DISASTER RISK REDUCTION APPLIED TO 
CANADIAN RESIDENTIAL HOUSING:
INTERIM REPORT ON THE HOME FLOOD 
PROTECTION PROGRAM
GENEROUSLY SUPPORTED BY:
DR. BLAIR FELTMATE, CHERYL EVANS, NATALIA MOUDRAK  |  INTACT CENTRE ON CLIMATE ADAPTATION  |  NOVEMBER 2017
This project has received funding support from the Government of Ontario. Such support does not indicate endorsement of the contents.
DELIVERED BY:
TM
2
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is an applied research centre at the University of Waterloo. The Intact 
Centre was founded in 2015 with a gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s largest property and casualty insurer. The 
Intact Centre helps homeowners, communities and businesses to identify and reduce risks associated with climate change and 
extreme weather events. For additional information, visit: www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca.
ABOUT THE INTACT CENTRE ON CLIMATE ADAPTATION
University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation university. With more than 36,000 students, the university is home to the 
world’s largest co-operative education system of its kind. The university’s unmatched entrepreneurial culture, combined with an 
intensive focus on research, powers one of the top innovation hubs in the world. For additional information, 
visit: www.uwaterloo.ca.
ABOUT THE UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX: IFC) is the largest provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in Canada with over $8.0 
billion in annual premiums. Supported by over 12,000 employees, the Company insures more than five million individuals and 
businesses through its insurance subsidiaries and is the largest private sector provider of P&C insurance in British Columbia, 
Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia and Newfoundland & Labrador. The Company distributes insurance under the Intact 
Insurance brand through a wide network of brokers, including its wholly owned subsidiary, BrokerLink, and directly to consum-
ers through belairdirect. For additional information, visit: https://www.intactfc.com.
ABOUT INTACT FINANCIAL CORPORATION
3
The Ministry of the Environment and Climate Change protects and improves the quality of the environment and leads Ontario’s 
actions on climate change leading to healthier communities, ecological protection and economic prosperity for present and 
future generations.
ABOUT THE ONTARIO MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Burlington, Ontario is a city in the Regional Municipality of Halton at the northwestern end of Lake Ontario. It has a population 
of 183,314 (2016 Census). Burlington was chosen as the ideal location for the Home Flood Protection Program pilot due to a 
highly localized catastrophic flooding event in August of 2014 that flooded roughly 3,500 homes in very specific 
neighbourhoods and left others virtually unscathed. As a result, the program has the ability to compare program uptake and 
effectiveness in areas directly impacted by flooding and those that were not. 
ABOUT CITY OF BURLINGTON
The Regional Municipality of Halton, or Halton Region, is a regional municipality of Ontario, Canada, located in Southern 
Ontario in the southwest part of the Greater Toronto Area (“GTA”), although it is the only region in the GTA that is not situated 
directly adjacent to the City of Toronto proper. It comprises the city of Burlington and the towns of Oakville, Milton, and Halton 
Hills. Halton Region has some of the most comprehensive residential flood protection subsidies in the country.
ABOUT HALTON REGION
AET Group is an employee-owned multi-disciplinary environmental consulting, auditing and scientific services company that 
has been serving Canadians since 1998.  With over 1,000 projects completed in Ontario and across Canada, AET offers 
extensive experience, capabilities and a proven track record that, among other benefits, assures that our clients receive 
value-added services, credible results and effective solutions. AET Group has been contracted by the University of Waterloo 
to provide delivery of the Home Flood Protection Program assessments in Burlington, Ontario.
ABOUT AET GROUP
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible. 
The Intact Centre cannot make any guarantees of any kind, as to the completeness, accuracy, suitability or reliability of the 
data provided in the report. This report has been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only, and does not 
constitute professional advice. You should not act upon the information contained in this publication without obtaining specific 
professional advice. 
No representation or warranty (express or implied) is given as to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in 
this publication, and Intact Centre employees and affiliates do not accept or assume any liability, responsibility or duty of care 
for any consequences of you or anyone else acting, or refraining to act, in reliance on the information contained in this report 
or for any decision based on it. 
DISCLAIMER
4
Definitions..................................................................................................................................................................................9
Chapter 1. Introduction...........................................................................................................................................................10
1.1 Rising Economic Costs of Natural Disasters and Flooding in Canada...........................................................................10
1.2 Repeated Flooding Stresses Canada’s Mortgage Holders.............................................................................................11
1.3 Flooding Gives Rise to Lawsuits.....................................................................................................................................11
1.4 Flooding Causes Mental Distress, Impacts Health of Canadians...................................................................................13
1.5 Home Flood Protection Assessment: Helping Homeowners Protect their Biggest Investment in Life..........................13
Chapter 2. Home Flood Protection Program........................................................................................................................14
2.1 Home Flood Protection Assessment..............................................................................................................................14
2.2 HFPP Assessor Training..................................................................................................................................................14
2.3 HFPP Mobile Application, Secure Portal and Database.................................................................................................15
2.4 Communication and Outreach.......................................................................................................................................15
2.5 Program Funding and Return on Investment.................................................................................................................16
Chapter 3. Burlington Pilot of the Home Flood Protection Program.................................................................................16
3.1 About Burlington............................................................................................................................................................16
3.2. HFPP Pilot To Date........................................................................................................................................................17
3.3. Key Findings..................................................................................................................................................................17
Chapter 4. Next Steps.............................................................................................................................................................20
Appendix A: Sample Home Flood Protection Assessment Report...........................................................................................21
Appendix B: Literature Reviewed.............................................................................................................................................40
Appendix C: Stakeholders Engaged in the Home Flood Protection Program Development..................................................42
Appendix D: Examples of Media Coverage on Home Flood Protection Program...................................................................43
CONTENTS
5
Residential basement flooding is on the rise across Canada, 
due in large part to more frequent and extreme rainfall 
events. In response, the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, 
University of Waterloo developed the Home Flood Protection 
Program (HFPP) to help Canadians protect their homes from 
flooding.  
The two primary goals of the HFPP are: (1) to limit pathways 
for water to enter a home (e.g., plastic covers over window 
wells), and (2) to minimize damage if flooding occurs (e.g., 
elevate electronics from basement floor).
This interim report profiles the fundamental components 
of the HFPP, and key findings to date regarding the most 
effective means to roll out flood protection to homeowners. 
Findings are based on the ongoing deployment of the HFPP 
as a pilot in the City of Burlington, Ontario, a community 
where over 3,000 homes were impacted by residential 
flooding in 2014.  A full HFPP report will be released in 2018, 
upon completion of the Burlington pilot.
The need for basement flood protection is evident in:
• substantial increases in home flood insurance premiums
• growth in the number of homes in Canada deemed  
uninsurable due to flood risk
• greater demand by provinces for Federal flood assistance 
(under Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements), and 
• greater focus by banks to track flood-induced residential 
mortgage defaults
Overview: Home Flood Protection Program
The HFPP offers homeowners a customized flood-risk 
assessment that addresses over 50 potential ways that water 
might enter into their home and cause flood damage (see 
Figure 1 on page 7). Based on the in-person assessment – 
which generally requires 1.5 hours – actions that homeowners 
can take to reduce flood risk are prioritized in a user-friendly 
report. This report also provides a list of standard questions 
that home owners should discuss with their insurance broker 
regarding flood coverage. Homeowners may opt in to receive 
seasonal maintenance reminders to help reduce flood risk 
around the house on an ongoing basis.
The Return on Investment (ROI) for the HFPP is impressive – 
for an average home, $1 invested in the program will return 
$13 in avoided flood damage costs over a period of 10 years 
(based on the average basement flood cost of $40,000 in 
Canada). Also, every dollar invested into HFPP supports 
local jobs (e.g., flood protection assessors, program trainers 
and a variety of contractors and suppliers involved in flood 
risk reduction work).
By focusing on avoiding the disaster before it strikes, the 
HFPP aligns well with the directives for climate adaptation un-
der federal Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and 
Climate Change, as well as disaster preparedness priorities 
under the Sendai Framework, of which Canada is a signatory.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
6
On-the-Ground Application of the Home Flood 
Protection Program
The Intact Centre launched the pilot of the HFPP in August 
2017 in Burlington, Ontario. Program funding to support the 
development and execution of the program was secured 
from Intact Financial Corporation, the Ontario Ministry of the 
Environment and Climate Change, the City of Burlington, and 
from homeowners themselves. 
As part of the pilot, homeowners who live in Burlington and 
select surrounding areas qualify to participate in the Home 
Flood Protection Assessment for a subsidized fee of $125.00. 
AET Group, an Ontario-based engineering technical services 
company, delivers these Home Flood Protection Assess-
ments. To date, hundreds of homeowners have registered for 
the Home Flood Protection Assessment. 
Of those who have registered for an assessment, 86% have 
committed to participating in a Home Flood Protection 
Study, which documents the most common actions taken 
by homeowners to reduce flood risks identified during the 
assessments. The study identifies barriers that homeowners 
face to take action to reduce flood risk, and the means to 
address those barriers.
Below are key findings from the initial phase of the HFPP 
pilot in Burlington:
• History of flooding and program uptake: The HFPP 
program uptake was the highest in neighbourhoods with 
a history of flooding (68% of participants). In neighbour-
hoods not impacted by flooding, uptake of the program 
was lower (32%). This highlights the fact that it is a much 
bigger challenge to engage people who have never 
been impacted by flooding to take preventative 
action to reduce flood risk. There is a need for broader 
homeowner awareness that any home in Canada is 
potentially at risk of flooding (as localized microbursts 
can impact any neighbourhood).
• Most common flood risk challenges: Based on 
completed assessments in Burlington, the most common 
flood risk challenges include:
· improperly installed or inadequate window wells 
(issue documented for 50% of assessed properties);
· presence of unsecured hazardous materials - paints, 
aerosols and corrosive substances - stored on 
basement floors (issue documented for 47% of 
assessed properties);
· presence of furniture and electronics susceptible to 
water damage in the basement (issue documented 
for 35% of assessed properties);
· poor grading of garden beds located outside homes 
(issue documented for 35% of assessed properties);
· high levels of moisture on basement floors (issue 
documented for 25% of assessed properties); and
· downspouts depositing water less than 1m from the 
foundation (issue documented for 25% of assessed 
properties).
• Importance of trust, confidentiality and third party-
	 delivery is critical for the program uptake: 48% of 
homeowners who registered for the Home Flood  
Protection Assessment indicated that they acted on 
information about the program received from City of 
Burlington or Halton Region (primarily through city 
councilor newsletters). Traditional media coverage 
that featured HFPP launch event at Burlington City 
Hall accounted for 33% of registrations. Social media 
posts that garnered registrations (14%) also featured 
trusted political and community leaders, as well as city 
logos in their posts. Finally, homeowners conveyed the 
importance of confidentiality of Home Flood Protection 
Assessments (including the fact that information  
gathered during the assessments would not be shared 
with the city and home insurance providers) and  
appreciated a third-party program delivery model. 
The HFPP pilot in Burlington will be completed in the Fall of 
2018. Interim lessons learned from the pilot are currently 
informing the development of a National Standard 
of Canada (CSA Group - Z800-18 - Basement Flood 
Protection Guideline), which is scheduled for completion 
in mid-2018.
Promoting the Home Flood Protection Program 
with Key Stakeholders
Next steps will address building promotional support for the 
HFPP with key stakeholders, including:
•	 Engaging real estate brokers/agents to encourage 
them to purchase the HFPP as a value-add service for 
house buyers and sellers; and
•	 Working with select insurance brokers, who can 
encourage homeowners to participate in the HFPP to 
lower flood insurance premiums.
The most important financial investment 
most Canadians will ever make is their 
home – the Home Flood Protection 
Program offers a simple means to protect 
that investment.
shutterstock-637588831
7
Figure 1: Key Aspects of the Home Flood 
Protection Program (HFPP)
The scope of the HFPP pertains to existing low-rise 
residential developments, including: 
•	 detached homes
•	 semi-detached homes
•	 row houses (including stacked and back-to-back 
   townhomes)
Types of flood hazards addressed through the HFPP 
include:
• overland flooding
• storm and sanitary sewer surcharge (sewer backup)
• infiltration flooding (groundwater seepage)
Types of flood hazards not addressed by the HFPP 
Assessment include:
•	 municipal stormwater drainage system failures
•	 coastal flood hazards
•	 unique flood hazards (e.g., dam failures)
	 Each Home Flood Protection Assessment consists of an 
initial homeowner questionnaire that confirms previous 
flood history of the assessed property, the year of 
construction and actions taken to reduce flood risk.
	 Following the initial questionnaire, flood risks inside and 
outside the property are assessed through a combination 
of visual inspections and series of standardized questions 
directed to the homeowner. Key features assessed are 
noted below, with maintenance questions that  
accompany each feature.
Exterior Features Assessed
Lot grading and Drainage:
•	 Water drains away from the house and into nearby storm 
drains; does not pool around the house.  
•	 Lot grading achieves a minimum 5% slope for land-
scaped surfaces and 1-2% for hard surfaces in relation to 
the house. Lot surface does not easily soak up water.
•	 Storm water drainage is not directed into the sanitary 
sewer to avoid sanitary sewer surcharge during extreme 
rain events.
Landscaping:
•	 Trees are in good condition (e.g., branches do not 
extend over the house, driveway and hydro lines). 
•	 Trees are located away from the foundation, storm 
and sanitary sewer laterals (to reduce potential risk of 
damage caused by tree roots, which can lead to water 
infiltration).
•	 Garden beds are located away from the foundation, at a 
5% slope (to reduce potential risk of water infiltration).
Walkways and Driveways:
•	 Walkways direct water away from the foundation and  
are free of cracks.
•	 Impermeable driveways direct water away from the 
foundation and are free of cracks and gaps.
•	 Permeable driveways direct water away from the  
foundation and all water drains from the driveways within 
24 hours.
Eaves Troughs, Downspouts and Sump Pump Discharge:
•	 Eaves troughs wrap around the entire house, are in good 
repair and are free of debris. 
•	 Minimum downspout placement is every 30-40’. 
•	 Eaves trough of 5” is present for asphalt shingles or 6” 
for metal roof.
•	 Downspouts extend at least 10’ away from the founda-
tion or to a drainage swale. Water is not directed onto 
adjacent private property.
•	 Sump pump drain pipe is present and drains at least 15’ 
from the foundation or to drainage swale. Water is not 
directed onto adjacent private property.
Window Wells:
•	 Window wells are present at each basement window, 
are located at least 3-6” above grade and are sealed at 
foundation. 
•	 Lot grading adjacent to window wells slopes away from 
the house at a minimum of 2-3%. Window wells are free 
of debris and drain freely within 1 hour.
Rain Barrels and Water Hoses:
•	 Rain barrels have diverters and overflow discharge pipes 
that divert water at least 10’ from the foundation or to 
drainage swales.
•	 Water hose bibs are free of leaks and are drained  
in winter.
Snow Piles (where applicable):
•	 Snow piles are kept 3’ away from foundation, window 
openings and vents.
Exterior Condition of Foundation Walls, Doors 
and Windows:
•	 Foundation appears to be in good condition, is dry, free 
of cracks and finishing gaps.
•	 Exterior condition of doors, window frames and weather 
stripping are in good condition. 
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
8
Interior Assessed Features
Plumbing:
•	 Basement sanitary sewer lateral cleanout is easily 
	 accessible.
•	 If backwater valves are used on storm or sanitary sewers, 
the valves are checked and cleaned according to  
manufacturer’s instructions once per season.
•	 Floor drain is present, the drain is in a good condition 
(e.g., free of debris). The standing water is present in the 
trap and water flows towards the drain.
•	 Toilets, taps and water heaters are in good condition.
Sump Pits and Sump Pumps:
•	 Sump pit has a sealed cap, is in good condition (free of 
cracks and holes) and is free of debris.
•	 Sump pump is present and is functioning.
•	 Back-up sump pump is present and is functioning.
•	 Sump pump back-up battery or generator is present 
and functioning. The back-up battery or generator can 
generate electricity for a minimum of 12 hours.
Internal Condition of Walls, Floors and Windows:
•	 Foundation walls are free of cracks and mineral deposits, 
no evidence of water entry.
•	 Floors are free of cracks and mineral deposits, no 
evidence of water entry.
•	 Earth floors are covered with a minimum 6 millimetre 
moisture barrier, with all seams and edges sealed.
•	 Window frames, glass and seals are in good condition.
•	 Moisture levels are low in the basement. Moisture levels 
of walls and window frames are low (as measured by the 
moisture meter).
Furniture and Electronics:  
•	 Furniture items located in the basement have non- 
absorbent surfaces up to 12” off the basement floor. 
•	 Electronic items are stored at least 12” off the floor.
Storage of Valuables: 
•	 Valuables are stored in sealed, non-absorbent containers 
at least 12” off the basement floor and at least 6” away 
from basement walls OR no valuables are stored in the 
basement.
Hazardous Materials:
No hazardous materials are stored in the basement 
(e.g., paints, aerosols and corrosive substances).
9
DEFINITIONS
Backwater valve: a device that mitigates against storm or sanitary sewage in an overloaded main sewer line from backing up 
into a basement. The valve automatically closes, if the flow from storm or sanitary sewage attempts to back up into a basement 
from the main sewer.
Combined Sewer: sewer that carries both wastewater and stormwater.
Flood Mitigation: a sustained action taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from flood hazards 
and their effects. Mitigation distinguishes actions that have a long-term impact from those that are more closely associated with 
preparedness for, immediate response to, and short-term recovery from specific events.
Floodproofing: any combination of structural or non-structural measures that reduce or prevent flood damage to the structure 
and/or its contents.
Flood Protection: any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which 
reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, or structures 
with their contents.
Flood Risk: flood risk is a combination of the likelihood of occurrence of a flood event (flood frequency) and the social or 
economic consequences of that event when it occurs (through exposure to the flood hazard).
Groundwater Seepage: groundwater that enters through cracks, pores or gaps in foundation walls, cracked pipes or other 
openings.
Infiltration (Sewer): the water entering a sewer system, including building sewers, from the ground through defective pipes, 
pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
Lateral: any pipe from a building connected to the main sewer.
Overland Flooding: flooding that occurs when runoff water flows from the streets onto properties causing flood damages.  
It can happen anywhere in the community, independent of an overflowing water body.
Riverine Flooding: excess of stream flow in a watercourse, such that land outside the normal banks is submerged or  
inundated. Can be caused by extreme rainfall or snowmelt, or physical conditions (such as ice jams and undersized watercourse 
crossings) associated with a watercourse.
Roof leader: a drainpipe that conveys storm water from the roof of a structure to a sewer for disposal onto the ground and 
removal from the property.
Sanitary sewer: part of the public sewage works for the transmission of sanitary sewage (includes human and industrial waste, 
and septic waste, but not stormwater).
Stormwater: rain, melting snow and ice that washes off driveways, parking lots, roads, yards, rooftops, and other surfaces.
Storm sewer: a sewer, the purpose of which is to carry stormwater (including surface and rainwater, melted snow and ice)  
and water in underground pipes and foundation drains.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
10
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Residential basement flooding is on the rise across Canada, due in large part to more frequent and extreme rainfall events.  
In response, the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo, developed the Home Flood Protection Program 
(HFPP) to help Canadians protect their homes from flooding. 
The two primary goals of the HFPP are to (1) limit pathways for water to enter a home (e.g., plastic covers over window wells), 
and (2) minimize potential damage if water was to enter a basement (e.g., elevate electronics from basement floor).
The purpose of this report is threefold:
1. To outline the imperative for flood risk reduction in Canada;
2. To profile the Home Flood Protection Program (HFPP); and
3. To share key findings to date from the HFPP pilot in Burlington.
Chapter 1 has three sections. It describes the rising economic costs associated with flooding in Canada; profiles emerging 
mortgage default risk for areas of the country where repeated flooding has occurred and insurance has become limited; and,  
it outlines the rise in lawsuits associated with flooding in Canada.
Chapter 2 describes the method employed to develop the HFPP, supporting tools and outreach materials.
Chapter 3 describes key findings to date from the HFPP pilot in Burlington, Ontario.
Chapter 4 profiles next steps to advance the HFPP as a key disaster risk reduction program in Canada.
1.1 Rising Economic Costs of Natural Disasters and Flooding in Canada 
The impacts of extreme weather events are bearing ever-increasing costs to governments, insurers and, by extension, all 
Canadians i. According to Public Safety Canada, the number of natural disasters for which provinces and territories required 
and obtained federal assistance under the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) increased dramatically between 
1970 and 2015 (see Figure 2).ii Similarly, the Office of the Auditor General of Canada has noted that from 2009 to 2015, DFAA’s 
compensation to provinces and territories was greater than any of the previous 39 fiscal years combined. iii The DFAA’s 
spending on flooding accounted for 75 percent of all weather-related expenditures. iv 
Figure 2: Number of Natural Disasters in Canada Requiring Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements for 
Provinces and Territories (1970 to 2015)
Source: Public Safety Canada. 2016-2017 Evaluation of the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements.
Catastrophic insurable losses for the property and casualty insurance sector in Canada are also on the rise. According to the 
Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC), “property and casualty insurance payouts from extreme weather have more than doubled 
every five to 10 years since the 1980s.”v While insurable payouts averaged $400 million per year over the period of 1983 to 
2008, for the last seven of eight years leading up to 2016, extreme insurance payouts exceeded $1 billion in Canada. As shown 
in Figure 3, the insurance gap in Canada is significant: for every dollar of insured losses in Canada, there are three to four 
dollars of uninsured losses that are borne by government, homeowners and businesses across the country.
1970
1973
1976
1979
1982
1985
1988
1991
1994
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
0
2
4
6
Number of Events
8
10
12
14
16
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
11
Source: 2017 Munich Re, Geo Risks Research, NatCatSERVICE. As of February 2017.
1.2 Repeated Flooding Stresses Canada’s Mortgage Holders
According to IBC, approximately 20 percent of Canadian households are at high risk of overland and sanitary sewer 
flooding, and approximately 10 percent are at very high risk of flooding.vi The latter group, representing 1.8 million 
households, is located in areas of Canada where repeated flooding may cause insurance companies to limit flood insurance 
coverage or withdraw it altogether. Limited or no flood insurance coverage is a significant concern - flood damages can cost 
homeowners tens of thousands of dollars to repair. For example, as per the US National Flood Insurance Program, a 15 cm 
flood in a 2,000-square-foot home is likely to cause about $40,000 in flood damages. With limited or no flood insurance, 
it may be challenging for homeowners to cover the cost of $40,000 on their own – to illustrate, as of 2016 the Canadian 
Payroll Association reported that almost half of working Canadians are living paycheque to paycheque, and one in four 
Canadians would not be able to afford $2,000 if an emergency arose the following month.
Consequently, there is an emerging risk facing Canada’s mortgage market. In the future, flood-related mortgage default 
rates may increase, as saving rates remain low and more households are subject to debilitating flooding. 
1.3 Flooding Gives Rise to Lawsuits
As floods continue to stress infrastructure in Canada, damage personal property and endanger human health, there are 
growing legal implications in the form of negligence lawsuits.  Flood-related lawsuits involve homeowners, developers, 
local governments, conservation authorities, First Nations and Indigenous peoples, provinces, as well as private businesses.  
Table 1 provides examples of flood-related lawsuits in Canada, demonstrating the need for flood-resilience at all levels to 
limit legal risks.
Figure 3: Catastrophic Insured Losses in Canada (1980 –2016): Overall and Insured, 2016 $ USD
2
4
6
8
US$ bn
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
Inflation adjusted via country-specific consumer price index and consideration 
of exchange rate fluctuations between local currency and US$.
* costliest event(s) in the respective year 
Uninsured Losses
(in 2016 values)
Insured Losses
(in 2016 values)
Winter 
damage*
Floods*
Ice 
storm*
Severe storm,
tornadoes, floods*
Wildfire,
floods*
Floods*
Wildfire*
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
12
Case Name 
(Year)
Description (damages, cost and settlement amounts included where identified)
Defendants
Anderson et al v 
Manitoba et al, 
2017 MBCA 14 
(CanLII) 
(ongoing)
Manitoba
A $950M class action lawsuit was brought forward by 4,000 residents of four First 
Nations following severe flooding in the spring of 2011. A flood resulted in damage to 
property and the evacuation of many people from their homes. Plaintiffs brought claims 
of negligence, nuisance and breach of treaty rights, alleging that the Government of 
Manitoba caused the flooding through its operation of flood control measures and the 
water control works that affected the water levels around the four First Nations. The 
class action lawsuit was certified in January 2017 and is moving forward.
Province, 
Manitoba 
Association 
of Native Fire 
Fighters
Muskoka Class 
Action, 2016 
(ongoing)
Ontario
A $900M class action was launched by Muskoka residents, cottage owners and business 
owners against the province of Ontario after damages were caused by flooding and high 
water levels. Plaintiffs allege that the Ministry of Natural Resources was negligent for 
failing to control water levels. The claim is ongoing.
Province
Cerra et al. v. 
The Corporation 
of the City of 
Thunder Bay, 
2012 (ongoing)
Ontario
Floods in May 2012 resulted in severe damage in Thunder Bay. Plaintiffs allege 
negligence in repair, inspection and maintenance of the water pollution control plant, as 
well as lack of diligent operation and supervision at the time of the flood (including an 
allegation that alarms were ignored). The $300M claim is ongoing. The court certified 
action on consent in 2013.
Municipality
Maple Ridge 
Class Action. 
2010 ix ongoing)
British Columbia
Fifteen households filed a class action lawsuit against a developer and contractor, two 
engineering firms and the City of Maple Ridge after a 2010 flood. Plaintiffs allege that 
defendants were negligent, arguing construction failure, faulty workmanship and design, 
failure to inspect basements for leaks and failure to repair leaks as requested. Plaintiffs 
also argue that the houses were not waterproofed to code, despite the municipality’s 
inspection, review and issuance of permits. The trial was scheduled to begin in 2016. 
The claim is ongoing.
Municipality, 
developer, 
contractor, 
engineering 
firms
Panza et al v. 
The Corporation 
of the City of 
Mississauga et al., 
2012 
Ontario
Upper and lower tier municipalities, the province and the conservation authority were 
all named as defendants in a negligence claim related to systemic flooding in the Lisgar 
area of Mississauga over several years. The $200M action was withdrawn before trial. 
However, this case shows the potential for systemic flooding to give rise to class action 
lawsuits.
Province, 
municipality, 
conservation 
authority
Dicaire v. Cham-
bly,
2008 (QueCA)
Quebec
The Quebec Court of Appeal dismissed a class action by owners of 1,723 homes that 
flooded in 1997 when sewers backed up following heavy rains. The court ruled that the 
sewers were designed, as provincial guidelines required; to cope with a “5-year storm,” 
and the town was not obliged to do more. However, the court noted that current design 
standards might not protect municipalities in future lawsuits, in light of “recent climate 
phenomena” and other scientific advances.
Municipality
McLaren v. 
Stratford (City),
2005 CanLII 
19801
Ontario
A major flood in the City of Stratford after severe rainfall in 2002 left many with sewage 
in their basement. Plaintiffs claimed negligence in design, construction operation and 
maintenance of the system. The class action was certified by the court in 2005 and 
the case was settled in 2010, eight years after the flood. Stratford settled for $7.7M 
after already spending $1.3M in emergency relief, and then upgraded the system to a 
250-year storm standard.
Municipality
Source: Zizzo Strategy. Legal Risks and Requirements to Address Flood Resilience. Prepared for the Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation. April 2017.
Table 1: Examples of Stormwater Management and Flood-Related Lawsuits in Canada
13
1.4 Flooding Causes Mental Distress, Impacts Health of Canadians
Mental health impacts associated with flooding can include general mental distress, anxiety, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
(PTSD), and depression. Mental distress is defined as “sufficient intensity to disrupt a person’s normal life patterns. x”
In Canada, several studies have found that both in the immediate and over the long-term, Canadians experienced mental  
distress because of flooding:
•	 A 2017 study of 200 households in Montreal that experienced flooding found that “almost 70% of respondents  
reported having suffered from anxiety, sleep disturbances or concentration problems since the floods xi”
•	 A 2004 study of 176 households in Manitoba found that over a third experienced psychological distress xii
•	 A 2016 study of men and women affected by the 2013 Alberta floods found an 164% increase in anti-anxiety  
medication and a 232% increase in sleeping aids for women in High River, one of the worst hit areas xiii 
•	 A 2000 study of Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean residents following 1996 floods found that 12% had to take sick leave or were  
absent from work, and 6% took an early retirement xiv 
Preliminary findings from a study supported by the Intact Centre of 100 households in flood-affected neighbourhoods in  
Southern Ontario confirms this mental distress. Three years after living through a flood, 50% of households are still wor-
ried about flooding when it rains – compared to 2% of households who have never lived through a flood. The quotes 
below further illustrate the impact that flooding has had on people’s lives: 
•	 “It’s always on my mind” – woman aged 25-64 who dreams of disasters
•	 “Most of the impacts were psychological” – man aged 25-64
•	 “It’s always in the back of your mind” – woman aged 65 or older
•	 “Some days I just wanted to run away” – woman aged 25-64
•	 “When we have bad weather, you worry” – woman aged 25-64
•	 “It’s something you never want to experience again in your life” – man aged 65 or older
•	 “It’s just an awful, awful experience” – woman aged 25-64
In conclusion, reducing flood risk not only reduces the physical damages and financial losses, it also mitigates a significant 
source of mental distress to homeowners. 
1.5 Home Flood Protection Assessment: Helping Homeowners Protect their Biggest Investment in Life 
Homeowners have the most to gain from reducing the risk of flooding at their homes. A Home Flood Protection Assessment 
identifies priority actions to reduce risk and provides information resources to help homeowners take action. The Home Flood 
Protection report clearly outlines simple activities that can be completed by the average homeowner, as well as more complex 
actions that are best undertaken by a qualified professional. The report also identifies other items that require further investiga-
tion (e.g. closed circuit television inspection of a sewer lateral or foundation drain). 
Carol Solis, a Home Flood Protection Assessment participant in Burlington whose family experienced two devastating sewer 
back-up floods in 2014, explains the benefits of the program: 
“During the assessment I learned about all the different ways that water might enter my home and the top actions I 
can take to reduce my risk. I also learned about the subsidies in Halton Region that can help me take action. I would 
recommend having an assessment to anyone who wants to understand what they need to do to protect their home and 
personal belongings. The assessment is $125, a small price to pay to have peace of mind.”
The vast majority of action items identified during the assessment are non-technical, cost-effective installation measures that 
homeowners can complete over a weekend after a trip to their local hardware store. Examples include installing window well 
covers, extending downspouts to direct water away from the home’s foundation and installing gutter guards on eaves troughs. 
Homeowners also learn about the importance of seasonal maintenance activities to protect their homes year round. Examples 
include testing sump pumps and back-up batteries, cleaning out backwater valves and removing debris from on-street storm 
sewer grates. 
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
14
CHAPTER 2. HOME FLOOD PROTECTION PROGRAM
The Intact Centre developed the Home Flood Protection Program to help homeowners reduce their risk of basement flooding, 
and minimize damage if flooding occurs. The HFPP consists of the following key components, described in more detail below:
1.	Home Flood Protection Assessment
2.	HFPP Assessor Training
3.	HFPP Mobile Application, Secure Portal and Database
4.	Communication and Outreach Materials
The funding sources for HFPP development and the return on investment are also presented.
2.1 Home Flood Protection Assessment
To address evolving residential flood challenges, the HFPP offers homeowners a customized flood-risk evaluation known as the 
‘Home Flood Protection Assessment’. The assessment takes approximately 1.5 hours to complete. It begins with an assessor 
conducting a 5 minute interview with the homeowner to discuss their past flood experiences, actions taken to reduce flood risk 
and the key concerns that they would like the assessment to address. The homeowner and the Assessor then review 50 points 
of potential water entry outside the home and inside the home and discuss preventative maintenance activities completed 
at the home. Each assessed item then receives a score of good, intermediate, poor or needs further investigation. Items that 
receive a poor or needs further investigation prompt the assessor to review a variety of practical options the homeowner can 
take to reduce risk.
Following the assessment, the homeowner receives a report featuring a concise summary of the top actions they can take to 
reduce risk. The report also includes comprehensive appendices that include a detailed scoring of assessed items as well as 
comprehensive resource links to help homeowners take action (see Appendix A). Homeowners may opt to receive 
electronic seasonal reminders of the maintenance activities they need to conduct to limit flood risk going forward.
Development of the Home Flood Protection Assessment
The Home Flood Protection Assessment content was developed January - December 2016. To develop the content, the Intact 
Centre completed a review of literature on residential flood vulnerability, home inspection programs, and a national stakeholder 
consultation with home inspectors, municipal engineers, engineering consultants, plumbers, landscape designers, insurance 
representatives, conservation authorities, academe and non-governmental organizations. See Appendix B for examples of 
literature reviewed and Appendix C for key stakeholders consulted.
The beta version of the assessment tool and assessment process was tested at 15 homes in December of 2016. Based on feed-
back from the participants, the report language was refined to improve readability and the assessment process was simplified 
to shorten the time required to conduct an assessment. In the spring and summer of 2017, a secure database, an online portal 
and a mobile assessment application (HFPP App) was created and tested to support the delivery of HFPP. Assessors, customer 
service and quality assurance team members from the environmental consulting AET Group were also trained during this time 
to prepare for the program launch in August 2017.
2.2 HFPP Assessor Training
The Intact Centre developed and executed a 5-day online and 2-day in-person training program for HFPP assessors to deliver 
Home Flood Protection Assessments. The HFPP assessors trainees were required to have a minimum of 3-5 years of experience 
in home inspection, landscape and home construction or related fields. Accordingly, the HFPP training enhances the existing 
knowledge that the assessors already possess. As part of the training, each HFPP assessor is required to achieve a minimum of 
80% on all online training tests and to successfully complete two on-site HFPP Assessments, including the completion of two 
HFPP reports.
The same group of stakeholders that was engaged in the development of the Home Flood Protection Assessment content  
(see Appendix C) was also engaged to develop training materials. In addition, the Intact Centre retained three specialists in  
the fields of municipal engineering, landscaping, and home inspection to develop curriculum and deliver the training. Each 
specialist had over 20 years of practical experience in their respective fields and a minimum of 5 years of experience 
developing and delivering curriculum.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
15
2.3 HFPP Mobile Application, Secure Portal and Database
To guarantee data security, streamline and automate data collection and analysis for the Home Flood Protection Assessment, 
the Intact Centre created tools, including:
•	 A mobile application to document the Home Flood Protection Assessment in a standardized format;
•	 A secure online portal to allow different users (homeowners, assessors, quality assurance personnel and Intact Centre 
administrators) to access relevant HFPP information and for Customer Service Representatives to manage appointments 
	 for assessors and keep notes of communication with customers; and
•	 An internal database to store and query data effectively.
This combination of tools facilitate time-saving and consistency in report generation and quality assurance review following a 
Home Flood Protection Assessment. Automatic report notifications, maintenance reminders and customer satisfaction surveys 
are also sent to homeowners through the Portal, using the information stored securely in the Database.
The overall security features of the Portal and Database meet the requirements for public institutions as set out in Canada’s 
Provincial and Territorial Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Acts. 
Notably, the tools developed for the HFPP can support more than 20,000 customers without additional development, using its 
built-in scalability. With minimal additional development, the tools can be scaled even further (e.g., to allow for Canada-wide 
deployment of the HFPP).
The Portal and the Database were designed and developed in such a manner that they can be hosted in a cloud-based 
environment, or on servers at the University of Waterloo.
2.4 Communication and Outreach
From the onset of the program, effective communication and outreach to homeowners was identified as a pivotal step to 
secure program uptake and implementation. Based on research into best practices for outreach, the Intact Centre determined 
that a two-pronged outreach strategy for HFPP promotion would be most appropriate, consisting of 1) targeted (neighbour-
hood-based) campaigns; and 2) broad-based marketing campaigns. 
The following approaches were included in targeted (neighbourhood-based) campaigns:
•	 Community events: participation in community events, local tradeshows, conferences, meetings and workshops to 
promote the program.
•	 Door-to-door campaigns: delivering information about the program in-person to encourage registration for Home Flood 
Protection Assessments.
•	 Door hanger campaigns: advertising information about the program through door hangers.
•	 City Councilor newsletters: sharing information about the program and promoting registration to specific 
	 neighbourhoods
The following approaches were included in the broad-based marketing campaigns:
•	 Traditional media: participation in interviews on television, radio, in newspapers and magazines to describe the program 
and encourage residents to sign up for the Home Flood Protection Assessments.
•	 Social media: sharing of content about the program through Facebook, LinkedIn and Twitter.
•	 Municipal website: sharing of content about the program on the City of Burlington website
•	 Paid advertising: advertising in newspapers and on social media.
•	 Engagement with local community leaders: ensuring strong program support from community leaders and influencers 
and encouraging them to share information about the program using social media and personal communication.
•	 Engagement with real estate agents and insurance brokers: providing information about the program to real estate 
agents and insurance brokers so that they can facilitate Home Flood Protection Assessment uptake for their clients.
Initial testing of the outreach approaches from August until October have yielded some important key learnings. All of the 
approaches above will be further tested during the remainder of the Burlington pilot in 2018 to further evaluate their 
effectiveness and generate lessons learned for a wider HFPP roll out. See Chapter 3 for a discussion of initial key findings.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
16
2.5 Program Funding and Return on Investment
The development and delivery of the program received financial support from Intact Financial Corporation, the Ontario 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change, the City of Burlington and participating homeowners (who pay a subsidized 
fee of $125.00 for Home Flood Protection Assessments).
The Return on Investment (ROI) for the HFPP was calculated as $1 yielding $13 in avoided basement flood damage costs over 
10 years. The formula for the ROI calculation assumes $40,000 as the average basement flood costs that can occur in a given 
year, a $300.00 fee to conduct Home Flood Protection Assessment and that 10% of homes that participated in HFPP do not 
experience basement flooding, over the 10-year time frame, due to application of the HFPP:
•	 The cost of HFPP applied to 1,000 homes = $300,000
•	 The return (avoided flood cost), assuming 10% of homes do not flood = 10% x 1,000 homes x $40,000/home = $4,000,000 
•	 ROI = $300,000 investment yields $4,000,000 savings = 1:13 over 10 years
The ROI calculation of 1:13 does not include costs to operationalize home improvements identified through the Home Flood 
Protection Assessment, increases to property value, or return relative to risk adjustments in flood insurance premiums.
CHAPTER 3. BURLINGTON PILOT OF THE HOME FLOOD PROTECTION PROGRAM
3.1 About Burlington, Ontario
Burlington, Ontario is a medium-sized city (population of 183,314) located at the west end of the Greater Toronto Area within 
the Regional Municipality of Halton. On August 4, 2014, Burlington experienced a flash flood event, during which over 190 
millimeters of rain fell over eight hours. According to the City of Burlington, “the record rainfall caused significant flooding and 
damage in parts of the city. Roads, highways and more than 3,000 homes were flooded xv.”
Following the flood event, the city hired AMEC Foster Wheeler to conduct a Flood Vulnerability, Prioritization and Mitigation 
Study. Based on the study, the city approved an additional $20.4 million to funds already budgeted for storm water 
infrastructure improvements. These additional funds are to be applied over the next ten years on storm water management 
capital upgrades, such as larger creek culverts and creek channel improvements xvi .
Halton Region also completed outreach in flood-impacted neighbourhoods and offered 100% subsidies for downspout 
disconnections, backwater valve installations and sump pump installations to the worst-hit homes in 2014 and 2015. 
At the end of 2016, Burlington City council approved $50,000 in funding to support the pilot of the Home Flood Protection 
Program in 2017. Funding supported the completion of a portion of initial assessments as well as the development of free 
online resources designed to help homeowners take action to reduce flood risk. 
In view of extensive outreach to flood-impacted neighbourhoods in the past by Halton Region, the Intact Centre was guided 
to direct targeted marketing at those neighbourhoods that were not hard-hit by flooding in 2014, but which were equally 
vulnerable based on the age of homes and condition of municipal infrastructure. 
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
17
3.2. HFPP Pilot to Date
The HFPP pilot formally launched in Burlington on August 4, 2017, three years after the devastating flood of 2014. The launch 
event featured an address by Mayor of Burlington Rick Goldring, MPP Eleanor McMahon, City Councilor Paul Sharman as well 
as an HFPP program participant, Audrey Bailey. The media visited Audrey Bailey’s home to discuss her experience and key 
learnings from participating in the Home Flood Protection Assessment. 
To date, the Intact Centre has deployed the following communication and outreach approaches, with a comprehensive 
promotions support from the City of Burlington.
Targeted (neighbourhood-based) campaigns:
•	 Community events: Two neighbourhood advisory committee meetings were conducted to gather community feedback in 
reference to the program. To encourage registration, three community events were attended by program staff.
•	 Council newsletters: Three City councilors sent two newsletters each to their Ward residents in targeted neighbourhoods.
•	 Door to door campaign: Door-to-door promotions for HFPP were cancelled two days after initiation in early August at the 
request of the City due to fraudulent door to door campaigns (unrelated to the HFPP) that were operating in the City at the 
time, leading to high volumes of public complaints.
•	 Door hangers: At the request of the City, the door to door campaign was replaced by a door hanger campaign in target 
neighbourhoods –15,000 door hangers were distributed to four target neighbourhoods
Broad-based marketing campaigns: 
•	 Traditional media: The HFPP was profiled on television (e.g., CBC News, CTV News, TVO, CHCH News), on radio 
programs (e.g., CBC Radio, The Current); as well as in numerous national and local newspapers (Globe and Mail, Global 
News, Canadian Underwriter, Inside Halton). See Appendix D for examples of media coverage received. for examples of 
media coverage received.
•	 Social media: Information about the program was shared through Facebook (@HomeFloodProtect), Twitter (@ICCA_
Canada) and LinkedIn. Posts were shared by the City, City Councilors, the Mayor of Burlington, Burlington MPP Eleanor 
McMahon, local residents, non-profits and businesses. Paid advertising through Facebook featuring participant 
	 testimonials was also completed.
•	 Municipal promotions: The City of Burlington issued a media release following the launch event and posted detailed 
information about the program on the City website.
•	 Newspaper advertising: The Intact Centre promoted the HFPP program through two paid advertisements and two 
advertorials featuring program participant testimonials in the Burlington Post in October 2017.
•	 Engagement with real estate agents: The Intact Centre engaged with real estate brokers in Hamilton-Burlington, at 
a trade show, and made a series of presentations to realtors, including the Realtors Association of Hamilton-Burlignton 
(RAHB). Broader engagement with real estate agents will commence in 2018 to encourage them to purchase the HFPP as  
a value-add service for house buyers and sellers.
•	 Engagement with insurance brokers: A meeting with a large Canadian property and casualty insurer was completed in 
mid-October to review results of marketing approaches and to provide guidance on the promotions strategy. Discussion 
is underway regarding methods to engage insurance brokers in HFPP promotion and initial brokerage presentations have 
been set for 2018.
3.3. Key Findings
Based on interim HFPP results, the Intact Centre has determined the following:
•	 Highest demand for HFPP is from residents with past flood experience: Although significant efforts were made to 
target promotions to homeowners with no past flood experience, the majority of registrations were received from people 
with past flood experience (68% of registrations). See Figure 4 for the percentage of program participants who have 
experienced previous flooding. 
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
18
•	 Trusted, confidential, third-party service delivery is important: 48% of registrants reported that they learned about the 
program from City or Regional promotions. Key elements of successful promotions included City logos and endorsements 
by trusted City officials and political figures. Due to the prominence of aggressive and fraudulent door-to-door promotions 
in Burlington in 2017, third-party service delivery and confidentiality of services was noted as critical by participating 
residents. See Figure 5 for a breakdown of primary registration information sources.
•	 Real estate agents and insurance brokers represent a major promotional opportunity: Initial discussions with real 
estate agents and insurance brokers indicated their substantial interest in promoting the HFPP. HFPP is a value-add that 
provides direct benefit to clients and helps real estate agents, and insurance brokers stand out in front of competitors.
•	 Optimum timing of promotions is March to June: Based on consultations with the City’s engineering and communica-
tions departments, and a review of the City’s most highly attended community events and consultations with local realtors, 
the Intact Centre determined that the best time to promote HFPP registration is March to June. Spring melts and heavy 
rains typically help put flood protection at top of mind for most homeowners. March to June is also a time when the 
majority of homeowners are conducting home renovations and gardening projects, which can be informed by Home Flood 
Protection Assessments.
•	 Top flood risk concerns vary: The top flood risk concerns noted by Burlington residents varied widely, with the largest 
percentage (33%) expressing concerns about basement infiltration flooding (where groundwater seeps through basement 
walls and floors), followed by 30% of residents expressing concerns about sanitary sewer backup risk (where water enters 
the home through sump pits or drains), and 12% expressing overland flood concerns (where water travels over the land and 
enters the home through above ground openings such as windows and doors) See Figure 6 for the top flood risk concerns 
of participants. 
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
19
•Top flood issues identified through HFPP Assessments: The most common flood issues identified through HFPP 
Assessments in Burlington included:
· improperly installed or inadequate window wells (50% of assessed properties);
· presence of unsecured hazardous materials stored on basement floors (47% of assessed properties);
· presence of furniture and electronics susceptible to water damage in the basement (35% of assessed properties);
· poor grading of garden beds located outside homes (35% of assessed properties);
· high levels of moisture on basement floors (25% of assessed properties); and
· downspouts depositing water less than 1m from the foundation (25% of assessed properties). 
· See Figure 7 for the top assessed flood risk features identified. 
•	 Top Areas for Further Investigation: 50% of assessment reports prioritized further investigation to determine the 
	 suitability of backwater valve installation to reduce the risk of sanitary sewer backup. Further investigation of the condition 
of the sanitary sewer lateral was identified as a priority for 82% of participants. To encourage action, the Intact Centre 
provided residents with tips on where to find the following information: local contractors, Regional subsidies, and City 
plumbing grant information.
Customer Satisfaction: A customer satisfaction survey indicated overall satisfaction with the HFPP Assessments as “very high” 
by 66% of participants and “high” by 33% (see Figure 8). Satisfaction with the HFPP assessors was also “very high” for 66% of 
assessments, and “high” for 33%. Report satisfaction was ranked “very high” by 50% and “high” by 50% of HFPP participants 
(see Figure 9).
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
20
Chapter 4. Next Steps
The Home Flood Protection Program offers a practical means to help protect Canadians from the costliest impacts 
associated with natural disasters in Canada - basement flooding. The Intact Centre will continue to test the HFPP in various 
communities throughout 2018. Having the opportunity to gather additional program promotions and assessment data will 
ensure that the program has the community-tested insights necessary to create a practical, cost-effective model for 
nation-wide program delivery. 
Through operationalizing the HFPP, everybody wins: 
•	 Homeowners are educated on the importance of flood risk reduction and on means to take direct action to protect their 
homes from basement flooding. In so doing, they protect both their properties and help to ensure their peace of mind 
every time it rains.
•	 Governments realize substantial financial benefits of home flood protection ($1 invested in HFPP yields $13 in avoided 
basement flood damage costs over 10 years). The HFPP increases uptake of current subsidy programs and initiatives to 
limit basement flood risk (e.g., backwater valve installation programs, downspout disconnect programs, and sump-pump/
back-up battery installation programs). 
	 For governments, the HFPP supports the Build Back Better mandate of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth 
and Climate Change, the Sendai Principles and Disaster Risk Reduction initiatives.
•	 Businesses, including retailers (e.g., home hardware stores), as well as home inspectors, plumbers and landscape 
	 designers benefit from increased demand from their services following HFPP assessments.
	 Intact Financial Corporation, the largest property and casualty insurer in Canada, recently made a public statement 
recognizing the value of assessing flood risks and taking action to reduce these risks. Accordingly, they will provide Home 
Flood Protection Assessment participants who have acted upon report recommendations, with a 5-15% discount on their 
total home insurance premium. 
“Severe weather events caused by climate change are increasing and impacting communities across Canada.  Water 
damage is now the leading cause of personal property claims. Over the last 10 years, water losses for personal property 
claims have doubled to 40% (of $ paid in losses). There are a number of improvements that Canadians can take to better 
protect their homes and communities against water damage. By taking these steps, Canadians could lower their annual 
premiums - anywhere from 5 to 15%. Those who live in municipalities who make climate resilient infrastructure a priority 
could also benefit from more affordable premiums, higher coverage limits and enhanced insurance coverage.”
 - Intact Financial Corporation, 2017
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
21
APPENDIX A: SAMPLE HOME FLOOD PROTECTION ASSESSMENT REPORT
Prepared for John Smith
123 Any Rd
Burlington, ON
Date Completed: September 10, 2017
Assessor Name: Cheryl Evans
Assessor Email: c8evans@uwaterloo.ca
 
Prepared on behalf of AET Group
www.aet98.com 
1-877-876-9235
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
22
Table of Contents
1.Cover Page
2. Table of Contents
3. Introduction
4. Definitions
5. Client Information Summary
6. Reported Past Water Damage Summary
7. Outside Assessment Summary
8. Inside Assessment Summary
9. Additional Resources
10. Outside Assessment Form
11. Inside Assessment Form
INTRODUCTION
What Does This Report Include?
This report includes an easy to read summary of top ranked items for priority action that have received a “poor/ needs 
further investigation” score or require specific mention based on questions asked by the homeowner. It also provides a 
record of all gathered information and provides additional helpful resources to help homeowners take action to reduce 
flood risk.
How Are Assessed Features Scored?
Assessors use the standardized assessment tool provided to guide them through a visual assessment of the property 
and to ask a list of preventative maintenance questions to homeowners. The information gathered is then compared 
to the tool’s scoring definitions, developed by the University in Waterloo in concert with a wide variety of national 
experts in the area of basement flood risk reduction. Assessed Features are assigned scores of “Good- Best Practice”, 
“Intermediate” or “Poor/ Needs Further Investigation” based on where they fall within these definitions. Any Assessed 
Features not accessible for observation and any preventative maintenance questions that are not completed by the 
homeowner are marked “Not Recorded.”
What Does This Report Not Include?
Beyond summarizing the report findings related to assessed items that received a score of “poor/needs further 
investigation” or require specific mention based on questions asked by the homeowner the report does not formally 
state a prioritized approach for addressing deficiencies. It is up to Homeowner to decide which actions they will take 
and in what order.
To ensure program impartiality the report does not recommend specific contractors, suppliers or products. The report 
also does not provide in-depth drawings or tailored step-by-step instructions to complete projects at the home to 
address deficiencies.
How Was Information for this Report Gathered?
This contents of this report have been gathered by examining the physical condition of a variety of features inside and 
outside the home using simple tools such as a moisture meter, humidity gauge, flashlight and measuring tape. A verbal 
preventative maintenance questionnaire has also been completed with the homeowner or their designate.
Reporting Time Frame
This report documents the observed condition of physical features of the home and the preventative maintenance 
information gathered from the Homeowner on the day of the Assessment only.
Follow-Up Support Provided
Your assessment fee includes the equivalent of a 15 minute email follow-up conversation with your Assessor. 
Our customer service team can also answer your basic questions at 1-877-876-9235. For ongoing support, visit 
homefloodprotect.ca to register for our e-newsletter that includes important preventative maintenance reminders. 
For do-it-yourself tips and Homeowner Success stories, like us on Facebook @HomeFloodProtect.
What is Included in the Additional Resources Section?
A list of easy to read, highly practical, online links is provided to help Homeowners take action to reduce flood risk. 
These include how-to fact sheets and videos, local subsidy information, questions to ask your insurance provider and 
tips about hiring contractors.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
23
DEFINITION OF TERMS
Scoring of Assessment
Each assessed item is assigned a score based on the standardized criteria laid out in the Home Flood Protection 
Assessment ranking system.
Score
Good- Best practice
Intermediate
Poor/ 
Needs Further Investigation
Not Reported
Out of Scope
Description
Observed or reported in good condition or reported maintenance practice
Observed or reported in intermediate condition or reported maintenance practice
Observed or reported in poor condition or reported maintenance practice or needs 
further investigation
Unobserved or unreported observed condition or reported maintenance practice
Out of scope for this assessment but worthy of further consideration
UNDERSTANDING DIFFERENT TYPES OF WATER DAMAGE RISKS AT YOUR HOME
The diagram and the definitions below are provided to help you understand the types of water damage that may affect 
any home due to deterioration of physical features, lack of preventative maintenance or water backup from municipal 
sewer systems during extreme weather events.
These water damage types are referenced in your Home Flood Protection Assessment Report to help you understand 
the types of water damage risks that have been identified at your home and your opportunities to reduce risk. Please 
see the customized list of maintenance best practices listed in your report to help you develop your preventative 
maintenance routine.
Insurance Coverage Considerations:
Sudden and accidental water damage is typically covered by insurers, however damage due to slow leaks or lack of 
preventative maintenance is typically not covered. Since there is no industry-wide, standard language used to define 
water damage types you may find using the terms and descriptions in this document helpful when working with your 
insurer to determine which coverage is best for you. Please note that not all insurance companies provide all types of 
coverages for all homes. See the “Questions for Your Insurance Provider” document in the Additional Resources 
section of the report for additional information.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
24
Typical Insurance Policy 
Coverage for Sudden and 
Accidental 
Damage
Type of 
Water Damage
Code
Simple Definition
Included
Optional
Optional
Optional
Optional
Plumbing and Fixtures
Sewer Back-Up
Overland Water
Ground Water
Water and Sewer Lines
PF
SB
OW
GS
WS
Water that enters your home from a tear or rupture of plumbing pipes 
or fixtures (e.g. toilets, hot water heaters, dish washers)
Water that flows from the sanitary or storm sewer or your home’s 
foundation drains and backs up into your home through the sump pit, 
toilets and drains
Water that flows from a lake or river, heavy rain or rapid snow melt and 
enters through cracks and gaps in your home’s exterior from a point at 
or above ground level
Water that has saturated the ground and enters your home below 
ground level through gaps, cracks and seepage through your home’s 
foundation
Water that enters your home due a tear or rupture of a water supply 
and/or sewer lines
CLIENT INFORMATION SUMMARY
Single Detached
Owner
Freehold
Yes
0-5 years
Over 10 years
1973
Between 1940 and 1970
2 Storey
Between 2000-4000 sq ft
Over 1 acre
Fully finished
Poured concrete
Clay
No
Well
Septic
Cloudy, 23 degrees
Type of Home
Ownership
Type of Ownership
Consents To Study
Length of Time in Home
Plan to Stay in Home
Year Home Was Built
Era of Neighbourhood development
Home Layout
Home Size
Lot Size
Basement Type
Foundation Type
Soil Type
Property within CA Regulated Area
Flood Plain Hazard Level if Known
Water Supply
Sewage Service
Weather Conditions
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
25
REPORTED PAST WATER DAMAGE SUMMARY
Have you experienced any type of water damage to your lot and/or 
exterior structures (decks, garages, sheds) in the past?
Yes
What was the cause of the water damage?
Rain fall or snow melt originating on your 
property.
What category would the water damage fit into (total damage to struc-
tures or content)
Between $5,000 and $25,000
What actions did you take to reduce your risk of future water damage 
outside your home?
Completing repairs or upgrades,
Completing maintenance activities.
What is your level of concern about experiencing water damage to your 
lot or exterior structures in the future?
High
Please list your top 2 water damage-related questions you have about 
your lot or exterior structures
How is the water entering the house.
Concerns with the septic system.
Have you experienced water in your basement or any type of water 
damage inside your home in the past?
Yes
What was the cause of the water damage?
Seepage through walls or floors.
What category would the water damage fit into (Total damage to struc-
tures or content)
Between $5,000 and $25,000
What actions did you take to reduce your future risk of indoor water 
damage?
Completing repairs or upgrades,
Completing maintenance activities.
What is your level of concern about experiencing water damage to your 
home is in the future?
High
Please list top 2 water-damage related questions you have about your 
home
Will the new system keep the water out 
of the basement.
Wanted more information about sump 
pump operation.
Past Water Damage to Your Lot and Exterior Structures
Past Water Damage To Your Home
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
26
OUTSIDE ASSESSMENT SUMMARY
TOP-RANKED OPPORTUNITIES TO REDUCE FLOOD RISK
All features and maintenance practices that were assessed as “poor/ needs further investigation”, require specific 
mention based on questions asked by the homeowner or are marked as “out of scope” but deserve further 
consideration, have been compiled into this summary.
B
D
C
A
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
27
Assessed Features
Fig
Assessed Feature Description
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Challenge	
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Condition of trees- Do trees pose any property 
damage risk or flood risk? Healthy and well pruned 
trees whose limbs do not hang over buildings and 
hydro lines reduce property damage risk during 
extreme weather events. Trees planted too close to 
foundations or sewer lines pose a risk of root damage 
and can contribute to flood risk.
SB, 
WS, 
GS
Trees appear to be in poor 
condition./ Many tree limbs 
hang over the home, driveway or 
hydro lines./ The position of trees 
represent high risk to the home’s 
foundation or sewer lateral.
See E on Outside Assess-
ment diagram. Some large 
tree limbs are hanging over 
the garage and pose damage 
risk during significant wind 
and ice storms. Consider 
contacting a certified arborist 
to assess tree health and 
prune as required.
B
Garden beds adjacent to home - Do garden beds 
and foundation plantings pose risk of infiltration 
of water into the basement or limit drying 
potential of foundation? Garden beds adjacent to 
the home’s foundation pose a risk of infiltration of 
water into the basement unless soil is graded at least 
5% away from foundation, soil and mulch are less 
than 8” from top of foundation. Trees that will reach 
a height of 30’(10m) or more are a minimum of 15’ 
(5m) from foundations and shrubs are minimum of 
6’ (2m) from foundations. Dense plantings close to 
foundation limit drying potential of foundation and 
present increased risk of foundation deterioration.
GS
Foundation plantings provide 
poor light and air circulation 
between plantings and founda-
tion. Less than 8” of foundation 
remains exposed. Trees that 
will reach height of 30’(10m) 
or are closer than 12’(4m) from 
foundation and shrubs are closer 
than 3’( 1m) from foundation. The 
garden bed has less than 2-3% 
slope away from the foundation 
and water drains poorly away 
from the foundation.
See B on Outside Assess-
ment diagram. Heavily prune 
back plantings to improve 
light and air circulation. 
Remove plantings that are 
too close to foundation. 
Correct grade to minimum 
5% slope to ensure water 
flows away from foundation.
C
Grading at foundation- Does the grading and 
surface cover within 10’ (3m) direct water away 
from your foundation? There is an increased risk of 
infiltration to the basement if the grade at foundation 
slopes away from the foundation at less than 5% for 
landscaped surfaces and 1-2% for paved surfaces and 
if the surface may absorb water.
OW, 
GS
Grading is flat or slopes toward 
the foundation. The surface is 
highly water absorbent.
See C on Outside 
Assessment diagram. Repair 
grading to achieve at least 
5% slope for landscaped 
surface and 1-2% for paved 
surfaces. Replace surface 
with non-water absorbent 
material.
D
Eaves troughs- Are eaves troughs adequately 
sized and in adequate condition to reduce flood 
risk? Eaves troughs should fully wrapping around 
building, are 5” for asphalt shingles or 6” for steel 
roof, are in good condition and have downspouts 
placed at a minimum of every 30-40’, to decrease 
likelihood of overflow and risk of basement flooding.
GS
Eaves troughs do not wrap 
around entire building, are 
in poor repair, contain a high 
amount of debris, and do 
not have downspouts placed 
every 30-40’. Eaves troughs are 
undersized and/or do not have 5” 
eaves trough for asphalt shingles 
or 6” for metal roof.
See D on Outside Assess-
ment diagram. Contact 
qualified professional to 
install eaves troughs where 
missing, install eaves trough 
of 5” for asphalt shingles 
and install downspouts every 
30-40’. Repair existing eaves 
troughs. Remove debris.
A
Connected downspouts- Are downspouts con-
nected to SANITARY OR STORM sewer increasing 
sewer backup risk? Downspouts that connect to 
foundation drains that in turn drain to the sanitary or 
storm sewer increase the likelihood of sewer backup 
into the home. Disconnecting these downspouts and 
directing water to downspouts that direct water at 
least 10’(3m) away from foundation or to drainage 
swale reduces risk of sewer backup. Water should 
not be directed onto adjacent properties. Note: 
Connection of downspouts to the sanitary sewer 
is illegal. Identifying the below ground connection 
of the drain is outside of scope of this assessment. 
Consult with your municipality about whether 
disconnection is right for your property and hire a 
qualified professional to complete this work.
SB
Note: Only a qualified 
professional can formally 
identify the condition of this 
item. Note: Check with the 
Region regarding eligibility for 
disconnection and subsidy.
See A on Outside 
Assessment diagram. 
Further investigation into the 
condition of the underground 
drainage piping and its con-
nections with a closed circuit 
camera is recommended by 
a qualified contractor. This 
may be a potential source 
of water infiltration into the 
basement.
Disconnected downspouts- Are downspouts (that 
are not presently connected into underground 
pipes) directing water safely away from your 
home to reduce flood risk? There is increased risk 
of groundwater seepage if water is not directed away 
from home less than 10’ (3m) from foundation or to 
a drainage swale. Water should not be directed onto 
adjacent private property.
GS
If applicable, caps are not secure-
ly in place over pipe to founda-
tion drains where downspout was 
formerly connected. Downspouts 
deposit water at foundation, or 
direct water between 0-3’ (0-1m) 
from the foundation OR Water 
is directed onto adjacent private 
property.
Properly secure downspout 
connections to ensure water 
moves freely to a minimum 
of 10’ (3m) away from the 
foundation.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
28
INSIDE ASSESSMENT SUMMARY
TOP-RANKED OPPORTUNITIES TO REDUCE FLOOD RISK
All features and maintenance practices that were assessed as “poor/ needs further investigation”, require specific 
mention based on questions asked by the homeowner or are marked as “out of scope” but deserve further 
consideration, have been compiled into this summary.
B
D
C
A
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
29
Fig
Assessed Feature Description
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Challenge
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Foundation drain- Is a foundation drain (weepers) 
present? If so, is it functioning properly to drain 
water away from your foundation? Depending 
on the age of your house it may or may not have a 
foundation drain or it may have a drain that is old and 
in poor condition. Missing or clogged drains increase 
the risk of basement infiltration flooding. Foundation 
drains that are connected to sanitary or storm sewers 
increase the risk of sewer backup related flooding. 
Note: Foundation drains are not common before 1950. 
Determining the condition of the foundation drain is 
outside of scope of this assessment. Consult a qualified 
professional.
GS, 
OW, 
SB
Note: Only a qualified 
professional can 
formally identify the 
condition of this item 
or recommend if one 
would be right for 
your home. Note: 
Check with the Region 
regarding eligibility 
for subsidy.
Your home is over 40 years old. A 
damaged or collapsed foundation 
drain is a possible source of high 
levels of water infiltration at your 
home. Consider working with a 
qualified professional to assess 
and repair your foundation drain 
if necessary to ensure that water 
is efficiently collected from your 
foundation and sent to your sump 
pit.
A
Sump pump- Is your sump pump in good condition, 
how often does it run? A sump pump reduces risk of 
basement flooding by gathering and expelling water 
from foundation drains. It will have limited capacity 
to reduce flood risk of water entering the basement 
in other ways. Consider installing and maintaining an 
alarm: Having an alarm to alert the homeowner to 
sump pump failure can reduce flood risk.
SB
Sump pump is present 
and homeowner reports 
it is not functioning well, 
sump pumps runs more 
than 10 times per year.
See A on Inside Assessment 
diagram. You noted that your sump 
pump is not functioning consistent-
ly. This puts your home at increased 
risk of flooding. Clean and repair 
your sump pump and replace if 
necessary. Hire a qualified profes-
sional for installation. Consider 
purchasing a sump pump alarm for 
additional monitoring. Note: Check 
with Region regarding eligibility 
for subsidy for purchase of sump 
pump. Plumbing permits required 
by City.
Back-up sump pump- Is there a backup sump pump 
and is it in good condition? Having a back-up sump 
pump provides an extra safeguard if the primary pump 
stops working
SB
Back-up sump pump 
is NOT present OR 
Back-up sump pump 
is present and home-
owner reports it is not 
functioning well .
Purchase back-up sump pumps. 
Consider hiring a qualified 
professional for installation.
Unfinished wall efflourescence- Is there evidence 
of efflourescence on your walls, indicating water 
movement through the foundation? Efflourescence 
(mineral deposits) indicate that water is slowly entering 
walls from outside and exiting again through evapora-
tion, leaving behind mineral deposits.
GS
Significant evidence of 
efflourescence (large 
areas of solid coverage 
of white flakes).
See G on Inside Assessment 
diagram. Remove source of water 
buildup at foundation as needed 
(correct drainage, repair eaves 
troughs and/or remove snow in 
winter, seal foundation from outside 
in extreme cases), remove ef-
flourescence and seal with masonry 
waterproofing paint.
B
Unfinished wall moisture- Are there high levels of 
moisture on the surface of your walls, indicating 
potential leaks or infiltration? High levels of moisture 
on wall surfaces indicate source of water infiltration, 
increased risk of mold damage.
GS
High moisture levels 
in some areas of wall 
surface.
See B on Inside Assessment 
diagram. Examine sources of 
moisture from inside and outside 
the home. Hire qualified profession-
al as needed to diagnose and repair 
moisture or mold problems.
Unfinished floor efflourescence- Is there evidence of 
efflourescence on floors, indicating water movement 
through the foundation? Efflourescence, or mineral 
deposits indicate that water is slowly entering floors 
from below and exiting again through evaporation, 
leaving behind mineral deposits.
GS
Significant evidence of 
efflourescence.
See G on Inside Assessment 
diagram. Remove source of water 
buildup at foundation as needed 
(correct drainage, repair eaves 
troughs and/or remove snow in 
winter, seal foundation from outside 
in extreme cases), consult with 
professional about foundation drain 
performance, clean and paint with 
masonry waterproofing paint.
Assessed Features
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
30
Fig
Assessed Feature Description
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Challenge
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
C
Unfinished floor moisture- Are there high 
levels of moisture, indicating water entry into 
basement? High levels of moisture in floor surface 
indicate source of water infiltration, increased risk 
of mold damage and flooding.
GS
High moisture levels are 
present in some areas of 
floor surface.
See C on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Examine sources of moisture from inside 
and outside the home. Hire qualified 
professional as needed to diagnose and 
repair moisture or mold problems.
Finished walls- Are water stains or high 
moisture levels indicating source of water 
infiltration? Evidence of moisture on walls surface 
may indicate a leak, higher risk of mold growth 
and flood damage.
GS
Walls have water stains, 
evidence of mold, mm 
indicates high concern.
See F on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Remove source of water buildup at 
foundation as needed (correct drainage, 
repair eaves troughs and/or remove 
snow in winter, seal foundation from 
outside in extreme cases), remove and 
replace damaged materials. Consult a 
professional if concerned about mold.
Finished floors- Are there high levels of mois-
ture, indicating water entry into basement? 
High levels of moisture on floor surface indicates 
source of water infiltration, increased risk of mold 
damage.
GS
Major evidence of water 
damage, strong mildew 
smell.
See E on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Remove source of water buildup at 
foundation as needed (correct drainage, 
repair eaves troughs and/or remove 
snow in winter, seal foundation from 
outside in extreme cases), remove and 
replace damaged materials. Consult a 
professional if evidence of mold.
Basement indoor sources of moisture- Minimiz-
ing and managing indoor sources of excessive 
humidity is essential to limit mold growth.
N/A
Fan is present but 
can’t hold piece of 
tissue when running, 
OR fan is not present 
OR fan is run for less 
than 10 minutes after 
shower or bath. Furnace 
humidifiers operate in 
the summer, items are 
stored that increase 
humidity. Dehumidifier 
is not keeping relative 
humidity between 
30-50%.
Consider running more than one 
dehumidifier. Ensure moisture is kept at 
between 30-50%.
D
Hazardous materials- Are hazardous materials 
stored in a way that represents a contamination 
risk during a flood? There is a risk of leak and 
contamination of the basement if a flood occurs.
N/A
Hazardous materials are 
not sealed in waterproof 
containers and/or are 
stored on the floor.
See D on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Remove hazardous material from 
basement or to avoid contamination 
threat, or seal hazardous materials in 
waterproof containers and store at least 
12” off the floor and at least 3” away 
from walls.
Assessed Features
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
31
Fig
Maintenance Feature Description
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Challenge
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Unfinished wall crack maintenance- 
Regular inspection provides insights 
into water infiltration risks and regular 
repairs reduce risk of larger problems 
developing.
GS
Never checks for cracks, fills cracks, removes 
sources of water buildup at foundation as 
needed (corrects drainage, repairs eaves 
troughs and/or removes snow in winter, seals 
foundation from outside in extreme cases). 
Consults with professional regarding 
foundation drain in case of major problems.
Check for cracks once per sea-
son, fill cracks, remove sources 
of water buildup at foundation as 
needed (correct drainage, repair 
eaves troughs and/or remove 
snow in winter, seal foundation 
from outside in extreme 
cases). Consult with professional 
regarding foundation drain in 
case of major problems.
Unfinished wall efflourescence 
maintenance- Regular inspection  
provides insights into water infil-
tration risks and regular prevention 
reduces risk of larger problems 
developing.
GS
Never checks for evidence of efflourescence, 
addresses sources of water buildup at 
foundation, cleans and repaints with 
masonry waterproofing paint as required.
Once per season check for 
evidence of efflourescence. 
Address sources of water buildup 
at foundation. Clean and repaint 
with masonry waterproofing 
paint as required.
Unfinished floor crack maintenance- 
Regular inspection provides insights 
into water infiltration risks and regular 
repairs reduce risk of larger problems 
developing.
GS
Never checks for cracks once per season, 
fills cracks, removes source of water buildup 
at foundation as needed (corrects drainage, 
repairs eaves troughs and/or removes snow 
in winter, seals foundation from outside in 
extreme cases). Consults with professional 
regarding foundation drain in case of major 
problems.
Check for cracks once per 
season, fill cracks, remove source 
of water buildup at foundation as 
needed (correct drainage, repair 
eaves troughs and/or remove 
snow in winter, seal foundation 
from outside in extreme 
cases). Consult with professional 
regarding foundation drain in 
case of major problems.
Unfinished floor efflourescence 
maintenance- Regular inspection 
provides insights into water infiltra-
tion risks and regular repairs reduce 
risk of larger problems developing. 
practices
GS
Never checks for evidence of efflourescence, 
addresses sources of water buildup at 
foundation, cleans and repaints with 
masonry waterproofing paint as required.
Once per season check for 
evidence of efflourescence. 
Address sources of water buildup 
at foundation. Clean and repaint 
with masonry waterproofing 
paint as required.
Finished floor maintenance- Regular 
inspection provides insights into 
water infiltration risks and regular 
repairs reduce risk of larger problems 
developing.
GS
Never check for water damage, signs of 
mold growth. Ensure humidity at between 
30-50% by running dehumidifier if necessary. 
If water damage and/or mold evident, 
consults professional for remediation.
Each season check for water 
damage, signs of mold growth. 
Ensure humidity at between 
30-50% by running dehumidier if 
necessary. If water damage, mold 
evident, consult professional for 
remediation.
Indoor plumbing and fixtures 
maintenance- Are your plumbing 
and fixtures and their connections 
to water and sewer in good repair 
to prevent flooding? Regular review 
and repair of leaks and broken seals 
in toilets, taps, pipes and water 
heaters reduce risk of basement 
flooding.
PF
Toilets, taps, pipes and water heaters are 
not inspected by homeowner, inspected and 
repaired by plumber as needed.
Each season inspect toilets, taps, 
pipes and water heaters for leaks 
and signs of wear. Repair or 
replace items with the assistance 
of a plumber as needed.
Assessed Features
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
32
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Home Flood Protection Program Frequently Asked Questions 
Homeowner Resource List 
Questions to Ask Your Insurance Provider 
Contractors Serving Burlington, Ontario 
Assessed Feature and Why It Matters
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Assessment
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Overland Drainage of Property
Overland drainage of property- How well does the 
water flow on the property? Within 24 hours, rain 
and snow melt need to drain freely away from home’s 
foundation to a drainage ditch, water course, municipal 
storm sewer, empty through a drainage swale or soak 
into property at least 10’ (3m) away from foundation of 
home to reduce basement flood risk.
OW
Water drains freely on 
property and in nearby storm 
drains and does not pool for 
over 24 hours.
No action is required.
Overland drainage maintenance- Regular monitoring 
and removal of debris from water flow paths on the 
surface of private property and adjacent municipal 
property (where applicable) is of critical important to 
reduce risk of water backing up, moving toward a home’s 
foundation and posing an overland flood risk.
OW
Once per season or when 
major storm events are 
predicted, checks for and 
removes debris and obstruc-
tions from water flow paths 
including swales and nearby 
storm drains.
Once per season or when major 
storm events are predicted, check 
for and remove debris and 
obstructions in swales and nearby 
storm drains. If nearby storm 
drains are free of debris but are 
still not draining within 24 hours, 
contact the City.
Landscaping
Condition of trees- Do trees pose any property 
damage risk or flood risk? Healthy and well pruned 
trees whose limbs do not hang over buildings and 
hydro lines reduce property damage risk during extreme 
weather events. Trees planted too close to foundations 
or sewer lines pose a risk of root damage and can 
contribute to flood risk.
SB, WS, 
GS
Trees appear to be in poor 
condition./ Many tree limbs 
hang over the home, driveway 
or hydro lines./ The position 
of trees represent high risk 
to the home’s foundation or 
sewer lateral.
See E on Outside Assessment 
diagram. Some large tree limbs 
are hanging over the garage 
and pose damage risk during 
significant wind and ice storms. 
Consider contacting a certified 
arborist to assess tree health and 
prune as required.
Tree maintenance- Regular tree maintenance enhances 
tree health and reduces risk of damage to hydro lines 
and property during extreme weather events.
SB, WS, 
GS
Once per season checks 
condition of trees and waters 
during drought periods.
Once per season check condition 
of trees. Water during drought 
periods. If concerned about tree 
on City property contact City for 
assistance. If concerned about 
tree on your property contact 
certified arborist for help.
Garden beds adjacent to home - Do garden beds 
and foundation plantings pose risk of infiltration of 
water into the basement or limit drying potential 
of foundation? Garden beds adjacent to the home’s 
foundation pose a risk of infiltration of water into the 
basement unless soil is graded at least 5% away from 
foundation, soil and mulch are less than 8” from top of 
foundation. Trees that will reach a height of 30’(10m) or 
more are a minimum of 15’ (5m) from foundations and 
shrubs are minimum of 6’ (2m) from foundations. Dense 
plantings close to foundation limit drying potential of 
foundation and present increased risk of foundation 
deterioration.
GS
Foundation plantings provide 
poor light and air circulation 
between plantings and 
foundation. Less than 8” of 
foundation remains exposed. 
Trees that will reach height 
of 30’(10m) or are closer than 
12’(4m) from foundation and 
shrubs are closer than 3’( 1m) 
from foundation. The garden 
bed has less than 2-3% slope 
away from the foundation and 
water drains poorly away from 
the foundation.
See B on Outside Assessment 
diagram. Heavily prune back 
plantings to improve light and 
air circulation. Remove plantings 
that are too close to foundation. 
Correct grade to minimum 5% 
slope to ensure water flows away 
from foundation.
Outside Assessment Form
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
33
Assessed Feature and Why It Matters
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Assessment
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Landscaping maintenance- Regular landscaping maintenance 
ensures that water flows away from the foundation at a 
minimum of 10' (3m) and maximizes the ability of rain and 
snow melt to be soaked into lawns and gardens in other 
areas, reducing risk of water pooling and potentially making 
its way into the basement.
GS
Once per year corrects 
grading issues within 10' (3m) 
of foundation, applies mulch 
to garden beds, aerates lawn.
Once per year correct 
grading issues within 10' (3m) 
of foundation, apply mulch to 
garden beds, aerate lawns.
Driveways, Walkways and Patios
Impervious (waterproof surface such as asphalt and inter-
locking pavers) driveway- Is the slope and condition of your 
driveway adequate to reduce flood risk? There is an increased 
risk of overland flow or infiltration-related flooding if paving 
directs water toward foundation or cracked surface permits 
water infiltration less than 10' (3m) from foundation.
GS
Impermeable driveway 
directs water away from 
foundation, small number of 
cracks or gaps are present.
Seal cracks, fill gaps, remove 
weeds to prevent additional 
damage.
Impervious (waterproof) driveway maintenance- Regular 
inspection and repair of driveway can reduce risk of basement 
flooding and buildup of winter ice.
GS
Once per season checks for 
evidence of pooling and ice 
buildup, repairs grading, 
seals cracks, fills gaps, 
removes weeds.
Once per season check for 
evidence of pooling, ice 
buildup, repair grading, seal 
cracks, fill gaps, remove 
weeds.
Walkways and patios- Are your walkways and patios graded 
properly and in adequate condition to reduce flood risk? 
There is increased risk of overland flow or groundwater 
seepage if paving directs water toward foundation or cracked 
surface permits water infiltration less than 10' (3m) from 
foundation.
OW, GS
Walkway directs water away 
from foundation, small 
number of cracks or gaps are 
present.
Seal cracks, fill gaps, remove 
weeds to prevent additional 
damage.
Walkways and patios maintenance- Regular inspection and 
repair of driveway can reduce risk of basement flooding and 
buildup of winter ice.
OW, GS
Once per season checks 
for evidence of pooling, ice 
buildup, repairs grading, 
seals cracks, fill gaps, 
removes weeds.
Once per season check for 
evidence of pooling, ice 
buildup, repair grading, seal 
cracks, fill gaps, remove 
weeds. Replace if surface in 
very poor condition.
Grading at Foundation
Grading at foundation- Does the grading and surface cover 
within 10' (3m) direct water away from your foundation? There 
is an increased risk of infiltration to the basement if the grade 
at foundation slopes away from the foundation at less than 
5% for landscaped surfaces and 1-2% for paved surfaces and 
if the surface may absorb water.
OW, GS
Grading is flat or slopes 
toward the foundation. 
The surface is highly water 
absorbent.
See C on Outside 
Assessment diagram. Repair 
grading to achieve at least 
5% slope for landscaped 
surface and 1-2% for paved 
surfaces. Replace surface 
with non-water absorbent 
material.
Grading at foundation maintenance- Regular review and 
correction of foundation grading can reduce basement flood 
risk.
OW, GS
Each year checks for signs 
of water pooling or ice 
formation; corrects grading 
to achieve at least 5% for 
landscaped surfaces and 
1-2% for paved surfaces.
Each season check for signs 
of water pooling or ice 
formation, repair grading to 
at least 5% for landscaped 
surfaces and 1-2% for paved 
surfaces.
Eaves Troughs and Downspouts
Eaves troughs- Are eaves troughs adequately sized and in ad-
equate condition to reduce flood risk? Eaves troughs should 
fully wrapping around building, are 5” for asphalt shingles or 
6” for steel roof, are in good condition and have downspouts 
placed at a minimum of every 30-40’, to decrease likelihood 
of overflow and risk of basement flooding.
GS
Eaves troughs do not wrap 
around entire building, are 
in poor repair, contain a high 
amount of debris, and do 
not have downspouts placed 
every 30-40’. Eaves troughs 
are undersized and/or do 
not have 5” eaves trough 
for asphalt shingles or 6” for 
metal roof.
See D on Outside Assess-
ment diagram. Contact 
qualified professional to 
install eaves troughs where 
missing, install eaves trough 
of 5” for asphalt shingles 
and install downspouts every 
30-40’. Repair existing eaves 
troughs. Remove debris.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
34
Assessed Feature and Why It Matters
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Assessment
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Eaves trough maintenance- Keeping eaves troughs 
in good repair and free of debris prevents water from 
overflowing at foundation and reduces flood risk.
GS
Once per year during heavy 
water flow, eaves troughs are 
checked for leaks, debris and 
blockage. Repairs, replace-
ments and debris removals are 
completed as needed.
Each season during heavy 
water flow, check for leaks, 
debris and blockage. Repair, 
replace and clean out as 
needed.
Connected downspouts- Are downspouts connected to 
SANITARY OR STORM sewer increasing sewer backup 
risk? Downspouts that connect to foundation drains that 
in turn drain to the sanitary or storm sewer increase the 
likelihood of sewer backup into the home. Disconnecting 
these downspouts and directing water to downspouts 
that direct water at least 10’(3m) away from foundation 
or to drainage swale reduces risk of sewer backup. Water 
should not be directed onto adjacent properties. Note: 
Connection of downspouts to the sanitary sewer is 
illegal. Identifying the below ground connection of the 
drain is outside of scope of this assessment. Consult 
with your municipality about whether disconnection is 
right for your property and hire a qualified professional 
to complete this work.
SB
Note: Only a qualified 
professional can formally 
identify the condition of this 
item. Note: Check with the 
Region regarding eligibility 
for disconnection and subsidy.
See A on Outside Assess-
ment diagram. Further 
investigation into the condition 
of the underground drainage 
piping and its connections 
with a closed circuit camera is 
recommended by a qualified 
contractor. This may be a 
potential source of water 
infiltration into the basement.
Disconnected downspouts- Are downspouts (that 
are not presently connected into underground pipes) 
directing water safely away from your home to reduce 
flood risk? There is increased risk of groundwater seepage 
if water is not directed away from home less than 10’ (3m) 
from foundation or to a drainage swale. Water should not 
be directed onto adjacent private property.
GS
If applicable, caps are not 
securely in place over pipe 
to foundation drains where 
downspout was formerly 
connected. Downspouts 
deposit water at foundation, 
or direct water between 0-3’ 
(0-1m) from the foundation OR 
Water is directed onto adjacent 
private property.
Properly secure downspout 
connections to ensure water 
moves freely to a minimum 
of 10’ (3m) away from the 
foundation.
Downspout maintenance- maintaining adequate sizing, 
good repair and regular cleanout of downspouts reduces 
basement flood risk.
GS
Once per season checks 
to make sure downspout 
extensions secured, free of 
leaks, depositing water 9 ‘ (3m) 
from foundation or to drainage 
swale and that water is not 
flowing onto adjacent property.
Once per year check to make 
sure downspout extensions 
secured, free of leaks, 
depositing water 10 ‘ (3m) 
from foundation or to drainage 
swale and that water is not 
flowing onto adjacent property.
Foundation
Foundation structure- Is your foundation in adequate 
condition to help prevent flooding? Cracks and damage 
to your foundation put your basement at increased risk of 
flooding.
GS
Foundation appears to be in 
moderate condition, areas of 
moderate moisture retention 
are identified, any cracks are 
less than 1/4” (6mm), some 
finishing gaps are present(e.g. 
missing parging).
Clean cracks and fill with 
expanding polyurethane. 
Replace missing finishes 
(e.g. patch missing parging). 
Consider consulting with 
qualified foundation repair 
contractors to further identify 
risks.
Foundation structure maintenance- Regular review 
of foundation condition can provide clues about broad 
water penetration risks to the home and regular repair 
of foundation cracks can help prevent larger issues from 
developing.
GS
Once per year checks for cracks 
and gaps, repairs as required.
Once per season check for 
cracks and finishing details, 
fill cracks, repair finishes as 
required. Contact qualified 
foundation repair contractors 
when cracks greater than 1/4” 
(6mm) appear.
Foundation clearance maintenance- Keeping stored 
items (e.g. wood piles) at least 6” away from foundation is 
important to maximize air flow and reduce risk of founda-
tion damage. Keeping snow piles at least 3’(1m) away from 
foundation, clearing window openings of snow and ice at 
all times reduces risk of basement flooding. It also reduces 
health risks by keeping any furnace, dryer, gas supply or 
hot water vents clear.
GS
Stored items are kept at least 
6” from foundation. As dictated 
by snow storm events, keeps 
snow piles 3’ (1m) away from 
foundation and keeps window 
openings clear of snow piles, 
ensures vents are clear.
Store items at least 6” from 
foundation. At intervals 
dictated by snow storms, 
regularly keep snow piles 3’ 
(1m) away from foundation and 
keep window openings clear 
of snow piles. Ensure vents are 
clear.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
35
Assessed Feature and Why It Matters
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Assessment
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Foundation efflourescence- Are there signs of efflourescence 
on the foundation that could indicate moisture problems? 
Efflourescence (mineral deposits) indicate water moving through 
masonry, evaporating, leaving minerals behind. Presence of 
efflourescence can indicate water issues that can lead to spalling 
or structural damage.
GS
No evidence of 
efflourescence.
No action required.
Foundation moisture content- Is your foundation showing 
high levels of water retention? High levels of moisture at 
surface of foundation can indicate infiltration presence, can pose 
risk of longer term damage to foundation.
GS
Moderate level of 
moisture at surface is 
indicated.
Reduce flow of water to 
masonry by correcting 
grading, maintaining eaves 
troughs, repairing foundation 
drains, sealing cracks on 
driveway, shoveling snow away 
from walls in winter. Contact 
qualified foundation repair 
contractor if problem persists.
Exterior Water Sources
Hose bib maintenance- Regular review and repair of leaks and 
closing and draining of water lines in the winter can reduce risk 
of basement flooding.
OW, GS
Spring, summer, fall 
checks for leaks, repairs 
as necessary. In the 
winter outdoor water 
supply is shut off and 
water line is drained.
Spring, summer, fall check for 
leak, repairs as necessary. In 
the winter shut off outdoor 
water supply and drain water 
line.
Sump pump discharge- Is your sump pump drain pipe 
directed far enough away from your foundation to help 
prevent flooding and also not putting neighbouring 
properties at risk? Increased risk of infiltration and/or increased 
running of sump pump if drain pipe deposits water less than 15’ 
(5m) from foundation or does not direct it to a drainage swale. 
Water should not be directed onto adjacent private property.
OW, GS
Sump pump drain pipe 
is present and drains 
at least 15’ (5m) from 
foundation or to drainage 
swale, is not directing 
water onto adjacent 
property.
No action required.
Assessed Feature and Why It Matters
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Assessment
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Floor Drain
Floor drain- Is your floor drain clear of physical barriers 
to water flow and in adequate condition to reduce flood 
risk? There is an increased risk of flooding if the path that 
water flows to the drain is blocked. Safety note: Standing water 
should be present it the trap to prevent sewer gases from 
entering the home.
SB
Floor drain is present, 
demonstrates clear flow 
path of water to drain, drain 
is in good condition, free 
of debris, standing water is 
present in trap.
No action required.
Floor drain maintenance- A properly maintained drain will 
maximize flow of water away from the home, reducing flood 
risk.
SB
Each year clears the path 
of water to drain, tops up 
standing water in trap, 
removes any debris from 
drain. In case of blockage, 
strange smell, lack of water 
in trap, contacts a licensed 
plumber.
Each season check for clear 
flow path for water to drain, 
standing water in trap, no 
debris. In case of blockage, 
strange smell, lack of 
water in trap, contact licensed 
plumber.
Basement sanitary sewer lateral cleanout- Is your cleanout 
present and accessible? An easily accessible basement 
sanitary sewer lateral cleanout makes it easier to clean out 
sewer lines when necessary to prevent sewer backup.
SB
Basement sanitary sewer 
lateral cleanout is easily 
accessible.
No action required.
Inside Assessment Form
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
36
Assessed Feature and Why It Matters
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Assessment
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Foundation Drain (Weepers)
Foundation drain- Is a foundation drain (weepers) 
present? If so, is it functioning properly to drain 
water away from your foundation? Depending 
on the age of your house it may or may not have a 
foundation drain or it may have a drain that is old and 
in poor condition. Missing or clogged drains increase 
the risk of basement infiltration flooding. Foundation 
drains that are connected to sanitary or storm sewers 
increase the risk of sewer backup related flooding. 
Note: Foundation drains are not common before 
1950. Determining the condition of the foundation 
drain is outside of scope of this assessment. Consult 
a qualified professional.
GS, OW, 
SB
Note: Only a qualified 
professional can formally 
identify the condition of 
this item or recommend if 
one would be right for your 
home. Note: Check with the 
Region regarding eligibility 
for subsidy.
Your home is over 40 years old. A 
damaged or collapsed foundation 
drain is a possible source of high lev-
els of water infiltration at your home. 
Consider working with a qualified 
professional to assess and repair 
your foundation drain if necessary 
to ensure that water is efficiently 
collected from your foundation and 
sent to your sump pit.
Sump Pit and Pump
Sump pit- Is your sump pit in good repair? Having 
a sump pit in good condition reduces risk of base-
ment flooding by providing a location for collecting 
and removal of water from foundation drains.
SB
Sump pit has a sealed cap, is in 
good condition (free of cracks 
and holes) and is free of debris.
No action required.
Sump pit maintenance- Regular inspection and 
maintenance of the sump pit ensures that water is 
properly contained and limits moisture escape into 
the home.
SB
Every season checks sump 
pit, repairs cracks or damage, 
removes debris.
Every season check sump pit, repair 
cracks or damage, remove debris.
Sump pump connection- Does your sump pump 
discharge water to the surface of your property 
to reduce sewer backup risk? There is increased 
risk of sewer backup if the sump pump connected to 
storm or sanitary sewer systems. Note: Determining 
if the connection of the sump pump drain is to the 
storm or sanitary sewer is outside of scope of this 
assessment. Consult a qualified professional.
OW, GS
Sump pump discharges water 
to absorbent surface at least 15’ 
away from foundation outside 
home, or to a drainage swale, 
does not direct water onto 
adjacent private property.
No action required.
Sump pump- Is your sump pump in good 
condition, how often does it run? A sump pump 
reduces risk of basement flooding by gathering and 
expelling water from foundation drains. It will have 
limited capacity to reduce flood risk of water entering 
the basement in other ways. Consider installing and 
maintaining an alarm: Having an alarm to alert the 
homeowner to sump pump failure can reduce flood 
risk.
SB
Sump pump is present and 
homeowner reports it is not 
functioning well, sump pumps 
runs more than 10 times per 
year.
See A on Inside Assessment 
diagram. You noted that your sump 
pump is not functioning consistently. 
This puts your home at increased risk 
of flooding. Clean and repair your 
sump pump and replace if necessary. 
Hire a qualified professional for 
installation. Consider purchasing 
a sump pump alarm for additional 
monitoring. Note: Check with Region 
regarding eligibility for subsidy for 
purchase of sump pump. Plumbing 
permits required by City.
Back-up sump pump- Is there a backup sump 
pump and is it in good condition? Having a back-up 
sump pump provides an extra safeguard if the 
primary pump stops working.
SB
Back-up sump pump is NOT 
present OR Back-up sump 
pump is present and homeown-
er reports it is not functioning 
well .
Purchase back-up sump pumps. Con-
sider hiring a qualified professional 
for installation.
Sump pump(s) maintenance- Regular monitoring 
and repair of the sump pump(s) ensures that they 
will be ready when needed to remove water from 
basement.
SB
Each season and when an 
extreme rain or melt event 
predicted, sump pump(s) are 
tested, repaired or replaced as 
required.
Each season and when an extreme 
rain or melt event predicted, test 
sump pump(s) and clean, repair or 
replace as required.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
37
Assessed Feature and Why It Matters
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Assessment
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Back-up power source- Is there a backup 
power source available for a minimum of 
12 hours? Having back-up power supply 
reduces risk of basement flooding by 
providing short term power supply for sump 
pumps and alarms in case or power outage. 
Consider installing and maintaining 
an alarm: Having an alarm to alert the 
homeowner about back-up power failure can 
reduce risk of flood damage.
SB
Back-up battery or generator 
is present and is reported by 
homeowner to be functioning 
poorly OR there is no back-up 
power supply. Check with your 
insurance company about 
discounts for installing sump pump 
backup batteries and monitored 
alarm systems.
Purchase and install back-up power supply.
Exposed Foundation Walls and Floors
Unfinished wall cracks- Are your 
foundation walls in adequate condition to 
reduce flood risk and showing no signs of 
water infiltration? There is an increased risk 
of infiltration with cracks. Mineral deposits 
on walls (efflourescence) indicates water 
entering walls from outside and exiting walls 
inside.
GS
Cracks of less than1/4” (6mm 
wide) are present and minor 
evidence of mineral deposits is 
present.
Remove source of water buildup at 
foundation as needed (correct drainage, 
repair eaves troughs and/or remove snow 
in winter, seal foundation from outside in 
extreme cases), clean and fill small cracks 
with expanding polyurethane foam.
Unfinished wall crack maintenance- 
Regular inspection provides insights into 
water infiltration risks and regular repairs 
reduce risk of larger problems developing.
GS
Never checks for cracks, fills 
cracks, removes sources of water 
buildup at foundation as needed 
(corrects drainage, repairs eaves 
troughs and/or removes snow 
in winter, seals foundation from 
outside in extreme cases). Con-
sults with professional regarding 
foundation drain in case of major 
problems.
Check for cracks once per season, fill 
cracks, remove sources of water buildup at 
foundation as needed (correct drainage, 
repair eaves troughs and/or remove snow 
in winter, seal foundation from outside in 
extreme cases). Consult with professional 
regarding foundation drain in case of 
major problems.
Unfinished wall efflourescence- Is there 
evidence of efflourescence on your walls, 
indicating water movement through 
the foundation? Efflourescence (mineral 
deposits) indicate that water is slowly 
entering walls from outside and exiting again 
through evaporation, leaving behind mineral 
deposits.
GS
Significant evidence of 
efflourescence (large areas of solid 
coverage of white flakes).
See G on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Remove source of water buildup at 
foundation as needed (correct drainage, 
repair eaves troughs and/or remove snow 
in winter, seal foundation from outside in 
extreme cases), remove efflourescence and 
seal with masonry waterproofing paint.
Unfinished wall efflourescence 
maintenance- Regular inspection provides 
insights into water infiltration risks and 
regular prevention reduces risk of larger 
problems developing.
GS
Never checks for evidence of 
efflourescence, addresses sources 
of water buildup at foundation, 
cleans and repaints with masonry 
waterproofing paint as required.
Once per season check for evidence of 
efflourescence. Address sources of water 
buildup at foundation. Clean and repaint 
with masonry waterproofing paint as 
required.
Unfinished wall moisture- Are there 
high levels of moisture on the surface of 
your walls, indicating potential leaks or 
infiltration? High levels of moisture on wall 
surfaces indicate source of water infiltration, 
increased risk of mold damage.
GS
High moisture levels in some areas 
of wall surface.
See B on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Examine sources of moisture from inside 
and outside the home. Hire qualified 
professional as needed to diagnose and 
repair moisture or mold problems.
Unfinished floor cracks- Are there cracks 
in your floor that provide potential water 
entry sites to your basement? There is an 
increased risk of infiltration with cracks. 
Mineral deposits indicate water entering 
walls from outside.
GS
Cracks are less than1/4” (6mm 
wide) , minor evidence of water 
entry.
Remove source of water buildup at 
foundation as needed (correct drainage, 
repair eaves troughs and/or remove snow 
in winter, seal foundation from outside in 
extreme cases), consult with professional 
about foundation drain performance, 
clean and fill small cracks with expanding 
polyurethane foam.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
38
Assessed Feature and Why It Matters
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Assessment
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Unfinished floor crack maintenance- 
Regular inspection provides insights 
into water infiltration risks and regular 
repairs reduce risk of larger problems 
developing.
GS
Never checks for cracks once per 
season, fills cracks, removes source 
of water buildup at foundation as 
needed (corrects drainage, repairs 
eaves troughs and/or removes snow in 
winter, seals foundation from outside 
in extreme cases). Consults with 
professional regarding foundation drain 
in case of major problems.
Check for cracks once per season, fill 
cracks, remove source of water buildup 
at foundation as needed (correct 
drainage, repair eaves troughs and/or 
remove snow in winter, seal foundation 
from outside in extreme cases). Consult 
with professional regarding foundation 
drain in case of major problems.
Unfinished floor efflourescence- Is 
there evidence of efflourescence on 
floors, indicating water movement 
through the foundation? Effloures-
cence, or mineral deposits indicate that 
water is slowly entering floors from below 
and exiting again through evaporation, 
leaving behind mineral deposits.
GS
Significant evidence of efflourescence.
See G on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Remove source of water buildup at 
foundation as needed (correct drainage, 
repair eaves troughs and/or remove 
snow in winter, seal foundation from 
outside in extreme cases), consult with 
professional about foundation drain 
performance, clean and paint with 
masonry waterproofing paint.
Unfinished floor efflourescence 
maintenance- Regular inspection 
provides insights into water infiltration 
risks and regular repairs reduce risk of 
larger problems developing. practices
GS
Never checks for evidence of 
efflourescence, addresses sources of 
water buildup at foundation, cleans and 
repaints with masonry waterproofing 
paint as required.
Once per season check for evidence 
of efflourescence. Address sources of 
water buildup at foundation. Clean and 
repaint with masonry waterproofing 
paint as required.
Unfinished floor moisture- Are there 
high levels of moisture, indicating 
water entry into basement? High levels 
of moisture in floor surface indicate 
source of water infiltration, increased risk 
of mold damage and flooding.
GS
High moisture levels are present in 
some areas of floor surface.
See C on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Examine sources of moisture from 
inside and outside the home. Hire 
qualified professional as needed to 
diagnose and repair moisture or mold 
problems.
Finished Walls and Floors
Finished walls- Are water stains or high 
moisture levels indicating source of 
water infiltration? Evidence of moisture 
on walls surface may indicate a leak, 
higher risk of mold growth and flood 
damage.
GS
Walls have water stains, evidence of 
mold, mm indicates high concern.
See F on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Remove source of water buildup at 
foundation as needed (correct drainage, 
repair eaves troughs and/or remove 
snow in winter, seal foundation from 
outside in extreme cases), remove and 
replace damaged materials. Consult a 
professional if concerned about mold.
Finished wall maintenance- Regular 
review provides insights into water infil-
tration risks and regular repairs reduce 
risk of larger problems developing.
GS
Each year checks for water damage, 
signs of mold growth, ensures humidity 
at between 30-50% by running dehu-
midifier if necessary. If water damage 
and/or mold is evident, consults a 
professional for remediation.
Each season check for water damage 
and signs of mold growth. Ensure 
humidity at between 30-50% by running 
dehumidier if necessary. If water 
damage or mold is evident, consult 
professional for remediation.
Finished floors- Are there high levels 
of moisture, indicating water entry 
into basement? High levels of moisture 
on floor surface indicates source of 
water infiltration, increased risk of mold 
damage.
GS
Major evidence of water damage, 
strong mildew smell.
See E on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Remove source of water buildup at 
foundation as needed (correct drainage, 
repair eaves troughs and/or remove 
snow in winter, seal foundation from 
outside in extreme cases), remove and 
replace damaged materials. Consult a 
professional if evidence of mold.
Finished floor maintenance- Regular 
inspection provides insights into water in-
filtration risks and regular repairs reduce 
risk of larger problems developing.
GS
Never check for water damage, signs 
of mold growth. Ensure humidity at 
between 30-50% by running dehumidi-
fier if necessary. If water damage and/or 
mold evident, consults professional for 
remediation.
Each season check for water damage, 
signs of mold growth. Ensure humidity 
at between 30-50% by running dehu-
midier if necessary. If water damage, 
mold evident, consult professional for 
remediation.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
39
Assessed Feature and Why It Matters
Type of 
Water 
Damage
Assessment
Opportunity to Reduce Risk
Furniture and Electronics
Furniture and electronics- Are furniture 
and electronics at risk of damage 
in the event of a flood? The risk of 
realizing damage to furniture and 
electronics from flooding can be greatly 
reduced by raising the height of items 
off the floor and selecting water resistant 
and washable furnishings.
N/A
Furniture items have non-absorbent 
surfaces up to 6” and electronics are 
stored at least 6” off the floor.
Select furniture items that have 
non-absorbent surfaces up to 12” and 
store electronics at least 12” off the 
floor.
Plumbing Fixtures
Indoor plumbing and fixtures 
maintenance- Are your plumbing and 
fixtures and their connections to water 
and sewer in good repair to prevent 
flooding? Regular review and repair of 
leaks and broken seals in toilets, taps, 
pipes and water heaters reduce risk of 
basement flooding.
PF
Toilets, taps, pipes and water heaters 
are not inspected by homeowner, 
inspected and repaired by plumber as 
needed.
Each season inspect toilets, taps, pipes 
and water heaters for leaks and signs of 
wear. Repair or replace items with the 
assistance of a plumber as needed.
Storage and Limiting Indoor Humidity
Stored valuables- Are your valuables at 
risk of damage during a flood or at risk 
of mold and mildew growth? Removing 
valuable items from the basement, 
sealing them in water-tight containers, 
raising items off the floor and moving 
them away from walls helps to reduce risk 
of flood damage and mold and mildew 
growth.
N/A
Valuables are stored in sealed, 
non-absorbent containers at least 12” 
off the floor, at least 6” away from 
walls OR no valuables are stored in the 
basement.
No action required.
Basement indoor sources of moisture- 
Minimizing and managing indoor sources 
of excessive humidity is essential to limit 
mold growth.
N/A
Fan is present but can’t hold piece 
of tissue when running, OR fan is not 
present OR fan is run for less than 10 
minutes after shower or bath. Furnace 
humidifiers operate in the summer, 
items are stored that increase humidity. 
Dehumidifier is not keeping relative 
humidity between 30-50%.
Consider running more than one 
dehumidifier. Ensure moisture is kept at 
between 30-50%.
Hazardous materials- Are hazardous 
materials stored in a way that 
represents a contamination risk during 
a flood? There is a risk of leak and 
contamination of the basement if a flood 
occurs.
N/A
Hazardous materials are not sealed in 
waterproof containers and/or are stored 
on the floor.
See D on Inside Assessment diagram. 
Remove hazardous material from 
basement or to avoid contamination 
threat, or seal hazardous materials in 
waterproof containers and store at least 
12” off the floor and at least 3” away 
from walls.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
40
APPENDIX B: LITERATURE REVIEWED
Behaviour Change Literature Reviewed
 
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1977). Attitude-behavior relations: A theoretical analysis and review of empirical research. 
Psychological bulletin, 84(5), 888. doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.84.5.888
Bamberg, S., & Möser, G. (2007). Twenty years after Hines, Hungerford, and Tomera: A new meta-analysis of psycho-social 
determinants of pro-environmental behaviour. Journal of environmental psychology, 27(1), 14-25. doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvp.2006.12.002
Darnton, A. (2008). GSR Behaviour Change Knowledge Review: Overview of Behaviour Change Models and their 
Uses-Briefing Note for Policy Makers. Retrieved from http://research.fit.edu/sealevelriselibrary/documents/doc_mgr/921/
Darnton.2008. Behaviour Change Models & Uses.pdf
Davis, F. D. (1985). A technology acceptance model for empirically testing new end-user information systems: Theory and 
results (Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1989). User acceptance of computer technology: a comparison of two 
theoretical models. Management science, 35(8), 982-1003. doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982
Jackson, T. (2005). Motivating sustainable consumption. Sustainable Development Research Network, 29, 30.
Jacobson, S. K., McDuff, M. D., & Monroe, M. C. (2015). Conservation education and outreach techniques. Oxford Universi-
ty Press.
Jaffe, A. B., & Stavins, R. N. (1994). The energy paradox and the diffusion of conservation technology. Resource and Energy 
Economics, 16(2), 91-122. doi.org/10.1016/0928-7655(94)90001-9
Rodgers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations. New York. doi:citeulike-article-id:126680
Stern, P. C. (1999). Information, incentives, and proenvironmental consumer behavior. Journal of Consumer Policy, 22(4), 
461-478. doi.org/10.1023/A:1006211709570
Stern, P. C. (2000). New environmental theories: toward a coherent theory of environmentally significant behavior. Journal of 
social issues, 56(3), 407-424. doi:10.1111/0022-4537.00175
Stern, P., Dietz, T., Abel, T., Guagnano, G., & Kalof, L. (1999). A Value-Belief-Norm Theory of Support for Social Movements: 
The Case of Environmentalism. Human Ecology Review, 6(2), 81-97. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/24707060
 
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
41
Flood Risk Assessment Tools Reviewed
Coastal Risk Consulting, LLC. (2017). Is your property at risk for flooding?. Retrieved from 
https://floodscores.com/flood-insurance/
Department for Infrastructure. (2013). Flood Maps (NI). Retrieved from 
http://riversagency.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=fd6c0a01b07840269a50a2f596b3daf6
Gov.Uk. (2017). Long term flood risk assessment for locations in England. Retrieved from 
https://flood-warning-information.service.gov.uk/long-term-flood-risk/#x=357683&y=355134&scale=2
Leich, S. (2017). This map will show you if your house is at risk of flooding. Edmonton Journal. Retrieved from 
http://edmontonjournal.com/news/local-news/is-your-house-at-risk-of-flooding
Newcastle City Council. (2017). Know Your Flood Risk. Retrieved from 
http://www.newcastle.nsw.gov.au/Flooding
North Carolina Flood Risk Information System. (n.d.). North Carolina Flood Risk Information Systerm. Retrieved from 
http://fris.nc.gov/fris/Home.aspx?ST=NC
Scottish Environment Protection Agency. (2015). Flood Maps. Retrieved from 
http://map.sepa.org.uk/floodmap/map.htm
Shoothill and UK Environmental Agency. (2017). Check My Flood Risk. Retrieved from 
http://www.checkmyfloodrisk.co.uk/
Square One Insurance Services Inc. (2017). International approaches to residential flood insurance. Retrieved from 
http://www.getfloodinsurance.ca/international-approaches
The Co-operators. (2016). Water risk assessment. Retrieved from 
https://water.cooperators.ca/en/assessment.aspx
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority. (2016). Flood Plain Map. Retrieved from 
https://trca.ca/conservation/flood-risk-management/flood-plain-map-viewer/
Assessment Templates Reviewed
Baseline Inspections. (2017). Home Inspection Report. Retrieved from 
http://baselineinspections.com
Center for Neighborhood Technology. (2016). RainReady Home Assessment Tool. Retrieved from 
http://www.cnt.org/tools/my-rainready-home-assessment-tool
CSA Group. (2017). CAN/CSA-A770-16 Home Inspection Standard. Retreived from 
http://www.csagroup.org/news_or_press/csa-group-publishes-the-first-national-standard-on-home-inspections/
Department of Energy & Environment. (1999). RiverSmart Homes. Retrieved from 
https://doee.dc.gov/service/riversmart-homes-overview
Gov.Uk. (2017). Flood Risk Assessment Tool. Retreived from 
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/flood-risk-assessment-local-planning-authorities 
Green Communities Canada & Rain Community Solutions. (2017). RAIN Home Visit. Retrieved from 
http://www.raincommunitysolutions.ca/en/
Green Trust Services Ltd. (2014). Home Inspection Report. Retrieved from 
http://www.greentrustservices.ca 
Ron the House Doctor. (2017). Home Inspection Report. Retrieved from 
http://www.cambridgehousedoctor.com
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority. (2016). Sustainable Neighbourhoods Action Plans. Retrieved from 
https://trca.ca/conservation/sustainable-neighbourhoods/
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
42
APPENDIX C: STAKEHOLDERS ENGAGED IN THE HOME FLOOD PROTECTION PROGRAM 
DEVELOPMENT
Allan Magi, Executive Director, Capital Works Department, City of Burlington
Cary Clark, Manager of Development Engineering and Stormwater, City of Burlington
Chris Rol, Senior Policy Advisor, Insurance Bureau of Canada
Dan Sandink, Director of Research, Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Frank Mossman, Property and Liability Insurance Inspector, Intact (Atlantic Canada)
Gerry Lashley, Director of Personal Property Insurance, Intact (Atlantic and Ontario)
Grant Murphy, Business Owner and Municipal Engineer, Two Point Oh! E-Learning Services 
Hashim Javed, Engineer, Project Manager II, Water & Wastewater System Services Public Works, Halton Region 
Jamie Shawn Mahoney, Financial Reporting & Insurance Analyst, University of Waterloo
Jitender Singh, Technical Advisor, Canadian Codes Centre, National Research Council, Canada
Kevin Snyder, Senior Field Claims Representative, Intact Insurance 
Larry Freiburger, Director of Operations, AET Engineering Consultants
Luke Kuzio, Contract Coordinator, Procurement & Contract Services, University of Waterloo
Michael Albanese, Business Owner, Avesi Stormwater and Landscape Solutions
Nickola Voegelin, Legal Counsel & Co-Chair of the Copyright Advisory Committee, University of Waterloo
Paul Allan, Real Estate Agent and Team Leader, KW Keller Williams Golden Triangle Realty Inc. 
Richard Simpson, Professional Plumber, Business Owner, Town Councillor, Town of Innisfil 
Rod McGilvary, Home Inspector, Baseline Inspections
Ron Bolender, Home Inspector and Business Owner, Ron the House Doctor
Sian Williams, (former) Senior Legal Counsel, University of Waterloo
Steve Kee, Director of Media & Digital Communications, Insurance Bureau of Canada
Communications Best Practices on Flood Risk Reduction
Aquafor Beech Ltd. and Freeman and Associates. (2015). Stormwater Management Master Plan, Municipal Class 
Environmental Assessment: Market-based Strategies: Securing Uptake of At-source Stormwater Management Practices on 
Private Property
Green Communities Canada & RAIN Community Solutions. (2015). RAIN Home Visit Participant Feedback Survey Report 
2012-2014
Kreibich, H., Christenberger, S., & Schwarze, R. (2011). Economic motivation of households to undertake private precaution-
ary measures against floods. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 11(2), 309. doi: 10.5194/nhess-11-309-2011
Maidl, E., & Buchecker, M. (2015). Raising risk preparedness by flood risk communication. Natural Hazards and Earth System 
Sciences, 15(7), 1577-1595. doi.org/10.5194/nhess-15-1577-2015
Owusu, S., Wright, G., & Arthur, S. (2015). Public attitudes towards flooding and property-level flood protection measures. 
Natural Hazards, 77(3), 1963-1978. doi.org/10.1007/s11069-015-1686-x
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
43
APPENDIX D: EXAMPLES OF MEDIA COVERAGE ON HOME FLOOD 
PROTECTION PROGRAM
2017
CBC Radio. September 2017.  Is Canada prepared for climate change?  Adaptation is key, say experts: 
http://www.cbc.ca/radio/thecurrent/the-current-for-september-05-2017-1.4274756/is-canada-prepared-for-climate-change-
adaptation-is-key-say-experts-1.4274758 
Snapd Burlington. September 2017. Home Flood Protection Program: 
https://burlington.snapd.com/events/view/1074068
Appleby News. August 2017. Home Flood Protection Program: 
http://www.applebynews.net/single-post/2017/08/25/Home-Flood-Protection-Program
Water Canada, August 2017.  Burlington Chosen to Pilot Home Flood Protection Program: 
http://www.watercanada.net/burlington-chosen-to-pilot-home-flood-protection-program/
Global News, August 2017.  Burlington will host flood prevention pilot program: 
https://globalnews.ca/news/3648388/burlington-will-host-flood-prevention-pilot-program/
Inside Halton. August 2017.  Burlington Pilots New Home Flood Protection Program: 
https://www.insidehalton.com/news-story/7488450-burlington-pilots-new-home-flood-protection-program/
CHCH News. August 2017.  Burlington to Launch Pilot Home Flood Protection Program: 
http://www.chch.com/burlington-launch-flood-protection-program/
2016
Canadian Underwriter. September 2016. Testing the Waters: 
https://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/features/testing-the-waters-2/
Canadian Underwriter, August 2016.  Ontario, City of Burlington support Home Adaptation Assessment Program pilot 
launch: https://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/insurance/ontario-city-burlington-support-home-adaptation-assessment-pro-
gram-pilot-launch-1004098027/
CHCH, August 2016.  Burlington prepares for climate change: 
http://www.chch.com/burlington-prepares-climate-change/
Hamilton Spectator, August 2016.  Burlington testing ground for anti-flooding project: 
https://www.thespec.com/news-story/6797932-burlington-testing-ground-for-antiflooding-project/
640News, August 2016.  City of Burlington launches flood risk assessment pilot: 
https://globalnews.ca/radio/640toronto/?gref=640toronto
Inside Halton, August 2016.  Burlington ‘anchor’ city for deployment of pilot program to reduce basement flooding: 
https://www.insidehalton.com/news-story/6797728-burlington-anchor-city-for-deployment-of-pilot-program-to-reduce-base-
ment-flooding/
2015
Global News, November 2015.  U. of Waterloo, Intact Financial seek ways to reduce damage from severe weather: 
https://globalnews.ca/news/2369902/u-of-waterloo-intact-financial-seek-ways-to-reduce-damage-from-severe-weather/
CBC News, November 2015.  Climate change research centre established at University of Waterloo: 
http://www.cbc.ca/news/business/climate-change-research-centre-established-at-university-of-waterloo-1.3343279
The Star Canada, November 2015.  University of Waterloo plan focuses on helping homes lessen risk of flooding: 
https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2015/11/30/university-of-waterloo-plan-focuses-on-helping-homes-lessen-risk-of-
flooding.html
Globe and Mail, November 2015.  Insurers look for new ways to cope with climate change: 
https://beta.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industry-news/energy-and-resources/intact-financial-launches-ef-
fort-to-help-canadians-prepare-for-climate-change/article27522914/?ref=http://www.theglobeandmail.com&
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
44
ENDNOTES
i Office of the Auditor General of Canada. Reports of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development. 
Report 2 Mitigating the Impacts of Severe Weather. 2016. Accessed at: 
http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_cesd_201605_02_e_41381.html 
ii Public Safety Canada. 2016-2017 Evaluation of the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements. March 2017. Accessed at: 
https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/vltn-dsstr-fnncl-ssstnc-2016-17/vltn-dsstr-fnncl-ssstnc-2016-17-en.pdf 
iii Office of the Auditor General of Canada. Spring 2016 Reports of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable 
Development. Report 2: Mitigating the Impacts of Severe Weather. Accessed at: 
http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/docs/parl_cesd_201605_02_e.pdf
iv Parliamentary Budget Officer of Canada. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial Assistance Arrange-
ments due to Weather Events. 2016. Accessed at: 
http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf 
v Insurance Bureau of Canada. Facts of the Property and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada 2016, 2016. Web. Accessible 
at: http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2016/Facts-Book-2016.pdf
vi Canadian Underwriter. New IBC flood model shows 1.8 million Canadian households at ‘very high risk’. February 2016. 
Accessed at: 
http://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/insurance/new-ibc-flood-model-shows-1-8-million-canadian-households-at-very-high-
risk-1004006457/ 
vii Forbes. Flood Insurance: Protection Against Storm Surge. 2012. Accessed at: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/realtorcom/2012/07/10/flood-insurance-protection-against-storm-surge/#3da7aa604136 
viii Canadian Payroll Association. Eighth Research Survey of Employed Canadians. 2016. Accessed at: 
http://www.payroll.ca/cpadocs/npw/2016/CPA_2016_NPW_National_Media_Deck_Final_English.pdf 
ix Globe and Mail. Leaky basement lawsuit drags on in Maple Ridge. 2015. Accessed at: 
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/british-columbia/leaky-basement-lawsuit-drags-on-in-maple-ridge/article25051951/ 
x Hutton, D. 2004. Psychosocial effects of a natural disaster: A post-flood assessment in Red River Valley. Environments, 
32(2), 27-43
xi Santé Montréal. 2017. Montréal’s Director of Public Health presents findings from the health survey flood victims. Accessed 
at: https://www.santemontreal.qc.ca/en/public/inondations-printanieres-2017 
xii Hutton, D. 2004. Psychosocial effects of a natural disaster: A post-flood assessment in Red River Valley. Environments, 
32(2), 27-43
xiii Sahni, V., Scott, A. N., Beliveau, M., Varughese, M., Dover, D. C., & Talbot, J. 2016. Public health surveillance response 
following the southern Alberta floods, 2013. Can J Public Health, 107(2), 142–148
xiv City of Burlington. Flood Recovery. Accessed at: 
https://www.burlington.ca/en/services-for-you/Flood-Recovery.asp 
 
xv Ibid.
Disaster Risk Reduction Applied to Canadian Residential Housing
45
“After going through two devastating sewer back-
up floods in 2014, my family and I wanted to learn 
what we could do to protect our new home from 
flooding. I would recommend having an assess-
ment to anyone who wants to understand what 
they need to do to protect their home and their  
personal belongings. The assessment is $125, a 
small price to pay to have peace of mind.”
– Carol Solis (Burlington, Ontario)
PARTICIPANT TESTIMONIALS
“A few years ago we experienced a flooded 
basement from sump pit overflow. We also have 
chronic dampness in parts of our basement. From 
our  assessment we learned we can upgrade our 
sump pump, install a backup battery and flood 
alarm and make some inexpensive changes to 
our downspouts to help us keep water out of our 
basement even during the biggest storms. The 
$125 assessment fee is an investment that could 
save any family thousands of dollars in future.” 
– Zainab & Patrick Moghal (Waterloo, Ontario)
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT:
CHERYL EVANS
Director, Home Flood Protection Program
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
EV3 4334 - 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3G1 
c8evans@uwaterloo.ca
shutterstock-401695021
