Health
Canada
Santé
Canada
Your health and 
safety... our priority.
Votre santé et votre
sécurité... notre priorité.
Human Health 
in a Changing Climate:
A Canadian Assessment of 
Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
Human Health 
in a Changing Climate:
A Canadian Assessment of 
Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
Edited by:
Jacinthe Séguin
Health Canada
Health Canada is the federal department responsible for helping the people of Canada maintain and
improve their health. We assess the safety of drugs and many consumer products, help improve the safety 
of food, and provide information to Canadians to help them make healthy decisions. We provide health 
services to First Nations people and to Inuit communities. We work with the provinces to ensure our health
care system serves the needs of Canadians.
Published by authority of the Minister of Health.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
Également disponible en français sous le titre :
Santé et changements climatiques : Évaluation des vulnérabilités et de la capacité d’adaptation 
au Canada
This publication can be made available on request on diskette, large print, audio-cassette and braille.
For further information or to obtain additional copies, please contact:
Publications
Health Canada
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0K9
Tel.: 613-954-5995
Fax: 613-941-5366
E-Mail: info@hc-sc.gc.ca
© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, represented by the Minister of Health, 2008
This publication may be reproduced without permission provided the source is fully acknowledged.
HC Pub.: 4038
Cat.: H128-1/08-528E
ISBN: 978-0-662-48365-6
Cover photo of Saguenay flood courtesy of the Canada Centre for Remote Sensing, Natural Resources Canada.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
i
EDITOR
Jacinthe Séguin
Health Canada
AUTHORS
Diane Bélanger
Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
and Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec
Peter Berry
Health Canada
Véronique Bouchet
Environment Canada
Dominique Charron
International Development Research Centre
Kaila-Lea Clarke
Health Canada
Bernard Doyon
Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec
Manon Fleury
Public Health Agency of Canada
Christopher Furgal
Indigenous Environmental Studies Program, Trent University
Pierre Gosselin
Institut national de santé publique du Québec, Ouranos 
and Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec
Serge Lamy
Health Canada
L. Robbin Lindsay
Public Health Agency of Canada
Gordon McBean
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction and Departments 
of Geography and Political Science, University of 
Western Ontario
Nicholas Ogden
Public Health Agency of Canada
Jacinthe Séguin
Health Canada
Corinne J. Schuster
United Nations University
Colin L. Soskolne
School of Public Health, University of Alberta
CONTRIBUTORS
Peter Berry (Health Canada), Mark Buell (National Aboriginal Health Organization), Kathleen Buset (Environment
Canada), Laurie Chan (University of Northern British Columbia), Quentin Chiotti (Pollution Probe), Kaila-Lea
Clarke (Health Canada), Sophie Cousineau (Environment Canada), Victoria Edge (Public Health Agency 
of Canada), Gylda Fry (Health Canada), Christopher Furgal (Trent University), Mélissa Giguère (Institut national
de santé publique du Québec), Andrew Hallak (Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction), Michel Jean
(Environment Canada), Barry Jessiman (Health Canada), Branka Jovic (Health Canada), Stan Judek (Health
Canada), Cheryl Khoury (Health Canada), Justine Klaver-Kibria, Tom Kosatsky (BC Centre for Disease Control),
Paul Kovacs (Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction), Marie-Andrée Lévesque (Université Laval), Eric Litvak
(Direction de santé publique de Montréal), Daniel Martin (Public Health Research Unit, CHUQ-CHUL),
David Noble, Nicholas Ogden (Public Health Agency of Canada), Radenko Pavlovic (Environment Canada),
Nedka Pentcheva (Environment Canada), Dieter Riedel (Health Canada), Jacinthe Séguin (Health Canada),
Dave Stieb (Health Canada), Jinhui Zhao (Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
ii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Climate Change and Health Office at Health Canada gratefully acknowledges the contribution of the 
following people in providing guidance, reviewing chapters and providing written comments, and assisting 
in the coordination of activities that made this publication possible:
Steering Committee
Horacio Arruda
Council of Chief Medical Officers of Health
Alain Bourque
Ouranos, Quebec
George de Berdt Romilly
Climate Canada Atlantic, Nova Scotia
Daniel Krewski
Institute for Population Health, University of Ottawa
Robert Lannigan
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
University of Western Ontario
Don Lemmen
Natural Resources Canada
Don MacIver
Environment Canada
Gordon McBean
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction and 
Departments of Geography and Political Science, 
University of Western Ontario
Lisa Stringer
Public Health Agency of Canada
John Wellner
Ontario Medical Association
Reviewers
Vic Adamowicz, Terry Battcock, Lianne Bellisario, Jim Berner, Ian Burton, Monica Campbell, André Cyr, 
Jean-François Dionne, Kristie Ebi, Betty Edwards, David Etkin, Mark Goldberg, Pierre Gosselin, Emdad Haque,
Dave Hutton, Roy Kwiatkowski, John Last, Don Lemmen, Diane McClymont-Peace, Véronique Morisset,
Linda Mortsch, Simone Powell, Timothy Ramsay, Dieter Riedel, Guy Sanfaçon, Ryan Schwartz, Don Shropshire,
Barry Smit, Robert Smith, Paul Sockett, Craig Stephen, Douw Steyn, Dean Stinson O’Gorman, Pierre Valois,
Lisa Van Buren, Jay Van Oostdam, David Waltner-Toews, Leslie Whitby, and Kue Young.
Secretariat and Peer Review Coordination
Marcia Armstrong, Ben Brisbois, Kaila-Lea Clarke, Jim Frehs, Catherine McIntosh, Dawn Paszkowski, 
Mark Saigeon, Anita Walker, Catherine Wilde, and Anna Yusa.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
iii
PREFACE
Doctors, nurses, and public health and emergency management officials are continually on alert for 
changes that will affect the well-being of the population. Increasingly they have recognised the impacts 
that environmental degradation can have on health and are seeking information to support needed 
clinical interventions and public health programs. Awareness of climate change and of the possible 
repercussions on health is growing among these health care professionals and decision makers but 
gaps in the knowledge of existing and future risks remain important barriers to adaptation. Health 
Canada undertook this publication in response to a growing number of requests for information a
bout how Canadians will be impacted by climate change. We believe that increased knowledge can 
empower Canadians and their communities. It provides opportunities to educate people about the 
risks and actions needed to protect the most vulnerable in our society and, ultimately, improves lives.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
represents the first comprehensive assessment of health vulnerabilities to climate change in Canada. 
It provides an up-to-date synthesis of knowledge on how the health of Canadians is affected by our 
climate today, and what may lie ahead under future climate change.
The goal of this publication is to raise awareness of the health risks posed by climate change among 
those charged with protecting health. It is hoped that the results will provide guidance to the public 
health and emergency management communities and support their efforts to adapt plans, policies 
and programs in order to prevent or reduce risks to health. The regional studies in this Assessment 
show how multiple sectors, levels of government, and individual Canadians play important roles 
in protecting health. They also demonstrate the need to understand the effects of climate change on 
local and regional scales. Some of the findings are not conclusive and therefore we look to researchers 
and decision makers in Canada to continue increasing our understanding of risks to Canadians, so 
that we can further the development of needed adaptations.
What started as a much smaller project grew into a larger undertaking as partners and stakeholders 
encouraged us to learn more about the impacts of concern to Canadians. We received valuable advice 
through early workshops and through the contribution of many experts during the project. I am indebted 
to the many individuals who shared our vision and took time to conduct research, provide expert 
opinions, and review draft chapters. The contribution of so many individuals from organisations and 
institutions across Canada is a testament to the multi-disciplinary and collaborative nature of this 
endeavour. Their commitment to advancing our knowledge in this area made this publication possible 
and I thank them for their dedication.
Jacinthe Séguin
Health Canada
Editor
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
iv
FOREWORD
Climate change presents significant challenges in efforts to maintain and improve the health and well-being 
of people living around the world. Developed countries such as Canada are not immune to the impacts of 
climate hazards such as weather extremes. As health risks from extreme weather events and global warming
continue, the scientific information needed to address these risks must reach health and emergency officials 
and individual citizens so that they can take needed measures to adapt.
This new report published by Health Canada is a timely assessment of new research on health risks posed 
by climate change. The theme of World Health Day in 2008 is “Protecting Health from Climate Change”, 
which reminds us of the urgency of this issue and of the need to take necessary actions to protect those most
vulnerable to the health impacts of climate change.
This Assessment draws from guidance provided in the “Methods for Assessing Climate Change and 
Health Vulnerabilities and Public Health Adaptation”, which were the result of a multi-year collaboration
among the World Health Organization, Health Canada, the United Nations Environment Programme and 
the World Meteorological Organization. Continued collaboration among researchers, government officials 
and health organizations in efforts to address the impacts of climate change is essential if we are to 
reduce risks to the health of the most vulnerable populations.
Findings and lessons learned from the Health Canada Assessment can benefit other countries in their 
investigations of existing vulnerabilities and in the engagement of the health sector in future adaptation work.
Maria Neira
Roberto Bertollini
Director
Director
Department of Public Health and Environment
WHO Regional Office for Europe
World Health Organization
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
v
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Authors and Contributors .................................................................................................................................... i
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................................ ii
Preface ................................................................................................................................................................ iii
Foreword ............................................................................................................................................................ iv
Chapter 1 – Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
Chapter 2 – Assessment Methods .................................................................................................................... 25
Chapter 3 – Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards and Extreme Weather ............................................................ 43
Chapter 4 – Air Quality, Climate Change and Health .................................................................................... 113
Chapter 5 – The Impacts of Climate Change on Water-, Food-, Vector- and Rodent-Borne Diseases .......... 171
Chapter 6 – Health Impacts of Climate Change in Quebec ............................................................................ 211
Chapter 7 – Health Impacts of Climate Change in Canada’s North .............................................................. 303
Chapter 8 – Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity in Canada .................................................. 367
Chapter 9 – Conclusion .................................................................................................................................. 449
Glossary .......................................................................................................................................................... 459
Chapter 1
Introduction
Jacinthe Séguin
Kaila-Lea Clarke
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
3
CONTENTS
1.1
Climate Change and this Assessment .......................................................................... 4
1.1.1 Introduction .......................................................................................................... 4
1.1.2 Origins of the Assessment .................................................................................... 5
1.1.3 Scope and Organization of the Report ................................................................ 5
1.2
Climate Change and Changing Weather .................................................................... 7
1.2.1 Weather, Climate Variability and Global Climate Change .................................. 7
1.2.2 A Changing Canadian Climate ............................................................................ 7
1.2.3 Impacts of Climate Change in Canada .............................................................. 10
1.2.4 Vulnerability to the Impacts of Climate Change ................................................ 11
1.3
Climate Change and Health ...................................................................................... 12
1.3.1 The Relationship Between Climate Change and Health .................................... 12
1.3.2 Determining Who Is at Risk .............................................................................. 15
1.3.3 Studying Climate Change and Health: Approaches and Challenges ................ 17
1.4
Adaptive Capacity and Adaptation .......................................................................... 19
1.4.1 Understanding Adaptive Capacity ...................................................................... 19
1.4.2 Toward Adaptation ............................................................................................ 19
1.5
References .................................................................................................................... 21
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
4
1.1
CLIMATE CHANGE AND THIS ASSESSMENT
1.1.1
Introduction
For more than two decades, findings of the scientific community have indicated that the Earth’s
climate is rapidly changing. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states that
“warming of the climate system is unequivocal,” and its conclusion is supported by observations
of increases in global air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice, and rising
global mean sea level (IPCC, 2007c,
p. 5). Natural processes have always
influenced global climate, but human
activities, in particular the burning of
fossil fuels and changes in land use
patterns, are considered to be the
main reasons for the climatic changes
observed since the mid-20th century
(IPCC, 2007c). In Canada, average
national temperatures have increased
1.2°C over the past 50 years and 
an even greater rate of warming 
is projected over this century
(Government of Canada, 2006).
Climate change is a global phenomenon that leaves no part of the world untouched. Everywhere,
changes in climate are having observable impacts on both natural and human systems—water
resources, ecosystems, food and forest products, coastal systems and low-lying areas, industry,
settlements and societies, and human health, involving significant social, economic and 
environmental consequences (Stern, 2006; IPCC, 2007c). As these changes occur, adaptations to
protect Canadians and their communities need to be developed and implemented. Adapting 
to climate change requires that decision makers and individual Canadians adjust their activities
and plan for events and conditions that, in some instances, have not yet been fully experienced.
Scenarios of future global or regional climate can act as guides for planning a safe and prosperous
future for future generations around the world.
Periodic assessments of vulnerabilities to climate change are necessary to inform and support
the processes of adaptation. Knowledge about the health impacts of climate change is growing
rapidly and is increasingly being shared around the world. Several recent publications examining
the effects of climate change at the global, national and regional levels have highlighted the
health impacts of climate change on populations (McMichael et al., 2003; Berner et al., 2005;
Menne and Ebi, 2006; Stern, 2006; Confalonieri et al., 2007).1 It is widely recognized that
efforts must focus on assessing current and future health vulnerabilities in order to identify
actions to help those affected, especially the most vulnerable.
This Assessment provides the most up-to-date synthesis of knowledge on how the health 
of Canadians is affected by the climate and what lies ahead under future climate scenarios. 
It explores how governments, communities and individuals are drawing on current capacity to
address and mitigate the effects of climate on health. These analyses identify vulnerabilities 
to health and areas where added vigilance and new knowledge are required to protect the
health of Canadians.
Chapter 1
1
A list of national impact assessments of climate change can be found in the Health Chapter of the IPCC Fourth Assessment
Report (Confalonieri et al., 2007). The World Health Organization has also completed, or participated in, a number of assessments
of climate change health risks (McMichael et al., 2003; Menne and Ebi, 2006).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
5
1.1.2
Origins of the Assessment
In the past decade, Canada has initiated and participated in several assessments of the 
impacts of climate change, which have included some of the possible effects of climate
change on health. The first report, the Canada Country Study: Climate Impacts and
Adaptation, included a review of published literature on the effects of climate change on
health in Canada (Koshida and Avis, 1998). In 2008, a second comprehensive assessment, 
From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, was released; it reports 
on key issues facing each region of the country, including health (Lemmen et al., 2008). 
The Arctic Climate Impact Assessment was a notable international initiative that profiled 
the health effects of climate change on Arctic populations, including those in Canada 
(Berner et al., 2005).
In planning this Assessment, Health Canada recognized the need to understand the 
significance of future climate scenarios and of global and local environmental change for 
the health of the population. The Assessment provides decision makers with an integrated 
perspective regarding the vulnerabilities of Canadians. It was also considered necessary 
to set a course for future research, policies and actions. Consequently, in 2003, Health 
Canada initiated a consultative and investigative assessment process, informed by the
approach proposed by the World Health Organization (WHO) in its 2003 publication 
Methods of Assessing Human Health Vulnerability and Public Health Adaptation to 
Climate Change (Kovats et al., 2003).
The process for this Assessment was guided by a National Steering Committee, with 
representation from various public and private organizations, and with input and advice from
over 350 stakeholders, practitioners, government decision makers and researchers in a 
series of activities (e.g. scoping workshops, table-top simulation exercises, committee meetings,
key interviews, peer reviews). The diversity of views broadened the scope of inquiry, 
challenged assumptions and strengthened the analysis. This Assessment is the first of its 
kind in Canada to focus on health vulnerabilities, conducted by health and environment
researchers and supported by experts from many other disciplines and fields.
1.1.3
Scope and Organization of the Report
The National Steering Committee recognized the limitations of current knowledge, research
capacity, and data availability and completeness. Therefore, the approach and scope of this
initiative was intended to meet the following objectives:
• develop a baseline of evidence concerning the relationship between a changing climate and
direct and indirect impacts on health;
• establish a framework for analyzing adaptive capacity and define the ability of selected
populations to cope and adapt to specific impacts;
• demonstrate the usefulness and replicability of the methods employed in this Assessment; and
• establish partnerships to advance policy and scientific work in this area.
This Assessment brings together information collected through a wide range of methods (literature
reviews, modelling studies, table-top simulation exercises, key informant interviews and 
population surveys) to present evidence of risks to health from climate change, along with
vulnerabilities of concern. It comprises investigations on both national and regional scales. 
Much of the data were collected at the sub-national level; consequently, useful lessons can 
be drawn from this exercise for future application at the local, regional and provincial levels 
in Canada, and to provide relevant advice for policy decisions at all levels of government.
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
6
The Assessment is organized as follows:
The present chapter summarizes the scope and organization of the Assessment. It then presents
background information on climate change in Canada helpful to understanding the relationship
between climate change and health. The assessment process and the content of the chapters
then follow.
Chapter 2, Assessment Methods, discusses methodologies used for this
Assessment, as well as their general limitations, including the topic of 
uncertainty. It should be noted that some chapters use methods and practices
appropriate to their specific investigations, and these are discussed in detail 
in the respective chapters.
Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards and Extreme Weather, examines
the occurrence of climate-related natural hazards in Canada. It reviews the
impacts of such events on health, and the systems and measures in place to
mitigate these impacts. It also proposes research directions, policies and
measures that are needed to reduce future risks.
Chapter 4, Air Quality, Climate Change and Health, provides a brief overview 
of the impact of air pollution and the effects of its interactions with warmer 
temperatures on health. It examines the effects of one future climate scenario
on air quality in Canada, and uses modelling to predict future impacts on
health. It also discusses current Canadian risk-management strategies, including
key research needs on this subject.
Chapter 5, Impacts of Climate Change on Water-, Food-, Vector- and Rodent-
Borne Diseases, reviews the potential effects of climate change on the risks in
Canada related to specific diseases that originate from food and water sources, and
from insects, ticks and rodents. It summarizes current key public health activities
that protect populations, and discusses future directions for research and risk
management.
Chapter 6, Health Impacts of Climate Change in Quebec, and Chapter 7, Health
Impacts of Climate Change in Canada’s North, are assessments of vulnerabilities
to health in two regions of the country; both cover the full scope of the issues
addressed in this Assessment. These regions were selected because of the
availability of data, case studies, and research expertise.
Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity in Canada,
assesses adaptive capacity by examining the current capacity to handle increasing
exposure or sensitivity of the population to certain climate risks and to manage
climate-sensitive diseases. It also reviews measures that have been developed
to strengthen the ability to manage these risks, and provides insights on how
future population exposure and sensitivities might change in Canada.
Chapter 9, Conclusion, reflects on the findings of all chapters and presents
five themes common to all. Under each theme, it highlights findings that
have the potential to influence current policy and program decisions as well
as future research directions in Canada.
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
7
1.2
CLIMATE CHANGE AND CHANGING WEATHER
1.2.1
Weather, Climate Variability and Global Climate Change
In studying the effects of climate change on health, it is important to distinguish the effects 
of several meteorological exposures: weather, climate variability and long-term climate
change (McMichael et al., 2003). Climate is the average day-to-day weather defined by 
variables such as temperature, precipitation, humidity, cloud cover and wind. Climate 
variability is a departure from the average climate, including seasonal variations and large-scale
regional cycles such as El Niño. Occurring over decades or even longer time-scales, climate
change is a sustained shift from the usual or expected climate patterns for a particular area
(Environment Canada, 2001). On a global scale, climate change means a long-term shift in 
the Earth’s prevailing weather that can be measured by key weather variables (e.g. temperature,
precipitation).
Over the past century, the world has become warmer. The total temperature increase has been
approximately 0.76°C (from 1850–99 to 2001–05). Eleven of the last 12 years (1995–2006)
rank among the warmest years on record (IPCC, 2007c). Numerous other changes in climate
have also been observed. These include changes in Arctic temperatures and ice, precipitation 
patterns, wind patterns and aspects of extreme weather including droughts, heavy precipitation,
heat waves and the intensity of tropical cyclones (Confalonieri et al., 2007). Reductions in
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are considered necessary to limiting the rate and magnitude
of future climate change. However, owing to the inertia of the Earth’s climate system, further
warming and the associated changes in climate parameters, such as precipitation patterns and
extreme weather events, are expected to continue (Confalonieri et al., 2007).
Major advancements in the number of simulations that are available from a broad range of
models, which cover a range of possible futures, provide a quantitative basis for estimating the
likelihood of many aspects of climate change (IPCC, 2007c). Global atmospheric models project
that, over the next two decades, global temperature will increase by 0.2°C per decade. Even 
if atmospheric concentrations of GHGs were kept constant at year 2000 levels, global mean
temperature would still increase by 0.1°C per decade. Geographic variation in the amount 
of warming is projected, with the greatest warming occurring over land and at high latitudes
(IPCC, 2007c). Precipitation is also projected to increase more at high latitudes, whereas
decreases in precipitation are expected in most subtropical land regions (IPCC, 2007c). Warmer
temperatures will be accompanied by continued contractions in snow cover, reduced extent 
and duration of Arctic sea ice, and an increased permafrost thaw depth. These patterns represent
a continuation of observed trends (IPCC, 2007c).
1.2.2
A Changing Canadian Climate
The geography of Canada is vast and diverse, covering 48 degrees of latitude from Pelee Island
in the south to the Arctic Ocean and extending across from the Atlantic to the Pacific oceans.
This land mass has a varied topography and considerably different ecosystems and climate
regimes. The Canadian climate is characterized by great variability on both seasonal and 
inter-annual scales.
An examination of historical records indicates that Canada’s average temperature has
increased 1.2°C over the past 50 years. Historical records can provide some indication 
of the direction of changes, but the complexity of the Earth’s climate system is such that 
predicting what changes are likely to occur in the future requires more sophisticated analyses.
Mathematical models and scenarios integrating various climate influences and detailing 
the implications of changes for North America and Canada are available and continue to be
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
8
improved. In recent years, Canada has supported several initiatives to develop regional 
projections that take into account socio-economic factors and other regionally relevant 
environmental variables. The Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric 
Sciences, the Meteorological Service of Canada, the Canadian Climate Scenarios facility 
at the University of Victoria, Ouranos and climate modellers at other Canadian 
universities are contributing to the development and refinement of regional climate 
projections for Canada. These models are considered to provide plausible projections 
of potential changes for the 21st century.
It is projected that Canada will continue to experience greater rates of warming in this 
century than most other regions in the world (Government of Canada, 2006). The 
Yukon and the Northwest Territories are experiencing the greatest warming, whereas 
there has actually been some moderate cooling over Baffin Island in the eastern 
Arctic (Figure 1.1). Projected increases in temperature vary, with the Arctic and 
the south-central Prairies warming the most (Figure 1.2). Precipitation has increased 
over most of the country, with the exception of the Prairie provinces and the eastern 
edge of Baffin Island (Figure 1.3). However, general statistics do not show that 
while precipitation has increased, it has also become more irregular. This trend will 
continue in the future; some areas will experience more intense rainfall, possibly 
causing floods, and others will experience record-setting periods of drought. In general, 
annual precipitation is projected to rise in many areas, accompanied by more frequent 
heavy precipitation events, less precipitation during the growing season and more 
precipitation during the winter (Lemmen et al., 2008) (Figure 1.4). Of interest to climate 
and health researchers are the projected changes in both these climate variables 
(i.e. temperature and precipitation) and the regional variation in their distribution; 
these point to the importance of regional- and local-scale studies in determining 
risks and vulnerabilities.
Figure 1.1 Regional distribution of linear temperature trends (°C) 
observed across Canada between 1948 and 2003
Chapter 1
Note: The symbol X indicates areas where the trends are statistically significant.
Source: Zhang et al., 2000 (updated 2005).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
9
Figure 1.2 National annual temperature scenario 2050: A simulation 
of projected changes in annual mean temperatures for Canada 
for the period 1961–90 to 2040–60
Chapter 1
Figure 1.3 Regional distribution of linear precipitation trends (%) 
observed across Canada between 1948 and 2003
Note: The symbol X indicates areas where the trends are statistically significant.
Source: Zhang et al., 2000 (updated 2005).
Source: Atlas of Canada, 2003b.
Annual temperature change from 1961–1990 to 2040–2060 (°C)
1–2
2–3
3–4
4–5
5–6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
10
Figure 1.4 National annual precipitation scenario 2050: A simulation 
of projected changes in annual mean temperatures for Canada 
for the period 1961–90 to 2040–60
1.2.3
Impacts of Climate Change in Canada
In its Fourth Assessment Report, the IPCC noted a marked increase in studies of observed
trends in the environment and their relationship to regional climate change since its Third
Assessment Report in 2001. The panel concluded, “There is high confidence that recent
regional changes in temperature have had discernible impacts on many physical and 
biological systems” (IPCC, 2007b, p. 2). Natural systems that are being affected by regional 
climate change, particularly changes in temperature, include changes in snow, ice and 
frozen ground; shifts in the ranges and species of plants and animals in terrestrial, freshwater 
and marine systems; earlier timing of spring events; and changes in ocean salinity, pH, 
oxygen levels and circulation (IPCC, 2007b).
All regions of Canada are experiencing climatic change, but the experience can vary widely
across the country. The impacts of climate change are especially visible and immediate 
in Canada’s northern regions. The effects of the gradual warming of temperature on 
ecosystems and economic activities dependent on natural resources (e.g. agriculture, 
forestry, fisheries, hunting) are also being observed. Shifts in average climate conditions 
Chapter 1
Source: Atlas of Canada, 2003a.
Annual precipitation change from 1961–90 to 2040–60 (%)
-10–0
0–10
10–20
20–30
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
11
are expected to be accompanied 
by changes in climate variability,
increasing the frequency of 
some extreme weather events.
Across the country, injuries, 
evacuations and economic losses
from weather-related disasters 
in Canada are reported to be 
on the rise in the past decade 
and can be in the hundreds of 
millions of dollars (PSEPC, 2005;
Lemmen et al., 2008). Recent
events such as the 1998 Ice Storm 
in eastern Canada, Hurricane 
Juan in 2003 in the Maritimes, and the Peterborough and Toronto floods in 2004 and 2005, 
respectively, have shown that climate variability can overwhelm infrastructure and 
communities in this country, and cause irreversible changes to ecosystems. Canadians have
also begun to experience the kind of heat waves that scientists predict will become much 
more common. For example, by 2050, hot summer days in southern Canada exceeding 
30°C are estimated to be four times more frequent than today (Environment Canada, 2005).
Coastal areas will continue to be at risk from erosion, extreme weather events and sea-level
rise (Riedel, 2004). The most up-to-date assessment of climate impacts in Canada, From
Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, assesses the body of knowledge
regarding Canada’s vulnerability to climate change, as well as potential future benefits
(Lemmen et al., 2008). In each regional chapter, current and anticipated climate impacts 
are reported, with a focus on human and managed systems, including human health.
1.2.4
Vulnerability to the Impacts of Climate Change
Humans are directly exposed to climate change through changes in weather patterns, such 
as more intense and frequent extreme weather events and changes in average seasonal 
temperatures and other climate variables like precipitation and winds. But the influences of 
climate go well beyond experience of the weather; they play key roles in most life-supporting
systems. The breadth of the influences of climate change on biological and physical 
systems and the unpredictable nature of extreme weather events can increase vulnerability 
to climate change impacts. However, understanding vulnerabilities within society is a 
complex process that must go beyond knowledge of the environmental effects of climate
change. It requires knowledge of the interactions between three variables:
• exposure of individuals or populations to the impacts of climate;
• sensitivity to the impacts; and
• adaptive capacity of individuals, populations and institutions (also known as ability to cope
with consequences or the ability of a system to manage change).
Many frameworks have highlighted the links between these three variables, but little guidance 
has been offered on how to integrate their analyses. Together, analyses of exposure, sensitivity
and adaptive capacity provide insights about vulnerability. In the field of climate change
impacts and adaptation, vulnerability refers to “the degree to which a system is susceptible 
to, and unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate variability 
and extremes” (IPCC, 2007a, p. 883).
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
12
1.3
CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
1.3.1
The Relationship Between Climate Change and Health
The World Health Organization’s definition of human health as “a state of complete physical,
mental and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity” (WHO,
2006, p. 1) is widely accepted and has influenced the development of approaches to managing
population health worldwide. In writing about the concept of health, Frankish et al. (1996)
expand the discussion to include a person’s capacity to adapt to, respond to, or control life’s
challenges and changes. It is now widely understood that at every stage of life, health is 
determined by complex interactions between social and economic factors, the physical 
environment, and individual traits and behaviours. These factors
are called determinants of health, and their combined influence
determines the health status of individuals and populations (Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), 2003).
Climate is one of many factors that determine the status of 
population health, and special analyses are needed to understand 
the complex pathways by which climate change can affect human
health. Many determinants of health can be affected by weather, 
climate variability or other environmental changes induced by 
climate. For example, in the aftermath of a major storm or flood,
individuals can experience loss of employment income, interruption
of support systems or health services, changes in diet, exposure 
to environmental contaminants and/or social unrest—all of which
can, individually or in combination, affect an individual’s health 
status. The relationship between climate and its impacts on health
occurs through a range of pathways that vary in directness, scale
and complexity (Figure 1.5).
Figure 1.5 Pathways by which climate change impacts health, and the concurrent 
influences of environmental, social and health system factors
Chapter 1
Determinants of health
• Income and social status
• Social support networks
• Education and literacy
• Employment/Working conditions
• Social environments
• Physical environments
• Personal health practices and
coping skills
• Healthy child development
• Biology and genetic endowment
• Health services
• Gender
• Culture
Source: Confalonieri et al., 2007. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability (Figure 8.1)
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
13
Direct exposure
Extreme climatic events in many parts of the world in the past decade have provided momentum
for the study of the direct impacts of climate on health. Catastrophic events have facilitated
the collection of data and enhanced the statistical power of analyses. Although the long-term
effects of sudden and short-term climatic events remain a challenge for health researchers,
sensitivity to extreme temperatures is one of the better understood climate stressors of human
health (McMichael et al., 2003; Riedel, 2004). Several recent studies confirm the impacts of
extreme temperatures on mortality within populations, as well as varying vulnerabilities and
thresholds related to health impacts (Rainham and Smoyer-Tomic, 2002; Kirch et al., 2005;
Pengelly et al., 2005). The results of regional studies strongly suggest that social determinants
(e.g. lifestyles, clothing, housing, social services) can affect mortality, and that local studies
are important to understand specific vulnerabilities. As well, weather conditions are a direct
contributing factor to motor vehicle accidents (Andrey et al., 2005). Although longer snow-free
periods in southern Canada could reduce dangerous winter driving conditions, Andrey et al. (2005)
indicated that the relative risks of mortality or serious injury are less during snowfall than
those observed during rainfall or mixed precipitation.
Indirect exposure
Health impacts may also occur indirectly—as the result of changes induced by climate on 
biological (e.g. plants, organisms, animals) or geochemical (e.g. air composition) systems. These
changes can alter conditions favourable for infectious diseases (water-, food-, vector- and
rodent-borne diseases). For example, the establishment, reproduction and survival of insects and
other hosts of diseases, such as tick-borne Lyme disease and mosquito-borne West Nile virus
(Health Canada, 2005b), can be influenced by temperature and precipitation. Temperature is
known to play a role along with other factors in the outbreaks of food-borne diseases in most
temperate developed countries (Kovats et al., 2004a, 2004b). Water-borne disease outbreaks
have been associated with heavy precipitation, spring snowmelt and flooding (Bowie et al., 1997;
Rose et al., 2000; Curriero et al., 2001; Charron et al., 2004; Schuster et al., 2005; Thomas et al.,
2006). Weather conditions can also affect air quality through the transport of air-borne pollutants,
creation of ground-level ozone and production of pollens (McMichael et al., 2003; Garneau 
et al., 2005). There is a well-known association between levels of air pollutants and health
effects within populations.
Climate change can also have an impact through economic and social factors such as the loss of
employment or property after a natural disaster, resulting in stress and other illnesses. Climate
change will also exacerbate the challenges already faced by many Canadian communities that rely
on agriculture, forestry and other natural resource-based activities (Lemmen et al., 2008). Increased
financial burdens on families and communities may affect many determinants of health, such 
as nutrition, housing conditions and sanitation, mental stress, marital stress, and substance abuse.
Similar impacts have been observed in populations that experience catastrophic weather events.
Transportation is another aspect of Canadian society highly influenced by climatic conditions.
For many northern residents, the unreliability of “snow roads” because of milder winters has
substantial implications in terms of access to food, goods and services, and employment. Weather
conditions can contribute to motor vehicle accidents; overall, casualty collisions cost 
the Canadian health care system more than $10 billion per year (Canadian Council of Motor
Transport Administrators (CCMTA), 2001).
Globally as well as nationally, the balance of positive and negative health impacts will vary from
one location to another, and will change over time, as temperatures continue to rise. In 2001,
Health Canada adopted its own list of health effects from climate change as a preliminary guide
for its investigation of the impacts of climate change on health in Canada; this list (Table 1.1)
has been a useful reference for examining how understanding of the health effects of climate
is advancing in Canada.
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
14
Table 1.1
Typical climate risks and related health effects
Chapter 1
Health Impact Categories
Source: Adapted from Health Canada, 2005b.
Climate-related Causes
Projected / Possible Health Effects
Temperature extremes
Extreme weather events
and natural hazards
Air quality
Contamination of food
and water
Infectious diseases 
transmitted by insects,
ticks and rodents
Stratospheric ozone
depletion
• More frequent and severe heat waves
• Overall warmer weather, with possible
colder conditions in some locations
• More frequent and violent thunderstorms,
more severe hurricanes and other types
of severe weather
• Heavy rains causing mudslides and floods
• Rising sea levels and coastal instability
• Increased drought in some areas, 
affecting water supplies and agricultural
production, and contributing to wildfires
• Social and economic changes
• Increased air pollution: higher levels of
ground-level ozone and airborne dust,
including smoke and particulates from
wildfires
• Increased production of pollens and
spores by plants
• Contamination of drinking and recreational
water by run-off from heavy rainfall
• Changes in marine environments that
result in algal blooms and higher levels
of toxins in fish and shellfish
• Behavioural changes due to warmer
temperatures resulting in an increased
risk of food- and water-borne infections
(e.g. through longer BBQ and swimming
seasons)
• Changes in the biology and ecology 
of various disease-carrying insects, ticks 
and rodents (including geographical 
distribution)
• Faster maturation for pathogens 
within insect and tick vectors
• Longer disease transmission season
• Depletion of stratospheric ozone by some
of the same gases responsible for climate
change (e.g. chloro- and fluorocarbons)
• Temperature-related changes to stratos-
pheric ozone chemistry
• Increased human exposure to UV 
radiation owing to behavioural changes
resulting from a warmer climate
• Heat-related illnesses and deaths
• Respiratory and cardiovascular disorders
• Possible changed patterns of illness 
and death due to cold
• Death, injury and illness from violent
storms, floods, etc.
• Social and emotional injury and 
long-term mental harm from loss of
loved ones, property and livelihoods
• Health impacts due to food or water
shortages
• Illnesses related to drinking water 
contamination
• Effects of displacement of populations
and crowding in emergency shelters
• Indirect health impacts from ecological
changes, infrastructure damages and
interruptions in health services 
• Psychological health effects, including
mental health and stress-related illnesses
• Eye, nose and throat irritation, and
shortness of breath
• Exacerbation of asthma symptoms
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and other respiratory conditions
• Exacerbation of allergies
• Heart attack, stroke and other 
cardiovascular diseases
• Increased risk of certain types of cancer
• Premature death
• Outbreaks of strains of micro-organisms
such as E. coli, Cryptosporidium, Giardia,
S. typhi (typhoid), amoebas and other
water-borne pathogens
• Food-borne illnesses
• Other diarrhoeal and intestinal diseases
• Increased incidence of vector-borne
infectious diseases native to Canada
(e.g. eastern & western equine
encephalitis, Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever)
• Introduction of infectious diseases 
new to Canada
• Possible emergence of new diseases, and
of those previously eradicated in Canada
• More cases of sunburns, skin cancers,
cataracts and eye damage
• Various immune disorders
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
15
1.3.2
Determining Who Is at Risk
Vulnerabilities within a population are generally uneven. Some individuals or groups 
may be more sensitive or more exposed to a climate hazard, and others may have 
a greater capacity to cope. Identifying different sensitivities within the population 
(e.g. age, culture, occupation, location) and the variations in exposure to these risks 
are key aspects of climate and health research. It is also well documented that coping 
strategies play an important role in reducing the vulnerability of individuals and 
populations to a variety of hazards (IPCC, 2007a; McMichael et al., 2003; Menne 
and Ebi, 2006).
On the whole, Canadians enjoy very good health status. Statistics Canada (2006) 
reported that Canadians’ life expectancy reached 80.2 years in 2004 compared with 
74.9 years in 1979. Worldwide, Canada has one of the lowest rates of low birth weight 
at 5.3 per 1,000 live births. More than half (58.4%) of Canadians reported having 
very good or excellent health. Canadians also enjoy a relatively high level of health 
services; in 2001, 87.7% of Canadians had a regular family physician and 84.4% of 
Canadians thought the health services they received were of excellent or very good 
quality (Health Canada, 2002).
The high level of population health in Canada 
provides a strong foundation for coping with the
diverse stresses that climate change will place 
on health and well-being. Healthy populations 
are more resistant to infection and disease, 
better able to recover from injury and less likely 
to fall ill under difficult conditions. However, 
there are notable disparities within Canada’s 
general population. For example, Aboriginal 
populations experience poorer health, lower 
life expectancies, higher rates of some chronic 
illnesses as well as significant socio-economic 
disparities (unemployment, education, average
income) (Health Canada, 2005a). Children 
and infants are more vulnerable to water- and 
food-borne illnesses because of the immaturity 
of their immune systems and inadequate ability 
to avoid the risks (Pond, 2002). Resource-dependent 
and remote communities have fewer resources 
available for coping and limited access to a 
wide range of services (Lemmen et al., 2008). Understanding the disparities within the
Canadian population is a key aspect in studying how people may be sensitive to climate 
change and proposing solutions that will protect the most vulnerable.
Successive national censuses have shown a Canadian population in evolution. Future 
demographic characteristics will include a marked increase in the proportion of seniors 
in Canada2 (Figure 1.6), a continued increase in life expectancy, an increase in immigrant 
populations, a growing trend toward obesity and poor physical fitness, and an increasing 
proportion of people living in urban centres. All these need be examined in the context 
of the impacts of climate change on health and society.
Chapter 1
2
For the purposes of the Assessment, seniors refer to people over the age of 65. 
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
16
Figure 1.6 Seniors by age sub-group, as a percentage of total population,
Canada, 1921 to 2041
Every individual in Canada can be exposed to climatic stresses, 
but where you live, your occupation, existing health status and 
available resources can make a difference to your vulnerability 
to these stresses. Several well-documented vulnerabilities are 
relevant to the study of the impacts of climate change on health.
Infants and children are especially vulnerable to environmental
degradation because of their inability to protect themselves, relatively
high intake of water, air and certain foods, rapid growth and 
development, immature physiology and metabolism, and potential 
for high cumulative exposures over their lifetime (Wigle, 2003).
Recent Canadian research indicates that pregnant women and their
developing fetuses may be at special risk during extreme weather
events (Laplante et al., 2004). Women may be more vulnerable 
to psychosocial health impacts during extreme weather events
because they are more likely to bear the burden of recovering 
from the event and of continuing to meet multiple demands within 
and outside the household (Elliot, 2001; Enarson, 2001). An 
established body of Canadian and international research provides strong evidence that age 
is a risk factor for heat- and cold-related mortality (Koppe et al., 2004; Menne and 
Ebi, 2006). Seniors are more vulnerable to heat because of age-related changes to their 
regulatory system and/or because they are taking drugs that interfere with normal homeostasis
(Koppe et al., 2004).
Social factors also contribute to vulnerabilities. A few studies discovered that older men 
suffer more from isolation, and as a result may be vulnerable to climatic extremes because
they do not have the ability to seek the assistance of family members or community 
volunteer organizations (Klinenberg, 2002; Soskolne et al., 2004). People in poor health, 
with precarious living conditions and limited economic means will generally have more 
difficulties coping with environmental stresses. Certain occupations may be affected by
increased temperatures, extreme weather events and poor air quality. Those who live on 
the land and whose livelihood is tied to natural-resource-based employment will also be
affected in unique ways (Riedel, 2004; Berner et al., 2005). The broad spectrum of potential 
physiological sensitivities and vulnerabilities highlights the importance of population-
specific studies.
Chapter 1
Increase in population of seniors
The proportion of seniors increased
from 10 to 13% of the Canadian 
population between 1981 and 2005,
and is projected to almost double 
in the next 25 years. According 
to medium-growth scenarios, half of 
the Canadian population will be 
over 47 years of age by 2056. The
proportion of the oldest persons 
(80 years and older) is also likely to
increase sharply, such that by 2056,
1 in 10 Canadians will likely be 
80 or more years of age, compared
with 1 in 30 in 2005 (Statistics
Canada, 2005).
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
85+
75–84
65–74
2041
2031
2021
2011
2001
1991
1981
1971
1961
1951
1941
1931
1921
Year
Source: Government of Canada, 2002.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
17
1.3.3
Studying Climate Change and Health: Approaches and Challenges
Climate change and health researchers have applied known methods and developed new
approaches to take into account the complexity of interactions between climate variables 
and the determinants of health, the challenges of scale, the uncertainties inherent in all the 
systems under study and the many coping strategies that may be employed by those at risk. 
The World Health Organization has outlined five main tasks for researchers of health 
and climate change: (1) establishing baseline relationships between weather and health, 
(2) seeking evidence of early effects of climate change, (3) developing scenario-based 
predictive models, (4) evaluating adaptation options, and (5) estimating the coincidental 
benefits and costs of mitigation and adaptation (McMichael et al., 2003) (Figure 1.7). 
Where data and research were available, analysis in the Assessment was structured according 
to these tasks.
Figure 1.7 Tasks for public health science
Epidemiological studies have been useful in establishing baseline relationships between
weather and health. However, standard methods have proven to have limited applicability 
in seeking evidence of the early effects of climate change; this is because broad-scale effects
and indirect causal pathways over long time spans and a broad geography need to be 
examined. Some of these challenges are amplified when dealing with smaller populations,
such as in Canada’s North. Researchers also routinely face important challenges with 
respect to the completeness, comparability and usability of available data. Matching climate 
or meteorological data and environmental quality and health data for the desired time or 
geographical scale is not always possible.
Chapter 1
Public health research
Baseline relationships
• Dose-response
Evidence of early effects,
including monitoring
Co-benefits
of mitigation
Scenario modelling
Adaptation options
Other disciplines
Policy formulation process
Communication to
• Policy makers
• Stakeholders
• Other researchers
Assessments of
• vulnerability
• adaptation
Questions to address?
Information sufficient?
Source: McMichael et al., 2003.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
18
Chapter 1
Using scenario-based predictive models to estimate health outcomes for a future climatic
regime is a practice still in its infancy, but it is becoming more sophisticated. Health
researchers have a choice of several predictive models that present future climate scenarios, 
based on varying levels of GHG emissions. The task is to link these models with health 
impact models where health impacts can be readily estimated. Not all health outcomes are 
easily quantified or modelled (e.g. the effects of climate change on nutrition in northern
Canada or the perinatal effects of extreme weather events). Without evidence of health 
outcomes at the population level, some of the impacts of climate on health are difficult 
to integrate into models forecasting multi-outcome health risks of climate change 
(McMichael et al., 2003). For this reason, assessments provide an opportunity to bring 
together knowledge derived from different methods to better understand the multitude 
of effects and possibilities for adaptation.
Assessing the impacts of climate
change on health is challenging
because health outcomes are strongly
influenced by many determinants
(e.g. behavioural factors, socio-
economic factors, public health
infrastructure). However, the 
understanding of causal pathways 
as well as the sensitivity of 
different populations to a range 
of climate-related risks has 
evolved significantly in the past
decade in Canada and the rest of 
the world. The understanding 
of the relationship between 
climate and health is only the first step in identifying the potential risks and population 
vulnerabilities to climate change. In order to inform adaptive strategies and reduce future
health risks, it is necessary to assess whether there will be an increase in the population 
exposed, whether coping strategies are adequate or whether such an increase will result 
in greater incidence of disease, illnesses or mortality. An even greater challenge for 
health decision makers and researchers is the consideration of the effects on population 
health of a sequence or cumulation of events and conditions. Overall, data on health 
effects and vulnerabilities across populations are necessary to devise cost-effective 
and successful adaptation options, but the valuation of health costs and benefits 
can also be a useful and sometimes necessary input to the calculation of costs and 
benefits of GHG reduction initiatives. Comprehensive assessments such as this 
one can demonstrate the breadth of co-benefits to health from actions to address 
climate change.
At this time, considering the uncertainties of climate projections, the presence of 
confounding factors and limits to the knowledge of environmental effects on health, many
researchers and decision makers have approached its study in manageable parts, focusing 
on regional interests and priorities. By sharing findings and results, knowledge of climate-
health relationships is continually improving, and the areas and conditions that create 
vulnerabilities for certain people within the Canadian population are being increasingly 
identified.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
19
1.4
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY AND ADAPTATION
1.4.1
Understanding Adaptive Capacity
As knowledge of the interactions between climate and health risks and the identification of
vulnerable populations (sensitivity) grows, attention is being paid to understanding the mechanisms
and strategies that protect health or create barriers to adaptation. Perception of risks and of
how well equipped people are to deal with them are important aspects of the coping capacity 
of individuals and institutions. The challenge of adapting to climate
change is taking action in anticipation of an event or events for
which there are significant uncertainties with regards to the time of
occurrence, scale or other essential parameters. Investigating adaptive
capacity and adaptation is less structured than the study of other
aspects of climate change and draws on social sciences and humanities
disciplines to inform its investigative processes.
Adaptive capacity is influenced by many interrelated societal factors,
such as economic resources, technology, information and skills,
infrastructure, institutions, existing inequities in health status and pre-existing disease burdens
(Grambsch and Menne, 2003). Countries will generally have greater adaptive capacity when
they have higher levels of gross domestic product or financial capital, substantial per capita
investments in health care, access to technologies such as vaccines or water treatment 
facilities, high levels of human capital or knowledge (e.g. health research), well-developed
public health infrastructures, well-established social institutions, equitable access to 
health care and social supports, and overall population health and well-being (Yohe and 
Tol, 2002; Adger, 2003).
It is easy to take for granted the measures that protect the health of Canadians from climate
extremes and other environmental hazards. These safeguards include safe water (treatment);
air and food regulations; adequate income; housing and clothing to handle environmental 
conditions such as temperature and pests; high-quality civil infrastructure such as storm sewer,
drainage and sanitation systems; and also all health infrastructures and services, including 
disease surveillance, public health programs and vaccination. When any of these public 
health services fail to meet their required standards, or are compromised—as is possible in 
a changing climate—good health is endangered. It is important to understand how these 
services will perform under different conditions and to identify adjustments needed to ensure
good health when the climate is changing so rapidly.
1.4.2
Toward Adaptation
Recent events in Canada and abroad have shown that developed countries can be overwhelmed
by climatic events. Losses from wildfires, floods, storms and droughts occur annually in
Canada, amounting to hundreds of millions of dollars (PSEPC, 2005). Two multi-billion dollar
disasters occurred in the 1990s—the 1998 Ice Storm ($5.4 billion) and the 1996 Saguenay
flood ($1.7 billion) (PSEPC, 2005). But the impact of these events on the health and well-being
of affected populations goes beyond the reported monetary costs. Recent studies of health 
vulnerabilities in Canadian populations have provided insights into how impacts can affect 
health in the short and long term. Although knowledge is far from complete, adaptive 
strategies to protect public health from the impacts of climate change will be needed. 
Well-informed individuals and institutions are essential to making long-term sustainable 
decisions and to protecting those populations most vulnerable to the risks associated 
with climate change.
Chapter 1
Adaptive capacity
Adaptive capacity refers to the ability
of a system to adjust to climate
change (including climate variability
and extremes) to moderate potential
damages, to take advantage of
opportunities or to cope with the
consequences (IPCC, 2007a).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
20
The reduction of GHG emissions is important to limiting the rate and magnitude 
of future climate change. Nevertheless, even if global efforts to reduce GHGs are 
successful in the future, climate change and its associated impacts are now expected 
to be unavoidable (IPCC, 2007c). Consequently, current and future health vulnerabilities 
arising from different climatic scenarios must be assessed, and options for effective 
interventions and adaptations must be identified. The assessment process is a way to 
determine where action is needed, and how to integrate that knowledge of the future 
into current plans and activities.
For industrialized countries with high levels of education and health status, and well-
developed infrastructures and health care systems, the task is largely to improve on existing
processes and programs using new climate and health information. Consideration is also 
needed about how climate change will compound other environmental, social and economic
changes to bring about unmanageable stresses to these systems. The study of adaptation 
must include an understanding of the effectiveness of systems that are already in place 
to help manage health risks (e.g. smog alerts, heat and cold alerts, severe weather warnings, 
boil water advisories, disease and health surveillance, emergency preparedness and 
response, health services). It must also consider the sensitivity to climate, the surge 
capacity and resiliency of these systems in order to determine if adjustments are required 
to ensure continued effectiveness. Awareness and education also play a role in ensuring 
that individuals adopt appropriate behaviours in the face of new risks.
Experience has shown that catastrophic events can be catalytic in bringing about actions 
to strengthen the ability of individuals and institutions to deal with similar events in 
the future. For example, in the province of Quebec, the 1998 Ice Storm that affected 
eastern Canada played a crucial role in building up momentum to increase the capacity 
to cope with extreme weather. It also created a society that is more aware today of its 
vulnerabilities to current climate variability and future climate change because of targeted
research investments, policy development and awareness building. Decision makers in 
many sectors, such as forestry, agriculture, health and industry, are now able to integrate 
this new information into current risk management regimes and planning activities 
(Desjarlais et al., 2004).
It is important to recognize that regions of the world already facing significant sustainability 
challenges are hit the hardest by climatic change. Canada can share its knowledge, 
expertise and resources to help others reduce their vulnerabilities and build strong 
and healthy societies. Adaptation can be successful if it is guided by reliable 
knowledge of the vulnerabilities to climate change and sound assessments of their 
implications for current systems of managing risks. Our hope is that communication 
and discussion of the findings of this Assessment among decision makers and 
stakeholders can inform and support adaptation processes in Canada and around 
the world.
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
21
1.5
REFERENCES
Adger, W.N. (2003). Social aspects of adaptive capacity. In J.B. Smith, R.J.T. Klein, and S. Huq (Eds.),
Climate change, adaptive capacity and development (pp. 29–49). London: Imperial 
College Press.
Andrey, J., Mills, B., Unrau, D., Christie, M., and Michaels, S. (2005). Toward a national assessment 
of the travel risks associated with inclement weather. Institute for Catastrophic 
Loss Reduction (ICLR) Paper Series, London, Ontario. Retrieved August 15, 2005, 
from http://www.iclr.org/research/publications_climate.htm
Atlas of Canada. (2003a). National annual precipitation scenario: 2050. Retrieved January 9, 2008, from
http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/maps/climatechange/scenarios/nationalannualprecip2050
—–. (2003b). National annual temperature scenario: 2050. Retrieved January 9, 2008, from
http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/maps/climatechange/scenarios/nationalannualtemp2050
Berner, J., Furgal, C., Bjerregaard, P., Bradley, M., Curtis, T., et al. (2005). Human health. 
In Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) (pp. 863–906). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
Bowie, W.R., King, A.S., Werker, D.H., Isaac-Renton, J.L., Bell, A., et al. (1997). Outbreak of 
toxoplasmosis associated with municipal drinking water. The Lancet, 350(9072), 173–177.
Canadian Council of Motor Transport Administrators (CCMTA). (2001). Road safety vision 2001:
2000 update. Transport Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved June 15, 2006, from http://www.tc.gc.ca/
roadsafety/vision/2000/pdf/RSV.pdf
Charron, D.F., Thomas, M.K., Waltner-Toews, D.W., Aramini, J.J., Edge, T., et al. (2004). Vulnerability
of waterborne diseases to climate change in Canada: A review. Journal of Toxicology and
Environmental Health, 67(A), 1667–1677.
Confalonieri, U., Menne, B., Akhtar, R., Ebi, K.L., Hauengue, M., et al. (2007). Human health. 
In M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, and C.E. Hanson (Eds.),
Climate change 2007: Climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working
Group II contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment
Report (pp. 391–431). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Curriero, F.C., Patz, J.A., Rose, J.B., and Lele, S. (2001). The association between extreme precipitation
and waterborne disease outbreaks in the United States, 1948–1994. American Journal of
Public Health, 91, 1194–1199.
DesJarlais, C., Bourque, A., Décoste, R., Demers, C., Deschamps, P., et al. (Eds.). (2004). Adapting 
to climate change. Montréal: Ouranos Consortium.
Elliot, M. (2001). Gender differences in causes of depression. Women and Health, 33(3–4), 163–177.
Enarson, E. (2001). What women do: Gendered labor in the Red River Valley flood. Environmental
Hazards, 3(1), 1–18.
Environment Canada. (2001). Climate change overview: What is climate change? Retrieved 
August 8, 2005, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/climate/overview_factors-e.html
—–. (2005). Climate change overview: The science of climate change. Retrieved August 8, 2005,
from http://www.ec.gc.ca/climate/overview_science-e.html
Frankish, C.J., Green, L.W., Ratner, P.A., Chomik, T., and Larsen, C. (1996). Health impact 
assessment as a tool for health promotion and public policy. A report submitted to the
Health Promotion Development Division of Health Canada, Ottawa.
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
22
Garneau, M., Guay, F., and Breton, M.-C. (2005). Modélisation des concentrations polliniques 
à partir de scénarios climatiques (Partie I) [Modelling pollen concentrations based on climate 
scenarios (Part 1)]. Montréal: Consortium Ouranos, Université du Québec à Montréal, 
département de géographie et Centre de Modélisation Régionale du Climat.
Government of Canada. (2002). Canada’s aging population. A report prepared by Health 
Canada in collaboration with the Interdepartmental Committee on Aging and Seniors 
Issues. Ottawa: Public Works and Government Services Canada.
—–. (2006). Canada’s fourth national report on climate change: Actions to meet commitments 
under the United Nations framework convention on climate change. Ottawa: Author.
Grambsch, A., and Menne, B. (2003). Adaptation and adaptive capacity in the public health 
context. In A.J. McMichael, D.H. Campbell-Lendrum, C.F. Corvalan, K.L. Ebi, A. Githeko, 
et al. (Eds.), Climate change and human health: Risks and responses (pp.1–17). 
Geneva: World Health Organization.
Health Canada. (2002). Healthy Canadians—A federal report on comparable health indicators.
Retrieved June 10, 2006, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hcs-sss/pubs/index_e.html
—–. (2005a). Statistical Profile on the Health of First Nations in Canada. Retrieved January 10, 2008,
from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fnih-spni/pubs/gen/stats_profil_e.html
—–. (2005b). Your health and a changing climate: Information for health professionals.
Ottawa: Author, Climate Change and Health Division.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2007a). Climate change 2007: Climate 
change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report. M.L. Parry, 
O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson (Eds.). Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007b). Summary for policymakers. In M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, 
P.J. van der Linden, and C.E. Hanson (Eds.), Climate change 2007: Climate change 
impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report (pp. 7–22).
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007c). Summary for policymakers. In S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, 
M. Marquis, et al. (Eds.), Climate change 2007: The physical science basis. Working 
Group I contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth 
Assessment Report (pp. 1–18). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Kirch, W., Menne, B., and Bertollini, R. (Eds). (2005). Extreme weather events and public health
responses. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Klinenberg, E. (2002). Heat wave: A social autopsy of disaster in Chicago. Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press.
Koppe, C., Kovats, S., Jendritzky, G., and Menne, B. (Eds.). (2004). Heat-waves: Risks and 
responses. Health and Global Environmental Change (Series, No. 2). Geneva: 
German Weather Service (DWD), London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 
and WHO/Europe.
Koshida, G., and Avis, W. (1998). Executive Summary. In G. Koshida, and W. Avis. (Eds.), 
Canada Country Study, Volume VII. Global Climate Change: National Sectoral Issue.
Environment Canada.
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
23
Kovats, S., Ebi, K.L., and Menne, B. (2003). Methods of assessing human health vulnerability and 
public health adaptation to climate change. World Health Organization, Health Canada, World
Meteorological Association, United Nations Environment Programme. Retrieved May 15, 2007,
from http://www.euro.who.int/InformationSources/Publications/Catalogue/20041118_9
Kovats, R.S., Edwards, S.J., Charron, D., Cowden, J., D’Souza, R.M., et al. (2004a). Climate 
variability and campylobacter infection: An international study. International Journal of
Biometeorology, 49(4), 207–214.
Kovats, R.S., Edwards, S.J., Hajat, S., Armstrong, B.G., Ebi, K.L., et al. (2004b). The effect 
of temperature on food poisoning: A time-series analysis of salmonellosis in ten European
countries. Epidemiology and Infection, 132(3), 443–453.
Laplante, D.P., Barr, R.G., Brunet, A., Galbaud du Fort, G., Meaney, M.J., et al. (2004). Stress 
during pregnancy affects general intellectual and language functioning in human toddlers.
Pediatric Research, 56, 400–410.
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J., and Bush, E. (Eds.). (2008). From impacts to adaptation:
Canada in a changing climate 2007. Ottawa: Government of Canada.
McMichael, A.J., Campbell-Lendrum, D.H., Corvalan, C.F., Ebi, K.L., Githeko, A., et al. (Eds.) 
(2003). Climate change and human health: Risks and responses. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
Menne, E., and Ebi, K. (Eds). (2006). Climate change and adaptation strategies for human health.
Geneva: World Health Organization.
Pengelly, D., Cheng, D., and Campbell, M. (2005). Differential and combined impacts of winter 
and summer weather and air pollution due to global warming on human mortality 
in south-central Canada. Toronto: Toronto Public Health.
Pond, K. (2002). Waterborne gastrointestinal diseases. In G. Tamburlini, O.v. Ehrenstein, 
R. Bertollini (Eds.), Children’s health and environment: A review of evidence
(pp. 113–120). Environmental Issues Report No. 29. Copenhagen: European Environmental
Agency (EAA) and World Health Organization, European Centre for Environment 
and Health.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2003). Population health. What determines health?
Retrieved June 15, 2006, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/ph-sp/phdd/determinants/
index.html
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC). (2005). Canadian disaster database.
Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and Emergency Preparedness. Retrieved 
August 5, 2005, from http://www.ocipep.gc.ca/disaster/bg_info.asp?lang=eng
Rainham, D.G., and Smoyer-Tomic, K. (2002). Human health impacts from urban heat. Toronto:
Clean Air Partnership.
Riedel, D. (2004). Human health. In D.S. Lemmen, and F.J. Warren (Eds.), Climate change 
impacts and adaptation: A Canadian perspective (pp. 151–170). Ottawa: Natural 
Resources Canada.
Rose, J.B., Daeschner, S., Easterling, D.R., Curriero, F.C., Lele, S., et al. (2000). Climate 
and waterborne disease outbreaks. Journal of the American Water Works 
Association, 92(9), 77–87.
Schuster, C.J., Ellis, A.G., Robertson, W.J., Charron, D.F., Aramini, J.J., et al. (2005). Infectious 
disease outbreaks related to drinking water in Canada, 1974–2001. Canadian Journal 
of Public Health, 96(4), 254–258.
Chapter 1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
24
Soskolne, C.L., Smoyer-Tomic, K.E., Spady, D.W., McDonald, K., Roth, J.P., et al. (2004). 
Climate change, extreme weather events and health effects in Alberta.
(HPRP # 6795-15-2001/4400013). Ottawa: Health Canada.
Statistics Canada. (2005, December 15). The Daily: Population projections, 2005 to 2031.
Catalogue no. 11-001-X1E. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2006, December 20). The Daily : Deaths. Retrieved March 13, 2008, from http://www.statcan.ca/
Daily/English/061220/d061220b.htm
Stern, N. (2006). The economics of climate change: The Stern Review. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Thomas, M.K., Charron, D.F., Waltner-Toews, D., Schuster, C.J., Maarouf, A.R., et al. (2006). 
A role of high impact weather events in waterborne disease outbreaks in Canada, 
1975–2001. International Journal of Environmental Health Research, 16(3), 167–180.
Wigle, D.T. (2003). Child health and the environment. New York: Oxford University Press.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2006). The Constitution of the World Health Organization.
Retrieved January 10, 2008, from http://www.who.int/governance/eb/constitution/
en/index.html
Yohe, G., and Tol, R.S.J. (2002). Indicators for social and economic coping capacity – 
Moving toward a working definition of adaptive capacity. Global Environmental 
Change, 12, 25–40.
Zhang, X., Vincent, L.A., Hogg, W.D., and Niitsoo, A. (2000). Temperature and precipitation 
trends in Canada during the 20th century. Atmosphere-Ocean, 38(3), 395–429.
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Assessment Methods
Peter Berry
Kaila-Lea Clarke
Colin L. Soskolne
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
27
CONTENTS
2.1
Introduction ................................................................................................................ 28
2.1.1 Considerations Relevant to the Assessment Approach ...................................... 29
2.2
Options for Assessing Vulnerability .......................................................................... 30
2.2.1 Methods of Assessing Human Health Vulnerability 
and Public Health Adaptation to Climate Change ............................................ 31
2.3
Approach and Methods Used for Human Health in a Changing Climate:
A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity ............................ 32
2.3.1 Assessment Approach  ........................................................................................ 32
2.3.2 Assessment Methods .......................................................................................... 34
2.4
Uncertainty .................................................................................................................. 37
2.5
Lessons for Future Assessments ................................................................................ 37
2.6
References .................................................................................................................... 40
Chapter 2
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
28
2.1
INTRODUCTION
Assessing the health risks associated with climate
change and variability requires understanding both the
vulnerability of a population and the capacity of the
population to respond to the new conditions that arise.
Several countries have completed some form of
assessment of climate-related health risks (e.g. United
States, India, Portugal, United Kingdom, Australia)1
as part of their national communications to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
However, few of these assessments specifically identify
existing vulnerabilities and adaptation options (Kovats 
et al., 2003a). Systematic approaches for identifying
health risks, vulnerable populations and adaptation
options are still being refined.
Vulnerability is a broad concept; the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) defines it as “the
degree to which a system is susceptible to, and unable
to cope with, adverse effects of climate change,
including climate variability and extremes” (IPCC,
2007, p. 21). Vulnerability to health impacts is a 
function of the sensitivity and exposure of populations 
to climate-related risks and the ability to manage these risks. Increasing adaptation 
measures and adaptive capacity helps to manage risks and reduce adverse health outcomes.
Generally, the vulnerability of a population to climate-related health risks can be influenced 
by the following key factors of adaptive capacity: economic resources, technology, infor-
mation and skills, infrastructure, institutions, equity and population health status (Grambsch 
and Menne, 2003).2
To assess the health risks of climate change, a number of important methodological issues must
be considered and addressed. Challenges associated with the selection and application of methods
for understanding human health vulnerabilities at the national scale arise because the impacts 
of climate change in Canada are expected to differ considerably according to the geographical
location and the sensitivity of exposed populations. Because Canada has regions with dramatically
different natural environments, and social and economic characteristics (e.g. north versus south), 
the methodologies for assessing vulnerabilities of populations need to address these variables.
In addition, there are also methodological challenges that arise from limited understanding 
of the complex pathways by which climate change can affect health, as well as from the 
timing of specific impacts. The pathways can be both direct and indirect and the severity 
of some impacts may not be felt for decades or longer. Direct and indirect health impacts 
may result from changes in day-to-day weather (e.g. deaths and illnesses from a heat wave) 
or from changes in ecosystems occurring over months to years (e.g. emerging infectious 
diseases from habitat alterations). Such impacts are often mediated through the effects of other
Chapter 2
1
A more complete list of national impact assessments of climate change can be found in the Health Chapter of the Fourth Assessment
Report of the IPCC (Confalonieri et al., 2007). The World Health Organization has also completed, or participated in, a number
of assessments of climate change health risks (McMichael et al., 2003; Menne and Ebi, 2006).
2
See Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity in Canada, for a more detailed discussion of vulnerability
and adaptive capacity.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
29
important determinants of population health (e.g. health care system, socio-economic factors).
Both direct and indirect health impacts are discussed in Human Health in a Changing Climate:
A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity (this Assessment).
For some health concerns (e.g. vector-borne and zoonotic diseases), assessments are supported
by methods that are relatively well established. For others (e.g. food security, impacts on 
vulnerable populations), methods are underdeveloped or hampered by shortages of available
data (Kovats et al., 2003b). An assessment of vulnerability to climate change impacts must
take these factors into account by moving beyond conventional human health risk assessment
approaches to investigate impacts that could occur in the future (Santos et al., 2002). Models,
scenarios and other tools, designed to explore a range of possible futures, are used in vulnerability
assessments to better understand future climate change impacts. Future projections of climatic
conditions do, however, lack resolution over small geographical areas, and they may not represent
the rate at which the changes may occur with a high enough degree of confidence to inform
decision making. Those conducting vulnerability assessments need to account for the strengths
and weaknesses of existing methods and tools.
2.1.1
Considerations Relevant to the Assessment Approach
In Canada, an investigation of climate change and health issues is included in the Canada Country
Study: Climate Impacts and Adaptation (Maxwell et al.,1997), Climate Change Impacts and
Adaptation: A Canadian Perspective (Lemmen and Warren, 2004) and in From Impacts to
Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007 (Lemmen et al., 2008). Each of these reports is
based on literature reviews and provided an overview of key health risks associated with climate
variability under changing climatic conditions. However, owing to the limited scope of the human
health component of the reports, little information is included on existing vulnerabilities of
specific populations and regions, and on the capacity of governments and communities to take
the needed actions to adapt.
The complexity of biophysical and
social processes affecting human
health requires that health assessments
employ a broad range of health data,
and analytical methods and tools, as
well as draw upon interdisciplinary
collaboration among researchers
from many fields of expertise.
Interdisciplinary collaboration unites
the efforts of specialists from 
various domains: environmental
science, medicine, public health,
climate sciences, and social and
behavioural studies (DesJarlais 
et al., 2004).
A range of both qualitative and quantitative methods and tools can be employed depending on 
the purpose of the assessment and the type of data available. Examples include literature reviews,
expert judgement, ecological studies, geographic information systems, time-series analysis, risk
assessment, community and stakeholder consultation, statistical models and scenario analysis.3
The choice of whether to use qualitative or quantitative methods, or a combination of both,
depends on the level and type of knowledge required by policy makers (Kovats et al., 2003b).
Many assessments integrate both types of methods.
Chapter 2
3
For example, Downing and Patwardhan (2005) provide a generic toolkit for climate change vulnerability and adaptation
assessments.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
30
Whatever methods are chosen, they should support the goal of identifying the potential health
risks of climate change, the most vulnerable populations and regions, and the measures required
to protect health. A comprehensive assessment provides information on:
• current distribution and burden of climate-sensitive diseases;
• interactions among multiple climate and non-climate-related stressors (e.g. heat waves, 
air pollution, power failures, drought);
• estimates of the future potential health risks of climate change using scenarios of future 
climate change, population growth, community infrastructure, and other factors;
• likely threshold or dose-response effects that indicate whether, and how rapidly, the level 
of response increases or decreases with exposure to the hazard;
• health implications of the potential impacts of climate change on other sectors;
• effectiveness of current actions in place to reduce the burden of any particular health outcome;
• future coping capacity of individuals and their communities (e.g. economic resources,
health and social services); and
• identification of short-term, medium-term and longer-term adaptation measures required 
to reduce current and future vulnerability.
2.2
OPTIONS FOR ASSESSING VULNERABILITY
Conventional environmental health risk assessment frameworks provide important methodological
tools (e.g. hazard assessment, stakeholder engagement) for climate change and health 
vulnerability assessments. But these frameworks do not provide sufficient guidance for 
vulnerability assessments because they cannot account for the multiple interrelated causes 
of disease and the various feedback mechanisms that often limit the predictability of health 
outcomes (Bernard and Ebi, 2001). Several guidance documents and conceptual frameworks
have been developed that provide general direction for the application of methods to 
assess vulnerability to the health impacts of climate change and to develop adaptation 
strategies and prioritize options (e.g. IPCC Technical Guidelines for Assessing Climate
Change Impacts and Adaptations: Carter et al., 1994; Handbook on Methods for Climate
Change Impact Assessment and Adaptation Strategies: Feenstra et al., 1998; Adaptation 
Policy Frameworks for Climate Change: Developing Strategies, Policies and Measures:
Lim et al., 2005).
A literature review by Füssel and Klein (2004) surveyed existing guidance documents 
and conceptual frameworks related to adaptation to climate change, and evaluated their 
applicability to national and regional policy strategies aimed at reducing climate-related 
health effects. Many of the current approaches, such as the IPCC technical guidelines 
(Carter et al., 1994), were found to have significant limitations in their applicability to 
climate change and health vulnerability assessments. The authors reported that Methods 
of Assessing Human Health Vulnerability and Public Health Adaptation to Climate 
Change (Kovats et al., 2003b) (described later in the text) is the “single most important 
guidance document for climate change adaptation assessment for human health” 
(Füssel and Klein, 2004, p. 82).
Chapter 2
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
31
2.2.1
Methods of Assessing Human Health Vulnerability 
and Public Health Adaptation to Climate Change
Kovats et al. (2003b) provided a basic approach for all countries to assess and better 
understand the risks of climate change to human health in regions throughout the world. They
provided advice for dealing with the complexity of the subject matter and existing scientific
uncertainties, outlined the strengths and weaknesses of existing tools and methods, and offered
practical guidance for undertaking assessments to governments, health agencies, and 
environmental and meteorological institutions in both industrialized and developing countries.
Figure 2.1 illustrates the steps in assessing vulnerability and adaptation as put forward 
by Kovats et al. (2003b).
Figure 2.1 Steps in assessing vulnerability and adaptation
Chapter 2
Source: Kovats et al., 2003b
The approach advocated in the document by Kovats et al. (2003b) integrates activities 
aimed at understanding current vulnerability and adaptive capacity with efforts to increase 
knowledge of projected future impacts of climate change. Such information directs 
actions to revise, reorient and/or expand public health strategies, policies and measures 
to protect the health of populations. For a range of health outcomes, methods are 
presented to aid in the evaluation of evidence that climate change is affecting morbidity 
and mortality. Methods are also selected to aid in the projection of future impacts, and 
identify adaptation strategies, policies and measures to reduce current and future 
negative effects.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
32
2.3
APPROACH AND METHODS USED FOR HUMAN HEALTH 
IN A CHANGING CLIMATE: A CANADIAN ASSESSMENT 
OF VULNERABILITIES AND ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
2.3.1
Assessment Approach
To the extent possible, the approach used in this Assessment followed the approach in Methods
of Assessing Human Health Vulnerability and Public Health Adaptation to Climate Change
(Kovats et al., 2003b). It combined an investigation of vulnerabilities to current weather and
climate variability with an exploration of specific health risks (e.g. air pollution health risks) that
are anticipated under future climate scenarios. The assessment of vulnerability varied considerably
for each chapter, given differences in data availability and in the focus and purpose of the
respective chapters. Those chapters that examined specific health issues arising from climate
change focussed the discussion of vulnerability on specific groups and populations within
Canada that are most at risk.4 Chapters dealing with specific regions (i.e. Quebec and the North)
provided a broader assessment of vulnerability to the impacts through an examination of current
adaptations and ability to cope with the multiple climate-related health risks within the respective
regions. Some of these findings are expanded upon in Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation
and Adaptive Capacity in Canada, which provides a national perspective on vulnerability by
highlighting trends in exposure to climate-related hazards and the sensitivity of individual
Canadians, and by examining the status and effectiveness of key adaptations to reduce health risks.
This Assessment went beyond a basic assessment; it not only reported on the available information
about potential vulnerabilities in Canada through literature reviews, it also collected new data
and research to quantify impacts and evaluate current responses (e.g. simulation exercises,
informant interviews).
Determination of structure and scope
Existing literature identifies several potentially adverse
health risks of climate change across Canada (Maxwell
et al., 1997; Health Canada, 2003; McMichael et al.,
2003; Lemmen and Warren, 2004):
• air quality-related health effects;
• water-, food-, vector-, and rodent-borne diseases;
• health effects of extreme weather events;
• health effects associated with stratospheric 
ozone depletion; and
• socio-economic impacts (e.g. economic and 
occupational losses).
Through consultative mechanisms, including 
steering committee meetings and three expert 
workshops, the structure and scope of this
Assessment were determined. Three areas that have
important implications for human health—air 
pollution, water-, food-, vector-, and rodent-
borne diseases and natural hazards related to 
climate variability—were chosen for investigation 
Chapter 2
4
Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards and Extreme Weather, goes somewhat further by highlighting the characteristics
that increase the vulnerability of communities, such as deteriorating infrastructure or factors related to urban design (e.g. large
areas of concrete, limited green spaces).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
33
in this Assessment based on the following criteria: (1) availability of data and analytical tools,
(2) existing burden of disease, (3) existence of knowledge gaps, (4) availability of scientific
expertise to address issues, and (5) the extent to which the health sector can adapt.
The investigation of air pollution related to climate variability provided findings that are 
relevant to many parts of Canada, given that many regions and several highly populated 
communities currently experience health risks from poor air quality. Expected impacts 
from climate change on air quality have been highlighted as a key issue for North America
(McMichael et al., 2003; Confalonieri et al., 2007; IPCC, 2007). Literature reviews of health
risks within Canada from water-, food-, vector-, and rodent-borne diseases, as well as natural
hazards related to climate variability (e.g. heat waves, storms, wildfires) were also conducted 
in the course of this Assessment. In addition, two regional health assessments—one for the
Canadian North and one for Quebec—were carried out to allow health decision makers to 
better understand how multiple health issues interact on one population, and to gauge the
adaptive capacity of the region as it responds to several, and sometimes confounding, health
issues. The North was chosen because it is currently experiencing severe impacts of climate
change and because the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment, which was released in 2004, 
provided a body of knowledge from which to draw (Hassol, 2004). The province of Quebec 
was chosen because, at the time of writing, it had the institutional research capacity and
expertise to carry out the research through key public health agencies in that province 
(e.g. Institut national de santé publique du Québec) and through the Ouranos Consortium, 
which includes Government of Quebec ministries, universities, federal agencies and industry
partners, collaborating to increase understanding of climate change impacts and needed 
adaptations in Quebec.
Although this Assessment did not examine vulnerability to the health risks of climate 
change in all parts of Canada, it is possible to extrapolate specific findings to other regions
that may share similar climate-related hazards. In addition, it provides lessons learned 
about how to conduct climate change and health vulnerability assessments for those regions
and individual communities in Canada that may choose to undertake their own assessments 
in the future.
Key assessment components included:
• assessing health risks at the national scale related to decreased air quality, including 
an investigation of current risk management strategies;
• assessing a range of health risks and vulnerabilities at a local scale in Canada’s northern
communities and for people living in Quebec;
• assessing the capacity of communities and governments to adapt to health risks, including
local-scale case studies;
• identifying populations most vulnerable to climate change;
• identifying knowledge gaps that need to be investigated further to fully understand 
the possible impacts of climate change on health; and
• literature reviews of water-, food-, vector-, and rodent-borne diseases and natural hazards
related to climate variability.
Authors for each chapter drew upon input from experts and practitioners, working in a wide
range of disciplines, who were engaged in collaborative research projects, as well as input
gained from the peer review process. For example, Chapter 4, Air Quality, Climate Change
and Health, involved governmental and non-governmental researchers with expertise in epi-
demiology, environmental health sciences, climate modelling and atmospheric sciences, in the 
Chapter 2
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
34
Chapter 2
analysis of the potential impacts of climate change on future air quality and risks to human
health. Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity in Canada, drew 
upon expert input from researchers in the fields of public health, health care system 
renewal, emergency management, natural hazards assessment, sociology and behavioural 
sciences to explore the ability of governments and communities to adapt to climate 
change health risks.
Assessment oversight
Oversight for this Assessment, including the peer review process, was provided by a 
multi-stakeholder National Steering Committee, comprising officials involved in these 
issues at local, regional and national levels, and representatives from governmental 
and non-governmental organizations. It is noted, however, that broad consultation with 
stakeholders, such as local medical officers of health, voluntary organizations and 
provincial health representatives did not take place, but would provide added value 
in future assessments.
2.3.2
Assessment Methods
This Assessment employed a broad range of health data, and analytical methods and tools. 
Key methods employed included climate models, climate scenarios, expert judgement, 
epidemiology, ecological studies, literature reviews and stakeholder consultations.
Data, methods and tools used for Human Health in a Changing Climate:
A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilitites and Adaptive Capacity
Climate model: A numerical representation of the climate system based on the physical,
chemical and biological properties of its components, their interactions and feedback
processes, and which accounts for all or some of the known properties. Models may vary
in complexity. As research tools, they are applied to study and simulate the climate, 
but are also used for operational purposes including monthly, seasonal and inter-annual
climate predictions.
Climate scenario: A plausible and often simplified representation of the likely future
climate, based on an internally consistent set of climatological relationships that has been
constructed for explicit use in investigating the potential consequences of anthropogenic
climate change and often serving as an input to impact models.
Expert judgement: Statements, which represent a process of evaluation that can be
described as a set of conditions and criteria, by someone widely recognized as a reliable
source of knowledge, technique or skill and whose judgement is accorded authority 
and status by the public or their peers.
Epidemiology: The science of public health and preventative medicine that studies the
distribution and determinants of health-related states or events in specific populations,
and that applies study findings to control and/or mitigate health problems.
Ecological study: An epidemiological study which seeks to find population- or community-
level associations between exposure and the occurrence of disease.
Literature review: A comprehensive survey of publications that aims to critically analyze,
summarize and compare prior research in a specific field of study.
Stakeholder consultation: Canvassing of views of stakeholders, which may include
governments, non-governmental organizations, research institutes and private entities that
focus on the issue being investigated, in the process of developing useful information,
often through forums, roundtables and advisory bodies.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
35
Strengths and limitations of the key methods and tools used for this Assessment are shown 
in Table 2.1. More detailed descriptions of specific methods used by the authors to examine
climate change risks to health are presented in the respective chapters.
Table 2.1
Strengths and limitations of assessment methods and tools5
Chapter 2
5
Note: Information on the general strengths and weaknesses of these, and other methods and tools for assessing climate change
and health vulnerability can be found in Kovats et al. (2003b) and Lim et al. (2005).
Quantitative estimates 
of future health risks 
were derived; these were
useful for developing 
adaptation measures to 
protect human health.
Statistical downscaling 
techniques permitted 
the use of global general 
circulation model data 
at more local scales in
Quebec (e.g. city level).
Modelling of heat health
effects allowed for the 
identification of impacts for
different cities and regions.
Qualitative findings 
complemented the analyses
conducted through 
literature reviews.
Surveys and consultations
provided a stakeholder
engagement and awareness-
building function.
Provided up-to-date 
and relevant information 
on adaptation initiatives of
health sectors in Canada.
Strengths 
of Application
Chapter 4, Air Quality,
Climate Change and Health:
Modelled the impact of an
increase in temperature of
4°C (2002 as the base year)
on concentrations of ground- 
level ozone and particulate
matter (PM2.5) for all of
Canada in 2080 using the
Meteorological Service of
Canada’s Unified Regional
Air-quality Modeling 
System (AURAMS), and then
impacts on human health
using Health Canada’s Air
Quality Benefits Assessment
Tool (AQBAT).
Chapter 6, Health Impacts of
Climate Change in Quebec:
Projected morbidity from heat
waves for the certain cities and
administrative areas in Quebec
using the HadCM3 general
circulation model and down-
scaling techniques. Projections
were made for the 2020,
2050 and 2080 timeframes.
Key informant interviews were
used in research projects 
for Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities
to Natural Hazards and
Extreme Weather; Chapter 4;
Chapter 6; and Chapter 8,
Vulnerabilities, Adaptation
and Adaptive Capacity 
in Canada.
Assessment 
Application
Climate Models 
and Scenarios
Expert Judgement
Study Method 
or Tool
Chapter 4 used a single 
temperature increase of 4°C
(not a range of possible
increases) to assess selected
changes arising from climate
change. It also used a single
3 month time period for 
the analysis based on 2002 
conditions, subject to the
4°C increase.
Analysis in Chapter 4 was
limited due to uncertainty
about future exposure to 
air pollution (e.g. people
spending more time outdoors)
and other factors that 
may affect air quality as a
result of climate change 
(e.g. wildfires, modification
of biogenic and anthro-
pogenic emissions).
Limitations in weather data
for administrative areas
made projections of impacts
on mortality more difficult.
Small number of interviewees
for Chapters 3, 4 and 8 limited
the ability to generalize 
findings.
Findings were subjective
in nature.
Limitations 
of Application
Continued on next page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
36
Chapter 2
Chapters 4 and 6 provided
quantitative estimate 
of impacts.
Chapters 4 and 6; and
Chapter 7, Health Impacts 
of Climate Change in
Canada’s North, used these
studies for understanding 
the risks associated with 
vulnerabilities in specific
population groups.
Quantitative estimates of future
health risks were used to
identify adaptation measures
for protecting human health
(e.g. Chapters 4 and 6).
Provided quantitative and
qualitative analyses.
Long-term records were
accessed through electronic
databases (e.g. Medline,
Webscience, etc.).
Analysis used descriptive
information not found 
in traditional databases.
Consultations built on
engagement and awareness
of issues.
Supported making assessment
results responsive to needs
of user community.
Accessed a wide range 
of scientists, experts and
practitioners to increase
credibility of results.
Community consultations
provided information based
on direct observations 
of the environment by 
the general population and 
local managers for the
Canadian North and Quebec.
Strengths 
of Application
All chapters reported on
results of epidemiology
and/or ecology studies
recently completed on climate
change and health issues 
in Canada.
The synergistic effects of
heat wave and air pollution
episodes (particulate matter
[PM2.5] and ground-level
ozone) were investigated 
for Chapter 4.
Used in all chapters of 
the Assessment.
Focus was on new studies
and findings released since
Canada Country Study: Climate
Impacts and Adaptation
(Maxwell et al.,1997).
Included the use of “grey”
literature and policy reports in
select chapters, particularly
for Chapters 7 and 8.
Reviews of existing documen-
tation of traditional and
indigenous knowledge, and
observations of climate
changes and health risks were
conducted for Chapter 7.
A multi-stakeholder steering
committee provided oversight
for the Assessment.
Expert workshops were held
to inform Chapters 3, 4 and 8.
An advisory committee 
provided oversight for
Chapter 6.
Government authorities and
individual citizens at local
and sub-regional levels 
were consulted, and current
perceptions and observations
of climate changes and
impacts over the province
were assessed for Chapter 6.
Assessment 
Application
Epidemiology/ 
Ecology Studies
Literature Review
Stakeholder
Consultation
Study Method 
or Tool
Constraints on application 
of this method included the
costs associated with, and 
the time-consuming nature
of, these studies.
Insufficient health data
and/or relevant climate 
data in Canada meant that
associations between current
and future climate hazards
and health outcomes could
not be rigorously tested 
(e.g. Chapters 3 and 7; and
Chapter 5, Impacts of Climate
Change on Water-, Food-,
Vector- and Rodent-borne
Diseases).
Insufficient understanding 
of system dynamics.
For some chapters, too few
studies are available to 
characterize the level of risk
to health faced by specific
populations and regions in
Canada from climate change
(e.g. Chapters 3 and 5).
Research on climate change
and health adaptation 
measures and their effective-
ness is particularly sparse.
Time consuming to ensure
representation of all relevant
stakeholders.
Results were largely qualitative
and influenced by factors
affecting individual and 
collective perceptions, and
understandings of environ-
mental change (e.g. age, 
gender, lifestyle, health 
status, income, etc).
Limitations 
of Application
Note: Information on the general strengths and weaknesses of these, and other methods and tools 
for assessing climate change and health vulnerability can be found in Kovats et al. (2003b) and 
Lim et al. (2005).
Continued from previous page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
37
Chapter 2
2.4
UNCERTAINTY
Uncertainty is an inherent component of science. However, climate change introduces 
new challenges when identifying, assessing and managing health risks. Major sources of
uncertainty in this Assessment resulted from knowledge gaps related to the biological 
and physical processes by which climate affects health as well as from difficulties inherent 
in estimating health impacts associated with projected climate trends. Uncertainty also 
resulted from incomplete knowledge about system dynamics, including a lack of information
regarding processes operating on a range of scales—from local to national—that determine 
the capacity of individuals, communities and governments to adapt to climate variability 
and change.
Uncertainty must be addressed in assessments of vulnerability in order to better inform 
policy. When reporting uncertainties, some science assessments adopt a probability-based
nomenclature for expressing likelihood and/or confidence, such as the Fourth IPCC
Assessment Report (IPCC, 2007) or the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (Hassol, 2004).
Although the IPCC approach is recommended in Methods of Assessing Human Health
Vulnerability and Public Health Adaptation to Climate Change (Kovats et al., 2003b), 
it was neither practical nor meaningful to adopt a standardized probability-based terminology 
for all chapters in this Assessment. This was due to the varying level of analysis used to 
assess and report health outcomes in each chapter, which was based upon available data 
and existing scientific studies. The qualitative statements of likelihood and confidence 
within this Assessment reflect the information that was available on any specific topic, 
as well as the use of expert judgement. In general, authors were able to express greater 
confidence and likelihood when the quantity and quality of the research available on the
issues were high.
Improved understanding of existing vulnerabilities and the expected health impacts requires
stronger health impact data and further progress in addressing existing knowledge gaps.
Examples of key areas of uncertainty regarding the findings of this Assessment include:
• magnitude of expected increases in future air pollution and health risks;
• magnitude of expected stresses and pressures on the health care system and social services
from a rise in climate-related health impacts; and
• degree of potential vulnerability of Canadians to climate change health impacts, given
uncertainty in future demographic and health trends (e.g. age, chronic health, access to
health services), and projected future exposures to climate-related hazards.
2.5
LESSONS FOR FUTURE ASSESSMENTS
This study constitutes one of the first assessments of impacts on health and well-being 
and vulnerabilities associated with climate change that draws extensively from the approach 
highlighted by Kovats et al. (2003b). It is the most comprehensive climate change and 
health assessment undertaken to date within Canada. As illustrated in Table 2.1, a wide 
range of methods were employed to examine the vulnerabilities of Canadians to climate 
variability and change. Application of these methods has produced new insights about 
the threats to the health and well-being of Canadians posed by climate change. However,
time, research capacity and the availability of health data constrained the ability of 
authors to conduct comprehensive studies of all the potential climate change and health 
vulnerabilities in Canada.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
38
Chapter 2
Extensive literature reviews, database searches and expert interviews were instrumental 
in pulling together, for the first time, baseline data and information on the magnitude 
of climate hazards, and the number of illnesses and deaths in Canada associated with key 
risks to health from climate change. For example, Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities to Natural
Hazards and Extreme Weather, presents information 
on the current health impacts of avalanches, rock-,
mud- and landslides, debris flows, extreme temperatures
including heat waves and cold waves, droughts, 
wildfires, thunderstorms, lightning, hail, tornadoes,
tropical storms (e.g. hurricanes), floods, fog, freezing 
rain and ice storms in Canada. Decision makers in 
the public health and emergency management fields
require such information to gauge future risks to 
health, prioritize risk management activities among
other issues of concern, and develop needed 
adaptive options.
Engagement of stakeholders and partners was crucial 
in this Assessment. It contributed to (1) identifying 
and validating the assessment approach, (2) scoping 
out priority health issues and regions for examination, 
(3) obtaining key information needs of health sector
decision makers, (4) providing advice on communicating
results of this Assessment, and (5) enlisting needed
expertise and research assistance when required. For
example, as a result of consultative workshops, it was determined that decision makers need 
key information on the status of existing risk management activities and on the effectiveness
of those activities for each health issue or region examined. Such analysis was included 
in a number of the chapters, particularly Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive
Capacity in Canada.
Furthermore, analysis in this Assessment enlisted cooperation from a broad range of experts 
to best characterize and assess health impacts and vulnerabilities associated with climate
change. Collaboration with climate modellers at Environment Canada was instrumental for
projecting the potential impacts of possible future climate warming on air quality, and 
climate modelling input from officials with the Ouranos Consortium allowed authors of
Chapter 6, Health Impacts of Climate Change in Quebec, to project the number of heat-
related deaths from climate change for a number of communities in that province. In addition,
integration of information from the Canadian Disaster Database in Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities 
to Natural Hazards and Extreme Weather, benefited from expert advice and review by officials 
in Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada.
Experience with the application of key methods for assessing climate change-related 
health risks and vulnerabilities suggests that future assessments would benefit from:
• development of other models and tools to allow additional non-climate drivers of health
impacts to be considered through cross-sectoral integrated assessment;
• development of climate scenarios, general circulation models and regional downscaling
techniques that provide finer spatial and temporal resolutions to provide needed information
on the changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events (rather than 
just mean values) and inform regional or local adaptation initiatives. Data and model 
constraints, and limitations in temporal and spatial resolution of climate scenarios 
mean that examination of the future burden of disease could not be estimated for all 
health issues and for each region under investigation;
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
39
Chapter 2
• development of quantitative indices of vulnerability and adaptive capacity to compare 
ability to cope with climate change and health risks at the country, regional and 
local levels; and
• more extensive data on (1) illnesses and deaths from key climate change health 
concerns (e.g. deaths related to extreme temperatures), (2) the role of health services 
in mitigating natural hazards or in aiding the victims of natural disasters, (3) the 
effectiveness of current adaptations, and (4) future socio-demographic trends with 
which to gauge vulnerability.
The experience of conducting climate change and health assessments in the North and 
in the province of Quebec provides insights and best practices for assessments at the regional
scale that can be applied to future studies. For example, such initiatives benefit greatly 
from a comprehensive review of the current health and socio-demographic status of the 
relevant populations. They are also aided by investigations of perceptions and observations 
of local-level decision makers and stakeholders who have an important role to play in 
future adaptation development processes. Based upon investigations of the effectiveness
and/or costs of adaptation measures, such information will be critical for the identification 
of priority actions that should be adopted to prepare for all, or the most likely, health 
impacts expected under climate change.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
40
Chapter 2
2.6
REFERENCES
Bernard, S., and Ebi, K. (2001). Comments on the process and product of the health impact assessment 
component of the National Assessment of the Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and
Change for the United States. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(2), 177–184.
Carter, T.R., Parry, M.L., Harasawa, H., and Nishioka, S. (1994). IPCC technical guidelines for assessing
climate change impacts and adaptations. London: Department of Geography, University
College London.
Confalonieri, U., Menne, B., Akhtar, R., Ebi, K.L., Hauengue, M., et al. (2007). Human health. 
In M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, and C.E. Hanson (Eds.), 
Climate change 2007: Climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working 
Group II contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment
Report (pp. 391–431). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
DesJarlais, C., Bourque, A., Décoste, R., Demers, C., Deschamps, P., et al. (2004). Adapting to climate
change. Montreal: Ouranos Consortium.
Downing, T.E., and Pawardhan, A. (2005). Assessing vulnerability for climate adaptation. In B. Lim, 
E. Spanger-Siegfried, I. Burton, E. Malone, and S. Huq (Eds.), Adaptation policy frameworks
for climate change: Developing strategies, policies and measures. New York: United Nations
Development Programme.
Feenstra, J., Burton, I., Smith, J., and Tol, R. (Eds.). (1998). Handbook on methods for climate 
change impact assessment and adaptation strategies, ver. 2. Nairobi: United Nations
Environment Programme.
Füssel, H.-M., and Klein, R.J.T. (2004). Conceptual frameworks of adaptation to climate change 
and their application to human health. PIK report no. 91. Potsdam, Germany: Potsdam
Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK).
Grambsch, A., and Menne, B. (2003). Adaptation and adaptive capacity in the public health 
context. In A.J. McMichael, D.H. Campbell-Lendrum, C.F. Corvalan, K.L. Ebi, A. Githeko, 
et al. (Eds.), Climate change and human health: Risks and responses. Geneva: World 
Health Organization.
Hassol, S. J. (2004). Impacts of a warming Arctic: Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA).
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved June 12, 2005, from
http://www.acia.uaf.edu
Health Canada. (2003). Climate change and health: A policy primer. Ottawa: Minister of Public 
Works and Government Services Canada.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2007). Summary for Policy Makers. In 
M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, and C.E. Hanson (Eds.),
Climate change 2007: Climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working 
Group II contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment
Report. (pp.7–22) Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Kovats, S., Menne, B., Ahern, M.J., and Patz, J.A. (2003a). National assessments of health risks 
of climate change: A review. In A.J. McMichael, D.H. Campbell-Lendrum, C.F. Corvalan, 
K.L. Ebi, A. Githeko, et al. (Eds.), 2003 climate change and health: Risks and responses.
Geneva: World Health Organization.
Kovats, S., Ebi, K.L., and Menne, B. (2003b). Methods of assessing human health vulnerability and
public health adaptation to climate change. World Health Organization, Health Canada, World
Meteorological Association, United Nations Environment Programme. Retrieved May 15, 2007,
from http://www.euro.who.int/InformationSources/Publications/Catalogue/20041118_9
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
41
Chapter 2
Lemmen, D.S., and Warren, F.J. (2004). Climate change impacts and adaptation: A Canadian perspective.
Ottawa: Natural Resources Canada.
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J., and Bush, E. (Eds.). (2008). From impacts to adaptation:
Canada in a changing climate 2007. Ottawa: Government of Canada.
Lim, B., Spanger-Siegfried, E., Burton, I., Malone, E.L., and Huq, S. (2005). Adaptation policy 
frameworks for climate change: Developing strategies, policies and measures. United
Nations Development Programme. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Maxwell, B., Mayer, N., and Street, R. (1997). The Canada Country Study: Climate impacts and
adaptation – National summary for policy makers. Ottawa: Environment Canada.
McMichael, A.J., Campbell-Lendrum, D.H., Corvalan, C.F., Ebi, K.L., Githeko, A., et al. (Eds.). (2003).
Climate change and health: Risks and responses. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Menne, B., and Ebi, K.L. (2006). Climate change and adaptation strategies for human health.
Geneva: World Health Organization.
Santos, F.D., Forbes, K., and Moita, R. (Eds.). (2002). Climate change in Portugal: Scenarios,
impacts and adaptation measures. Lisbon, Portugal: Gradiva.
Chapter 3
Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards
and Extreme Weather
Peter Berry
Gordon McBean
Jacinthe Séguin
Contributors:
Andrew Hallak
Michel Jean
Justine Klaver-Kibria
Paul Kovacs
Dieter Riedel
Jinhui Zhao
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
45
CONTENTS
3.1
Introduction ................................................................................................................ 47
3.2
Methods and Limitations ............................................................................................ 49
3.3
Natural Hazards and Health Impacts in Canada .................................................... 51
3.3.1 Overview ............................................................................................................ 51
3.3.2 Extreme Temperatures ........................................................................................ 54
3.3.2.1 Heat waves .......................................................................................... 54
3.3.2.2 Cold waves .......................................................................................... 56
3.3.3 Floods ................................................................................................................ 56
3.3.4 Droughts ............................................................................................................ 60
3.3.5 Wildfires ............................................................................................................ 61
3.3.6 Storms and Other Extreme Weather Events ...................................................... 62
3.3.6.1 Tornadoes ............................................................................................ 62
3.3.6.2 Freezing rain and ice storms ................................................................ 63
3.3.6.3 Thunderstorms and lightning .............................................................. 63
3.3.6.4 Hurricanes and related storms .............................................................. 64
3.3.6.5 Hailstorms ............................................................................................ 65
3.3.7 Avalanches, Rock-, Mud- and Landslides, and Debris Flows .......................... 66
3.3.8 Fog, Smog and Mist .......................................................................................... 67
3.4
Evidence and Implications of Climate Change for Natural
Hazards in Canada ...................................................................................................... 68
3.4.1 Evidence of Climate Change .............................................................................. 68
3.4.2 Future Climate in Canada and Risks of Natural Hazards .................................. 69
3.5
Individual and Community Vulnerability ................................................................ 71
3.5.1 Human Health Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards and Disasters ...................... 71
3.5.2 Vulnerable Individuals ........................................................................................ 71
3.5.2.1 Age ...................................................................................................... 71
3.5.2.2 Underlying health problems ................................................................ 74
3.5.2.3 Socio-economic conditions .................................................................. 74
3.5.2.4 Aboriginal peoples: First Nations, Inuit and Métis .............................. 75
3.5.2.5 People relying on natural resources .................................................... 76
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
46
3.5.3 Vulnerable Communities .................................................................................... 76
3.5.3.1 Infrastructure ........................................................................................ 76
3.5.3.2 Public health and emergency response services .................................. 78
3.5.3.3 Urban planning .................................................................................... 79
3.5.3.4 Community structure and characteristics ............................................ 79
3.6
Managing Risks from Natural Hazards and Reducing Vulnerability
through Adaptation .................................................................................................... 80
3.6.1 Emergency Management Approach .................................................................. 80
3.6.2 Emergency Management in Canada: Current Capacity and Initiatives ............ 82
3.6.2.1 Overall capacity and advances in preparedness .................................. 82
3.6.2.2 Health emergency management .......................................................... 82
3.6.2.3 Identifying hazards and issuing warnings ............................................ 84
3.6.2.4 Response, recovery and resilience ...................................................... 89
3.6.3 Barriers and Opportunities for Adaptation ........................................................ 92
3.6.3.1 Barriers ................................................................................................ 92
3.6.3.2 Opportunities ........................................................................................ 93
3.7
Knowledge Gaps .......................................................................................................... 95
3.8
Conclusions and Recommendations .......................................................................... 95
3.8.1 Conclusions ........................................................................................................ 95
3.8.2 Recommendations .............................................................................................. 97
3.9
References .................................................................................................................... 99
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
47
3.1
INTRODUCTION
This chapter examines how natural hazards affect the health of Canadians, how climate
change is influencing natural hazards and related risks across the country, and what
conditions determine individual and community vulnerability to these risks. From the
perspective of the emergency management community, three factors combine to create
a hazard: the probability of occurrence of events that can impact a community, the vulnerability
of the population to such impacts, and the resources of the community to cope with those
impacts. All three factors are examined in this order in this chapter, leading to conclusions
about the preparedness of Canadians, knowledge gaps and needed policies and programs.
Because climate change does not influence all types of natural hazards (e.g. earthquakes),
the scope of this chapter focusses on weather and weather-related events. However,
some data and statistics quoted in the chapter include information on all hazards and
natural disasters.
Generally, weather and weather-related events relate to conditions defined in terms of heat
and cold, wet and dry, and wind and pressure conditions, which often come in combinations
such as snow and ice storms, and floods and droughts. These weather conditions then
generate related hazards such as landslides, wildfires, avalanches, storm surges, and melting
ice and permafrost (some of which may
also be considered geological hazards).
A hazard is the potential for a negative
interaction between extreme events (of
a natural or technological origin) and
the vulnerable parts of the population.
Numerous scientific studies have established
that changes in temperature, barometric
pressure, humidity, and other determinants
of weather and climate can affect human
health and well-being.
While many natural hazards have the
potential to affect human health, they
become disasters when certain vulnera-
bilities are present (Etkin et al., 2004).
Around the world, the impacts of natural disasters have been increasing dramatically; the
number of natural disaster events was 10 per year from 1900 to 1940, 65 per year in
the 1960s, 280 per year in the 1980s, and 470 per year since the beginning of this century
(Emergency Disasters Database, 2007). Although part of the reason for this increase
may be better systems for reporting disasters, this does not explain the observed increase
in the number of extreme weather events. The greater frequency of these events and
the higher vulnerability of human systems to them are important
for explaining this observed increase in the number of disasters.
In Canada, people living in all parts of the country can be affected
by natural hazards, and should be concerned about how their
exposure to these hazards may be changing over time because
of climate change. Public Safety Canada (PSC) (formerly Public
Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada) maintains a database
of Canadian disasters dating from 1900 to the present. Information
in this database is useful for determining the current frequency and
longer-term trends of events of a certain size, based upon their
Chapter 3
A disaster is defined as “a serious
disruption of the functioning of a
community or a society causing wide-
spread human, material, economic
or environmental losses which
exceed the ability of the affected
community or society to cope using
its own resources” (United Nations
International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (UN/ISDR), 2004).
Landslide (Saguenay, 1996)
Photo Credits:
Canada Centre for Remote Sensing, NRCan
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
48
costs and related injuries and fatalities. However, these records do not provide information on the
range of health impacts that are caused or exacerbated by natural hazards, nor do they include
estimates of health sector costs associated with these events. Instead, it is through detailed
examples provided by case studies that researchers begin to understand the scope of health
impacts. This chapter highlights the health impacts and the economic costs associated with a range
of events drawn from the PSEPC database and Canadian case studies.
In the 1990s, natural disasters caused
170 deaths and 1000 injuries, and affected
over 700,000 Canadians. Those people
affected were evacuated from their homes,
lost power, or were made homeless. The
largest number of these resulted from the
1998 Ice Storm that affected eastern
Canada (PSEPC, 2005a). Although mortality
in Canada attributed to natural disasters
has decreased in the past several decades,
injuries and the number of people affected
have risen.
At the global scale, weather and weather-
related events together make up most of all
natural disaster events, with floods (33%),
storms (23%, which includes hurricanes,
typhoons, tornadoes and mid-latitude winter
storms), and droughts (15%) as the major
contributors. Most avalanches and many
landslides are also weather-related.
The Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) confirmed that meteoro-
logical and hydrological events that
can impact human health are expected
to increase in the future, irrespective
of near-term efforts to reduce greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions (IPCC, 2007a). Risks to Canadians and their communities will
therefore increase, and will require concerted efforts to plan for, and where possible,
reduce the impacts on health.
Although the characteristics of specific weather events are important for assessing the
risks that individuals and communities face, existing social and economic conditions
and emergency management strategies for coping with an event are also critical in
determining the scope of the impacts. Canadian experience has shown that highly
resilient communities prepare for and respond more effectively to disasters, and that
these communities are better able to protect the most vulnerable people in the population
(Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Network for Emergency Preparedness and
Response, 2004).
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
49
3.2
METHODS AND LIMITATIONS
This chapter reviews Canadian and international literature to assess the impacts of natural
hazards on health, the geographic scope of such hazards in this country and the special
characteristics that make Canadians vulnerable to impacts related to climate change.
Using case studies and examples, current adaptations to protect individuals, communities
and property are highlighted. To support future adaptation efforts, current knowledge
gaps are identified, and the actions needed to increase health risk management capability
and the resilience of Canadians are examined.
The focus of the chapter was guided by recommendations arising from consultations and
workshops organized by the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) and Health
Canada, respectively. Participants included emergency sector experts and practitioners
from academia; municipal, provincial and federal governments; and non-governmental
organizations. In addition, a workshop was held in 2003 to identify key natural hazards
to be examined in this chapter. Floods, heat waves, cold waves, wildfires, convective storms,
and snow and ice storms were highlighted as priority hazards in terms of health impacts
for Canadians. Workshop participants also identified the need to examine psychosocial
impacts of natural hazards and disasters, the effectiveness of risk management activities
to protect people from current and future risks, and the adaptive capacity of institutions
and individuals (Health Canada, 2003).
Baseline information on
the spatial distribution
of natural hazards and
on the occurrence of
extreme weather events
for all regions of Canada
is presented throughout
the chapter, along with
evidence of health impacts
from case studies. The
chapter has drawn its
analysis from original
data sources and reviews
of published and grey
literature. The literature
review targeted both
peer-reviewed scientific
publications, and a variety
of technical and govern-
ment reports. Search terms included global warming, climate change, cold, heat, natural
hazards, storms, floods, drought, wildfires, disasters and other terms related to natural
hazards and disasters in Canada that might be influenced by climate and weather. Particularly
useful sources included maps from the Atlas of Canada, published by Natural Resources
Canada (NRCan), and information from Public Safety Canada’s searchable Canadian
Disaster Database. This database summarizes information on past weather-related disasters
in Canada that are defined as historically significant events, or those in which either:
• 10 or more people were killed;
• 100 or more people were affected, injured, evacuated or became homeless;
Chapter 3
Man setting sandbags during flooding
Photo Credits: Communications
New Brunswick, Govt. New Brunswick
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
50
• an official appeal was issued for national or international assistance; or
• damage to or interruption of community functions was so great that it prevented
recovery of the community on its own.
The database is continually updated and, at present, it covers the years 1900 to 2005.
Unless otherwise indicated, most of the statistics cited in this chapter have been obtained
from this source. Another important source of information was the Meteorological Service
of Canada, which is the principal source of weather and climate information for Canadians.
It provides forecasts, advisories, maps and other information related to weather and
climate (Environment Canada, 2007a).
Limitations in time and space for this project resulted in an uneven coverage of topics,
geographic regions and events that have been illustrated by selected graphics, statistics
and case studies. More comprehensive information can be found in the many references
cited herein. More detailed information on some hazards relevant to the health of
Canadians living in Quebec and the North can be found in Chapter 6, Health Impacts
of Climate Change in Quebec, and Chapter 7, Health Impacts of Climate Change
in Canada’s North, respectively. As well, Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and
Adaptive Capacity in Canada, more fully addresses the problems of how to anticipate,
cope with, and prevent natural disasters related to climate change.
As well, there are few studies
on long-term health impacts
and the role of health services
in the recovery process
following a natural disaster.
While recovery processes
would be expected to play
a role in influencing the
resilience of communities
that have had to cope
with natural disasters, few
Canadian studies have
examined the factors that
could have led to successful
recoveries. In some rare
cases, journalists and
photographers have vivid
on-the-spot accounts
of the experiences of
victims and emergency personnel during and soon after a major disaster (Anderson
et al., 2003). But as yet, there are few comprehensive accounts of whether and to
what extent neighbourhoods or communities have recovered from such disasters.
The August 2003 wildfire disaster in the southern interior of British Columbia
seems to be the only one in which health authorities commissioned a report that is
easily accessible on the performance of emergency medical services and related
matters (Lynch, 2004).
Chapter 3
Wildfires in British Columbia, 2003
Photo Credits: British Columbia Ministry of Forests and Range
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
51
3.3
NATURAL HAZARDS AND HEALTH IMPACTS IN CANADA
3.3.1
Overview
Each region of Canada has unique susceptibilities to extreme weather, and to weather-
related natural hazards; these are greatly influenced by specific geographic and geologic
features of the region. Examples include the so-called storm paths and “tornado alleys”
along the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River corridor, the unstable hillsides and river
valleys in mountain regions that are susceptible to rock-, mud- or landslides, and severe
droughts in the southern Prairies that can lead to dust storms and wildfires. Some coastal
regions are vulnerable to storm surges and the decrease in winter sea ice which protects
the coast from erosion. In addition, many inland river basins are also subject to flooding
and erosion.
There is a lack of reliable and comprehensive data on disasters and weather-related events
in Canada (Etkin et al., 2004). The Canadian Disaster Database is the most comprehensive
database of Canadian information on natural hazards. However, it records only events and
related injuries, deaths and economic losses that meet the defined disaster criteria; many
weather-related hazardous events of concern reviewed in this chapter (e.g. fog occurrences,
thunder and rain storms, heat waves) are not typically recorded in this database. Consequently,
statistics from this database underestimate both the total number of occurrences of weather
events as well as the scope of their impacts. Despite these limitations, according to records
dating back to 1900, there is an increasing trend in the occurrence of natural disasters
and associated costs, with considerable year-to-year variability. The total number of
Canadians affected by natural disasters increased from 79,066 between 1984 and 1993,
to 578,238 between 1994 and 2003 (Health Canada, 2005a). Another database, using
different inclusion criteria than the Canadian Disaster Database, also showed that 51%
of all Canadian disasters were weather-related (Jones, 2003).
Figure 3.1 A century of natural disasters in Canada
Notes: Data compiled using natural disaster information about meteorological events.
*
Health data were either not available or could not be confirmed for a number of disasters.
†
The number of people affected was calculated using the number of people injured plus the number
of people evacuated during a disaster event.
‡
Disaster damages are based on 1999 Canadian dollars for those disasters occurring between
1915 and 2002. Total amount of disaster damages is based on cost data for 76 of 160 disasters
occurring between 1900 and 1969, and for 324 of 388 disasters occurring between 1970
and 2002.
§
Damage estimates are conservative and include only direct costs, excluding uninsured and
indirect costs, such as hospitalization costs, which are difficult to quantify.
Source: Data from PSEPC, 2005a.
Chapter 3
Estimated number of disasters
Estimated number of deaths*
Estimated number of affected*, †
Estimated direct damage
costs (CAN$)‡, §
2000–2002
29
18
154
0.203 billion
1990s
151
179
712,625
13,710 billion
1980s
114
283
50,285
17,617 billion
1970s
92
114
25,477
9,712 billion
1900–1960s
160
3,010
162,462
4,882 billion
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
52
The human health implications of climate change across the globe have been examined under
the combined sponsorship of the World Health Organization (WHO), the World Meteorological
Association (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (McMichael
et al., 1996; McMichael, 2003). They concluded that weather-related disasters might increase
in frequency and intensity as a result of climate change, but noted that the secondary effects
and delayed consequences of such events are poorly documented and reported.
Weather-related disasters pose a threat to human life, health and well-being in a variety of
ways (Health Canada, 2003; ICLR, 2003) (Table 3.1). Some events result in more direct and more
immediate impacts than do others. For example, flooding, drought, severe storms and other
weather-related natural hazards can damage health by leading to an increased risk of injury,
illness, stress-related disorders and death (Hales et al., 2003). Other impacts on health are
less direct and longer-term, such as mould in buildings as the result of flooding, which can
have resulting impacts well after the waters have receded (Solomon et al., 2006). Still
others may not be felt for weeks or months and may last for years, such as a drought causing
economic hardship with a resulting strain on health.
Although dramatic events like tornadoes and floods receive most media attention, evidence
suggests that changing temperature and other weather variables also affect human health.
Weather variables are associated with hospital admissions for respiratory diseases over certain
periods (Makie et al., 2002; Hajat et al., 2004), and relationships between weather variables
and hospital presentations for asthma and asthmatic syndromes have been examined (Celenza
et al., 1996; Harju et al., 1997; Ehara et al., 2000).
Table 3.1
Key weather-related natural hazards in Canada and their associated
health impacts
Chapter 3
Examples: Potential
Health Effects
• Dehydration
• Heat-related illnesses (heat stroke,
fainting, heat cramps, heat rash)
• Existing medical problems made
worse, such as asthma and allergies
• Physical and mental stress
• Respiratory and cardiovascular
disorders
• Food-borne diseases
• Vector-borne infectious diseases
• Frostbite
• Hypothermia
• Death
• Increased risk of injury due to
accidents (car, slipping on ice,
shovelling snow)
Examples: Health
Impact Pathway(s)
• Body temperatures
are elevated beyond
normal range
• Increased growth and
abundance of disease-
causing organisms
and/or vectors
• Air quality is negatively
affected
• Body temperature is
reduced below normal
range
Extreme
Weather Event
Extreme heat
Extreme cold
Populations at
Higher Risk
• Young children
• Seniors (especially those
who are bedridden,
unable to care for them-
selves or socially isolated)
• Chronically ill individuals
• People with compromised
health status
• People living in areas
with poor air quality
• People working or
exercising outdoors
• People without access
to air conditioning
• People on certain
medications
• People without shelter
• People who play or
work outdoors
• Children
• Seniors
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
53
Source: Adapted from Health Canada, 2005a, 2005b.
Some population groups are more vulnerable to natural hazards than others.1 The degree
to which people are vulnerable to these hazards varies significantly across the country
and is influenced by, among other things, where people live, their age, the socio-economic
conditions of family and community, and institutional services and infrastructures.
Research into the impacts of natural hazards on health in Canada is in its infancy. Attributing
illnesses to natural hazards is difficult, and requires the application of appropriate
methodologies and analytical approaches to draw causal relationships. However, lessons
Chapter 3
Examples: Potential
Health Effects
• Physical injury, shock and trauma
• Death by drowning
• Respiratory illnesses
• Outbreaks of vector-borne
infectious diseases
• Outbreaks of crytosporidiosis,
giardiasis, amoebiasis, typhoid and
other water-borne infections
• Respiratory illnesses from dust
and smoke from fires
• Outbreaks of water-borne illness
due to increased concentration
of contaminants
• Hunger, malnutrition and associated
stress disorders due to crop
failures and economic hardship
• Injury or death (in extreme cases)
• Stress from loss of property,
livelihood, displacement and
community disruption
• Physical injuries or death from falls,
collapsing buildings, windblown
debris, house fires, motor vehicle
accidents, etc. (especially head
injuries, fractures and lacerations)
• Hypothermia
• Electrocution
• Food-borne disease
• Respiratory illness and asthma
due to pollen and spores
• Drowning
• Stress disorders from loss of loved
ones, property and livelihoods
Examples: Health
Impact Pathway(s)
• Flooding and its after-
effects (e.g. poor indoor
air quality from growth
of moulds)
• Increase in populations
of mosquitoes and other
disease carriers
• Contamination of drinking
water by chemicals or
wastes in surface runoff
• Failure of essential
infrastructure (e.g. sewers,
water treatment facilities)
• Algal blooms and other
changes in aquatic ecology
• Water shortages
• Crop failures
• Reduced water quality
• Wildfires
• Air pollution due to dust
and smoke
• High winds
• High waves and storm
surges
• Flooding
• Property damage
• Damage to essential
infrastructure (e.g. power
lines, hospitals, water
treatment plants)
• Damage to personal
property
• Increased risk of
automobile accidents
Extreme
Weather Event
Extreme rain
or snowfall
Extreme
drought
Severe storms
• Children
• Seniors
• People living along coasts
or waterways
• People with chronic
illnesses
• People with compromised
health status
• People with impaired
immune systems
• People with inadequate
or no housing
• People living in
drought-prone areas
• Agriculturally dependent
communities
• People without insurance
• People without resources
(e.g. financial and social)
• People living in
storm-prone areas
• People living in low-lying
coastal areas or in
regions prone to flooding
• People living in areas
where environmental
degradation has created
hazardous conditions
Populations at
Higher Risk
1
See section 3.5, Individual and Community Vulnerability, for a discussion of vulnerable populations.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
54
can be drawn from analysis of recent events within Canada and internationally to profile
hazards, vulnerable populations, and ways to reduce the impacts on individuals and
communities.
The sections that follow review the many weather-related hazards in Canada, organized
according to their importance in terms of the number of Canadians exposed to the natural
hazard, and the known health impacts on the Canadian population.
3.3.2
Extreme Temperatures
Each year, large regions of Canada experience periods of very hot (above 30°C) and very cold
weather (below -15°C) that can have both direct and indirect impacts on human health and
well-being. Across Canada, average temperatures have increased by 1.2°C between 1945 and 2006,
and this trend is expected to continue (Environment Canada, 2007d). As the mean temperature
rises, the frequency of occurrence of extreme events increases (IPCC, 2007c). Therefore,
temperatures above some threshold, such as 30°C, will become more common and temperatures
below a cold threshold will become less common.
Temperature patterns vary significantly across the country. Communities in some regions
(e.g. southern Alberta) can experience sudden winter temperature increases of up to 27°C in a few
minutes, caused by warm chinook winds (Nkemdirim, 2007). In the high Arctic, temperatures
may range from -55 to +22°C over the course of a year (Environment Canada, 2005e).
Temperatures in urban and rural communities tend to differ because of the “urban heat-island
effect” in city core areas (Oke, 1997; Lo and Quattrochi, 2003; Clean Air Partnership (CAP),
2004). This makes for milder winter temperatures in large urban areas, but higher summer
temperatures that can exacerbate the effects of heat waves.
Humans and animals can acclimatize to a fairly narrow range of temperatures (their thermoneutral
or comfort zone), but can suffer from excessive heat loss (hypothermia) or heat gain (hyperthermia)
at extreme temperatures, which can result in illness or death (Campbell and Norman, 2000).
3.3.2.1 Heat waves
Heat waves are periods of abnormally and uncomfortably hot temperature lasting from several
days to several weeks, and may be accompanied by high humidity and air pollution (American
Meteorological Society, 2000). Canadian communities, especially in the Windsor-to-Quebec
corridor along Lakes Erie and Ontario and the St. Lawrence River, portions of British Columbia,
the Prairie region and even the northern territories may experience spells of uncomfortably or
stressfully hot weather (Environment Canada, 1999; Smoyer-Tomic et al., 2003).
According to the Canadian Disaster Database, between 1900 and 2005, five major heat waves
causing multiple deaths occurred in Canada. In 1936, the worst of these extended across much
of Canada with temperatures ranging from 32 to 44°C, resulting in close to 1,180 deaths,
mostly of seniors or infants. About 400 of the victims drowned while trying to escape the heat
by cooling off in rivers, lakes or the sea (Environment Canada, 2005a). Four other severe heat
waves occurred in the years 1912, 1953, 1963 and 1988 in the Prairie region or in southeastern
Canada; together these resulted in at least 23 deaths and 186 illnesses requiring medical
attention (PSEPC, 2005a).
Prolonged exposure to a sudden increase in environmental temperatures above 30°C (i.e. heat
waves), especially when accompanied by high humidity and severe air pollution, can be especially
dangerous for infants, seniors and for people in frail health, particularly those taking certain
medications (Havenith, 2005). This danger is heightened early in the year when people have not
yet had an opportunity to acclimatize to severe heat (Havenith, 2005). The health problems
associated with extreme heat increase with longer periods of high temperatures (Toronto Public
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
55
Health, 2007). Heat-related illnesses include skin
rashes, cramps, unconsciousness, exhaustion and
heat stroke. The special vulnerability of economically
disadvantaged people and of seniors in urban
environments to heat stress was particularly evident
in the disastrous heat wave of August 2003 in
Europe, when an estimated 33 000 excess deaths
occurred across western Europe, mostly among
the very old (Kosatsky, 2005). Heat illnesses are
preventable by limiting exposure to hot weather
to a short period of time and by accessing cool
areas to lower body temperature. Drinking plenty
of liquids to maintain adequate body fluids and abstaining from alcoholic or caffeinated
beverages also helps to prevent heat-related illnesses.
A study of four Canadian cities showed that from 1954 to 2000, about 120 people died each
year due to heat-related causes in Toronto, 121 in Montreal, 41 in Ottawa, and 37 in Windsor
(Cheng et al., 2005). In Toronto between 1980 and 1996, temperature values of 30° to 35°C
(based on a humidex value) were accompanied by increased mortality for all ages, especially
among those over the age of 64. In 2005, there were six heat-related deaths among residents
of rooming houses and boarding houses in that city. Persons of low socio-economic status,
including homeless persons, are considered to be at high risk of heat-related illness or death
(Smoyer-Tomic and Rainham, 2001; McKeown, 2006).
Smoyer-Tomic et al. (2003) reviewed heat wave hazards and their health impacts across Canada,
and found that the highest summer temperatures and most frequent heat waves occurred in the
Prairies, southern Ontario and the St. Lawrence River valley, including Montreal. They also
judged Montreal residents to be particularly vulnerable to extreme heat because the city has a high
proportion of older high-density housing without air conditioning. In southern Ontario, Smoyer
et al. (2000) found the population in the Windsor-to-Toronto corridor, especially those older
than 64 years, to be at greatest risk of heat-related mortality because of frequent hot and
humid summer weather conditions. At temperatures above 32°C, heat-related deaths were
most frequent in Toronto, London and Hamilton. However, even urban areas located next to
mountains and large bodies of water (e.g. Vancouver and its suburbs) can act as urban heat
islands (Roth et al., 1989).
Urban heat island research in Canada has focussed on three principal metropolitan regions:
Montreal, Toronto and Vancouver. As of 2007, active research programs are ongoing in
each of these three cities. In Montreal and Vancouver, research is being undertaken by the
Environmental Prediction in Canadian Cities (EPiCC) network (EPiCC, n.d.). Its goal
is to improve the safety, health and well-being of Canadians through a better understanding
of urban climates.
The Clean Air Partnership, a Toronto-based non-governmental organization, has maintained an
ongoing urban heat island research program since 2002 (CAP, 2007). It has been responsible for
the “Cool Toronto” initiative, which includes the production of a number of public education
products (e.g. website, fact sheets).
More recently, the Canadian Centre for Remote Sensing (Natural Resources Canada) and the
Clean Air Partnership have begun a multi-year research project called the Assessment of
Urban Heat Island Impacts in the Greater Toronto Area Region. The research project involves
detailed data collection and modelling exercises to assess the microclimate associated with
various land uses and building types.
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
56
3.3.2.2 Cold waves
Cold waves are unusually large
and rapid drops in temperature
that can be accompanied by high
winds and heavy snowfalls,
and are usually followed by
prolonged periods of intensely
cold weather. They are a common
occurrence in some regions
of Canada, although all parts of
the country can be affected.
In the past century (from 1900
to 2005), nine have reached
the scale of a recorded disaster
by causing a total of 35 deaths
(PSEPC, 2005a).
Mortality statistics, however, do not accurately describe the full health impact of cold
waves. For those who are exposed to bitterly cold air, injuries such as frostbite and hypothermia
may occur. The risk of cold injuries is increased at high wind speeds, which accelerate heat
loss from the body. Therefore, Environment Canada issues weather warnings for cold waves,
high winds and wind chill (Environment Canada, 2003e, 2005b). During cold alerts, vulnerable
groups are usually people living in sub-standard housing, those engaged in outdoor occupations,
alcoholics, the homeless and seniors (Ranhoff, 2000).
Cold-induced stress can lead to viral and bacterial infections and contribute to a pronounced
peak in mortality in Canada during the cold season (Trudeau, 1997). In a study of temperature-
related injuries in Montreal, most of the injuries and deaths due to extreme temperatures
were caused by cold (Koutsavlis and Kosatsky, 2003). The principal determinants of cold-
related injury include male gender, alcohol intoxication, psychiatric illness, older age,
and homelessness. The Montreal study is unique within the Canadian context, given the lack
of data on determinants of environmental-temperature injury in other cities (Koutsavlis
and Kosatsky, 2003).
3.3.3
Floods
Floods are defined as water flowing temporarily over normally dry land, due to a variety
of causes such as excessive rain during hurricanes or thunderstorms, rapid melting of
snow or ice, blocked watercourses, storm surges in coastal areas, land subsidence or the
failure of dams. Large parts of Canada’s inhabited areas are susceptible to flooding
because of excessive precipitation and surface run-off, rapid melting of snow and ice
in the spring, and other causes identified in the Atlas of Canada (Etkin et al., 2004).
Floods have been the most commonly reported disasters in Canada (Tudor, 1997).
From 1900 to 2005, at least 170 major floods occurred in Canada (PSEPC, 2005a),
many of these in southern Ontario, southern Quebec and New Brunswick, and in
Manitoba (Figure 3.2). They were frequently caused by spring snowmelt run-off
combined with rain, and ice jams on rivers (Geological Survey of Canada, 2006; Atlas
of Canada, 2007a).
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
57
Figure 3.2 Occurrence of major floods in Canada during the 20th century
Note: Triangles indicate floods with local effects and circles
represent floods with regional effects.
Source: Atlas of Canada, 2007a.
The number of flood disasters along Canadian rivers seems to be on the rise, with 70% of
floods of the past century occurring after 1959. This may be due partly to more intense
precipitation events, but also to population growth that has led to the expansion of settlements
in vulnerable flood plains. Better reporting during the last few decades may also have
led to an increase in the number of documented natural disasters, including floods
(Brooks, 2006).
There are several major categories of floods, which have different causes. The first of
these are “flash floods” caused by local storms with heavy rainfalls that quickly saturate
the earth, leading to major run-off and unusually high peak flows in the rivers, especially
in mountain areas. They usually occur along quickly flowing rivers in relatively narrow
valleys, and can happen so quickly that there is little time to prepare for them. Flash
floods tend to be of relatively short duration, and occur mostly during the peak thunder-
storm season in the summer. The fast-flowing water can cause massive erosion, undermining
roads, dams, dykes and bridges. Examples are the 1996 Saguenay and 2003 Bois Francs
floods in Quebec (NRCan, 2005a; Couture, 2006). In cities, flash floods can cause sewer
backups into buildings, flooding of underpasses, tunnels or below-grade expressways,
and may cut off electricity supplied by vulnerable power lines or substations. This happened
in July 1987 in and around Montreal after thunderstorms dropped more than 100 mm
of rain. As a result, at least 40,000 homes and one health care centre were flooded, about
350,000 homes lost electricity, and the flooding of a major expressway and other roads
caused over 400 cars to stall and to be abandoned, with many of their occupants requiring
rescue by emergency services (Environment Canada, 2005d).
Chapter 3
Relief
Sea level - 100 m
100 - 200 m
200 - 300 m
300 - 500 m
500 - 700 m
700 - 1000 m
1000 - 1500 m
1500 - 2000 m
2000 - 3000 m
3000 - 4000 m
4000 - 5000 m
Mount Logan, 5959 m
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
58
The second kind of
flood results from a quick
thaw following a winter
with unusually deep snow
and ice cover. This flood-
ing usually takes place
during the spring along
large, flat river basins
with gentle slopes; this
results in large peak
flows of slowly moving
water. The run-off melt-
water inundates wide
areas that tend to remain
flooded for a long time
because of slow water
drainage. Examples
are the rivers of the
central Prairie region
that flow through a
rather flat landscape with poor drainage, such as the Red River and Assiniboine River
basin of North Dakota, Minnesota and Manitoba (Brooks et al., 2001; Environment
Canada, 2005c). Similar conditions prevail along the Saint John River valley in New
Brunswick, the upper St. Lawrence River basin, and the Fraser River and Mackenzie
River deltas (Environment Canada, 2004b).
The third kind of flood is caused by storm surges, when strong winds that cross open
water push large waves against shorelines. Some shore areas around the Great Lakes,
as well as coastal areas of Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick and
Newfoundland and Labrador are vulnerable to storm surges (Environment Canada, 2004b).
The implications of climate change for coastal regions in Canada include accelerated
sea level rise, warmer ground temperatures in high latitudes (therefore enhanced
melting of permafrost in the North), reduced sea ice extent in the Arctic and mid-latitude
seas such as the Gulf of St. Lawrence (therefore increased wave energy) and
changes in large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns causing an increase in storm
frequency and severity. All of these impacts can increase the risks of flooding in
coastal regions.
Table 3.2 provides information on the health impacts of floods. The existing literature
suggests that the less tangible, psychosocial effects can be the most damaging (Menne
et al., 1999; Hutton, 2005). Studies in Europe and the United States (U.S.) establish a
correlation between flooding and subsequent increases in a range of common mental
disorders (e.g. anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder) that can last, in some
instances, for years (WHO, 2002; Hutton, 2005). It is hypothesized that certain vulnerable
groups, such as children and low-income families, are more susceptible to such long-term
impacts (WHO, 2002).
Chapter 3
Flooding in New Brunswick, 2005
Photo Credits: Communications New Brunswick, Govt. New Brunswick
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
59
Source: Menne et al., 1999.
Despite the frequent occurrence of floods in Canada, very few deaths and relatively few injuries
have occurred: fewer than one recorded death per year during this past century (PSEPC, 2007).
This low number may be because, for most large floods, the water rose gradually, allowing
for preventive measures and safe evacuations. Several large-scale floods since 1900 led to the
evacuation of more than 200,000 people; almost half of these were due to the Red River flood
in Winnipeg in 1950 (PSEPC, 2005a). The psychosocial effects of flooding can be substantial.
Although commercial insurance coverage is available, the recovery of affected families and
individuals can be potentially arduous because residential flood insurance does not exist in Canada
(Etkin et al., 2004).
The literature on the health impacts of floods is limited in scope due to the lack of relevant data and
indicators, as well as tools to assess health risks and vulnerability (Hutton, 2005). The assessment
of the medium- to long-term impacts of flooding, especially the psychological impacts on human
health and well-being, is an area in significant need of greater research (Hutton, 2005).
Table 3.2
Impacts of floods on human health
Chapter 3
Causes
Damage to water supply, sewage and sewage disposal
damage, insufficient supply of drinking water, insufficient
supply of water for washing
Disruption of transportation systems
Underground pipe disruption, dislodgement of storage
tanks, overflow of toxic-waste sites, release of chemicals,
rupture of gasoline storage tanks leading to fires
Standing water, heavy rainfall, expanded range
of vector habitats
Rodent migration
Disruption of social networks; loss of property, jobs,
and family members and friends
Clean-up activities following floods
Destruction of primary food products
Damage to health services, disruption of ‘normal’
health services activities
Possible Health Concerns
Water-borne infections (enterogenic Escherichia coli,
Shigella, hepatitis A, leptospirosis, giardiasis,
campylobacteriosis), dermatitis, conjunctivitis
Food shortage, disruption of emergency response
Acute or chronic chemical pollution
Vector-borne diseases
Rodent-borne diseases
Psychosocial disturbances
Electrocutions, injuries, lacerations, skin punctures
Food shortage
Decrease of “normal” health care services, insufficient
access to medical care
Indirect Effects
Causes
Stream flow velocity, topographic land features, absence
of warning, rapid speed of flood onset, deep floodwaters,
landslides, risk behaviour, fast-flowing waters carrying
boulders and fallen trees
Contact with water
Contact with polluted waters
Increase of physical and emotional stress
Possible Health Concerns
Drowning, injuries
Respiratory diseases, shock, hypothermia, cardiac arrest
Wound infections, dermatitis, conjunctivitis,
gastrointestinal illnesses, ear, nose, and throat
infections, water-borne diseases
Increased susceptibility to psychosocial disturbances
and cardiovascular incidents
Direct Effects
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
60
3.3.4
Droughts
A drought is a temporary period of insufficient precipitation (mostly rain or snow), resulting
in inadequate surface and subsurface water supplies for ecosystem and human needs. Droughts
are most common in the Prairie provinces where long-term average precipitation is already
quite low, amounting to about 500 to 900 mm annually (King, 2007). Between 1950 and 2000,
Canada experienced at least 37 major droughts, about two thirds of which occurred in the
Prairie provinces (PSEPC, 2005a). The most recent severe drought to affect Canada occurred
in 2001–2002, and extended over most of southern Canada, although the most affected regions
were Alberta and Saskatchewan. It caused large crop and livestock production losses in other
regions as well (Wheaton et al., 2005; Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 2006, 2007).
Figure 3.3 Extent of the record drought in Western Canada, 2001–2002
Note: Areas shaded in yellow, orange, brown and red indicate increasing
levels of precipitation deficits.
Source: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 2006.
While no deaths have been directly attributed to drought in Canada, the effects of economic
damage and dust may have contributed to excess morbidity and mortality. Droughts particularly
affect farmers and ranchers through greatly reduced crop yields and livestock production, with
resulting economic losses (Herrington et al., 1997; Wheaton et al., 2005). The 2001–2002 drought
led to the loss of more than 41,000 jobs, economic losses amounted to $3.2 billion, and net
farm income in several provinces was zero or negative for the first time in 25 years (Wheaton
et al., 2005). Some of the economic losses of the drought in the Prairie region were partly offset
by crop insurance payments, which amounted to about $2.5 billion for Alberta and Saskatchewan
(Wheaton et al., 2005).
Stress related to financial pressures resulting from droughts, combined with the effects of an
environment degraded by dust storms and wildfire smoke, can have many adverse health impacts,
such as respiratory illnesses, exhaustion, depression or even suicide (Walker et al., 1986; Deary
et al., 1997; Malmberg et al., 1997; Smoyer-Tomic et al., 2004; Soskolne et al., 2004). Surface-water
evaporation during droughts lowers water levels and causes suspended and dissolved matter to
become more concentrated. This may stimulate the growth of toxic algae (U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (U.S. EPA),1995). During droughts, some communities have to curtail their water
use and hydroelectric power production is reduced, as are recreational and tourism-related activities.
Chapter 3
North Battleford
Pincher Creek
Hanna
Jasper
Red Deer
Edson
Fort St John
Dawson
Creek
Fort Nelson
Fort McMurray
Cree Lake
Collins Bay
Buffalo Narrows
La Ronge
Stony Rapids
Lynn Lake
Gillam
Thompson
Flin Flon
The Pas
Norway House
Island Lake
Bissett
Swan River
Dauphin
Melita
Morden
Emerson
Brandon
Weyburn
Estevan
Maple Creek
Consul
Moose Jaw
Rosetown
Wynyard
Meadow Lake
Hudson Bay
Melfort
Lloydminster
Prince Albert
Melville
Brooks
High Level
Fort Vermilion
Grande Prairie
Banff
Cold Lake
Whitecourt
Gimli
Slave Lake
Peace River
Coronation
Medicine Hat
Lethbridge
Swift Current
Coronach
Gravelbourg
Portage La Prairie
Saskatoon
Edmonton
Calgary
Regina
Churchill
Winnipeg
September 1, 2001 to August 7, 2002 (A.M.)
Current Precipitation Compared to Historical Distribution
Prepared by PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) using data from the Timely Climate
Monitoring Network and the many federal and provincial agencies and volunteers that support it.
(Previously Precipitation Percentiles)
Extent of Agricultural Land
Percentile Classes
Record Dry
Extremely Low (0-10)
Very Low (10-20)
Low (20-40)
Mid-Range (40-60)
High (60-80)
Very High (80-90)
Extremely High (90-100)
Record Wet
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
61
3.3.5
Wildfires
Wildfires and forest fires are closely associated with droughts and thunderstorms. Droughts
favour the accumulation of dry plant materials that burn easily and can serve as starter material
for wildfires. Wildfires may occur in grass, peat, shrub and forest regions, but they tend
to become largest and most persistent in forests, where there is abundant fuel. Lightning
strikes associated with thunderstorms often ignite the dry material; they cause 35% of all
forest fires (NRCan, 2004b, 2004c). On average each year, there are more than 8,000 forest
fires in Canada that burn 0.7 to 7.6 million hectares (Figure 3.4). While the vast majority
of wildfires occur far from human settlements, an increasing number occur at the
“wildland-urban interface,” as community expansion, cottages, tourist camps and other
economic development initiatives encroach upon forests or lands with abundant shrubs,
trees and other vegetation.
In British Columbia alone, several hundred thousand people, as well as thousands of private
and business properties, are at risk from such fires, which will likely become more frequent
(Bothwell, 2004; Filmon et al., 2004; Lurie, 2004). The same problem likely also exists in
other parts of Canada, but has not yet been assessed.
Figure 3.4 Occurrence of forest fires in Canada, 2005
Source: Atlas of Canada, 2008.
In Canada, 52 nationally significant forest fires occurred in all provinces and territories between
1900 and 2005; most occurred in Quebec (8), Ontario (16), Saskatchewan (7) and British
Columbia (6) (PSEPC, 2005a). Since 1900, major forest fires have forced the evacuation
of at least 44 communities and more than 155,000 residents, and caused the deaths of at
least 366 people (NRCan, 2004b; PSEPC, 2005a). Most of these deaths occurred in the first
half of the 20th century, before the development of modern communications networks and
airborne forest fire-fighting teams and equipment, such as water bombers.
For those directly exposed to wildfires, the health impacts can be acute and may include
hyperthermia and dehydration, eye irritation and respiratory irritation leading to bronchitis
caused by exposure to smoke and ash. As well, physical and mental exhaustion, stress-related
hypertension and post-traumatic stress syndrome may be experienced, especially by fire
fighters and other emergency personnel. Some of these impacts may also be experienced
by people who have lost their homes to fire and by those who are evacuated for safety
reasons (Mackay, 2003).
Chapter 3
Percentage of Productive Forest
< 1%
1% - 10%
10% - 25%
25% - 50%
50% - 75%
75% - 98%
Note: orange dots
represent reported
forest fires.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
62
Apart from the immediate deaths, injuries
and loss of property and community services,
large wildfires can cause long-lasting
economic hardship for communities that
depend on forest product industries. In
addition, they can have far-reaching effects
on air quality; wildfire smoke plumes are
rich in toxic air pollutants, such as aldehydes,
benzo[a]pyrene, carbon monoxide, ketones,
nitrous oxides, organic acids and ozone
(Chepesiuk, 2001; Scala et al., 2002; Sapkota
et al., 2005; Langford et al., 2006). In July
2002, due to unusually large-scale air
movements, smoke from large forest fires
near James Bay in northern Quebec formed
dense haze clouds that drifted without significant dispersion to the East Coast, a distance of over
1,000 kilometres. There and along the way, the smoke adversely affected both outdoor and
indoor air quality, and caused short-term but significant health risks for millions of inhabitants
of Baltimore and other major cities in the northeastern U.S. (Scala et al., 2002).
Research on the human health impacts of wildfires in the Canadian context is limited,
and the results have been mixed. Although the findings of one Canadian study of rural
residents in northern Saskatchewan were not conclusive with respect to the relationship
between wildfire smoke and hospitalizations (Langford et al., 2006), a more recent study
of the health and economic effects of a major wildfire in Chisholm, Alberta, estimated
that costs related to the impairment of the health and well-being of the affected population
amounted to between $9 and $12 million, second only to the cost of lost timber. The
estimate took into account the increased risks of mortality, restricted activity days, lost
wages and acute respiratory symptoms due to wildfire smoke (Rittmaster et al., 2006).
3.3.6
Storms and Other Extreme Weather Events
3.3.6.1 Tornadoes
Tornadoes are violent destructive whirlwinds characterized by a funnel-shaped cloud that descends
from thunderstorm clouds to the ground. The funnels can vary greatly in size, speed and the
amount of damage they can cause. Tornadoes most usually occur in southern Ontario and Quebec,
southeastern Manitoba, southern Saskatchewan, and southern and central Alberta.
Barrie, Ontario tornado, May 1985
An exceptionally strong tornado hit Barrie, Ontario, on the afternoon of May 31, 1985, killing
12 people, injuring 281 people, and destroying and damaging many buildings. Those who
died had received severe injuries, and almost all died before they reached a hospital. Nearly
one half of the serious injuries were to the head and/or neck (49%), and consisted mostly
of concussions and brain injuries, with less serious wounds located mostly on legs and arms.
Flying objects, including broken glass, caused many of the wounds.
Many of the 605 houses along the tornado path had their roofs or upper floors torn off,
windows shattered or brick walls blown apart, while some were lifted off their foundations
or destroyed completely. About 200 of these houses were left uninhabitable. In addition,
16 factories were destroyed and 400 people were left at least temporarily unemployed
(Etkin et al., 2002).
Chapter 3
Lillooet, British Columbia, 2004
Photo Credits: British Columbia Ministry
of Forests and Range
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
63
The Canadian Disaster Database lists 31 disasters caused by tornadoes in Canada from 1912 to 2005
(PSEPC, 2005a). Of these, one occurred in Nova Scotia, seven (22%) in Quebec, 13 (42%) in
Ontario, four each (13%) in Saskatchewan and Alberta, and three (10%) in Manitoba. They caused
142 deaths (an average of 4.6 deaths per tornado), injured 1,930 persons (an average of 62 per
tornado) and caused the evacuation of nearly 6,500 people. The most destructive tornado in Canada
happened on July 31, 1987, in Edmonton, Alberta. It killed 27 people, injured about 600 and led
to the evacuation of approximately 1,700 people.
Most tornado occurrences in Canada do not result in injuries and deaths and are therefore not
captured in the Canadian Disaster Database. The average number of tornadoes per year is sixteen
each in Alberta, Saskatchewan and Ontario; nine in Manitoba; five in Quebec; and one each in
Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Newfoundland and Labrador. The annual number of tornadoes
in Canada seems to have increased between 1950 and 2000, from fewer than 10 to about 40,
but this could be partly due to an observation bias resulting from population growth, better
communications and more intensive news media coverage (Eisen, 2000). If this trend were
confirmed, and were to continue along with the growth of communities in southern Canada, the
Canadian population would face an increasing risk to its health and well-being from tornadoes.
3.3.6.2 Freezing rain and ice storms
Between the months of December and April from 1900 to 2000, six of seven major ice storms
occurred in eastern Canada; the other was in Manitoba (PSEPC, 2005a). Of these events, the
1998 Ice Storm in early January in the northeastern U.S. and eastern Canada caused the greatest
damage, and the greatest number of fatalities and injuries. Electrical power failures caused by the
collapse of towers and poles, and other damage to transmission lines, affected over 1.6 million
Canadians, in many cases for several weeks. An estimated 2.6 million people could not
perform their ordinary work at all or could do so only partially, and economic losses amounted
to $5.4 billion. Many thousands had to be evacuated to emergency shelters. The 1998 Ice Storm
caused 28 deaths in Canada, mostly due to injuries resulting from the indoor use of open flames,
barbecues, or propane or kerosene heaters that caused carbon monoxide poisoning or fire; only
four people died of hypothermia. This natural catastrophe was exacerbated by the unpreparedness
of governments, power transmission agencies, telecommunications enterprises and citizens
alike to an event of this magnitude and duration (Lecomte et al., 1998).
3.3.6.3 Thunderstorms and lightning
Thunderstorms are violent winds accompanied by lightning, thunder, and often also by rain
or hail, or tornadoes. They most often occur during spring and summer (Environment
Canada, 1995). Lightning flashes created by thunderstorms occur mostly in low-lying areas
in southern Canada. Since 1998, the Meteorological Service of Canada has operated a lightning
detection network. This network has made possible the identification of lightning “hot spots”
and has helped to make severe weather alerts and warnings more accurate. It can also be used to
determine where lightning strikes might start wildfires. Maps showing lightning activity in
Canada, as well as lightning safety information, are available from the Environment Canada
Internet site (Environment Canada, 2003b, 2003c, 2007b).
In Canada an average of six to 10 people are killed each year, and another 90 to 160 are injured
by lightning (Environment Canada, 2003a; ICLR, 2007). Young, healthy survivors of lightning
strikes have been known to suffer from debilitating long-term damage to their nervous systems
(Cooper, 1998). However, because there are few studies of medical records documenting
lightning-related injuries and deaths, and many of the numbers appear to be based on news reports,
it is likely that the number of people hit by lightning in Canada is under-reported. During the
past 100 years, the rates of death and injury resulting from lightning strikes have declined
considerably, despite a significant increase in population. In part, this may be due to better
lightning protection systems for buildings, the concentration of much of the population in cities
where building protection has increased in comparison with rural areas, improved individual
awareness and protective behaviour, and improved weather forecasting (Aulich et al., 2001).
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
64
3.3.6.4 Hurricanes and related storms
Hurricanes (tropical storms or cyclones) consist of very strong winds (with speeds of
120 km/h or more) accompanied by heavy rain and lightning, often initially forming
a spiral pattern. They generally originate over the warm waters of the southern Atlantic
or in the Caribbean, and move toward Canada along storm tracks that usually pass along
the East Coast or through the eastern U.S. They reach Canada at fairly frequent intervals;
three to four tropical storms or hurricanes pose a threat to Canada or its territorial waters
each year (Environment Canada, 2004a). The frequency of intense hurricanes is likely to
increase as a result of climate change (IPCC, 2007d).
In 1985, the Meteorological Service of Canada (Environment Canada) established the
Canadian Hurricane Centre (CHC) in Halifax, Nova Scotia. The CHC advises Canadians
on the threat of hurricanes and tropical storms so that they can take necessary precautions
to protect their health and property.
From 1950 to 1999, Ontario, Quebec, Atlantic Canada and British Columbia experienced
18 disasters related to tropical cyclones (typhoons and hurricanes), resulting in extensive damage
and 137 deaths. During the same period, Canada experienced 145 disasters related to
other major storms, accounting for 499 deaths. A significant number of these fatalities
occurred in weather-related marine accidents such as the wreck of the “Edmund Fitzgerald”
on Lake Superior in 1975 (29 deaths) and a 1982 blizzard off the coast of Newfoundland
that cost 117 lives when an oil rig and an ocean-going vessel sank (PSEPC, 2005a).
The two tropical storms that proba-
bly had the greatest impact on
Canada during the last 100 years
were Hurricane Hazel, which
passed through Ontario and
Quebec in August 1954, and
Hurricane Juan, which passed
through Nova Scotia in late
September 2003. Hurricane Hazel
alone resulted in 81 deaths and
over 7,400 evacuations.
The greatest mortality originates
from the secondary disasters that
are triggered by hurricanes, such
as small tornadoes, flash flooding
and storm surges. Historically, in the U.S., nine out of 10 deaths from a hurricane are
directly correlated with the preceding storm surge (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), 2005). Individuals in the storm path consistently underestimate
a hurricane’s ability to cause coastal flooding, and many are caught unprepared for the
consequences.
Winds are the second deadliest aspect of a hurricane. They are often responsible for property
damage, including the collapse of houses and other structures. Crushing injuries caused
by the collapse of structures, similar to injuries caused by earthquakes, are common during
severe storms especially in areas with substandard construction. Breaking windows and
doors, caused by flying objects or wind pressure, are common precursors to major damage
to a building, and can cause injuries as well (WHO, 1989).
Chapter 3
Damage from Hurricane Juan, 2003
Photo Credits: Peter Young
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
65
Like other natural disasters, hurricanes typically produce longer-term, yet more intangible,
psychosocial impacts. Little research on this subject has been done within the Canadian
context. In the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew (1992) in northwestern Bahamas and
southern Florida, 30% of respondents in the most affected areas reported experiencing
major depression, while a further 20% reported anxiety disorders (David et al., 1996).
Parker (1977) and Hutton (2005), in a study of Cyclone Tracy (1974), which destroyed
Darwin, Australia, concluded that stress arising from the event could be classified into
short-term “mortality stress” (fear of injury or death) and longer-term “relocation stress”
related to the loss of possessions, support networks and familiar patterns of interaction.
Cyclone Tracy killed 30 and left 100 people hospitalized. One conclusion from the research
is that people’s capacity to recover from psychosocial impacts is linked to basic health
determinants (Hutton, 2005).
3.3.6.5 Hailstorms
Hail consists of ice pellets that are produced during thunderstorms and are typically
larger than 5 mm; on rare occasions pellets may reach the size of an orange or grapefruit.
In Canada, major hailstorms tend to occur most frequently in southern and northwestern
Alberta, in the southwestern interior of British Columbia, southern Saskatchewan, and
less frequently in southern Ontario and Quebec, especially along the St. Lawrence Valley
(Figure 3.5).
Figure 3.5 Average frequency of hailstorms in different regions of Canada
Chapter 3
SAS
K.
MA
NITOBA
ALBE
RTA
O
NTARIO
QUEBE
C
P.E.I.
N.B.
N.S.
N
UN
AVU
T
U.S.A.
N
EW
FO
UND
LA
ND
BRIT
ISH
COL
UMBIA
HUD
SO
N
BAY
Victoria
Edmonton
Regina
Winnipeg
UNITE
D
STAT
ES
OF A
MERI
CA
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
OTTAWA
Toronto
Québec
Fredericton
Halifax
Charlottetown
St. John’s
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
YU
KO
N
TER
R.
OCEA
N
ATLAN
TIC
PAC
IFIC
OC
EAN
Salmon
Arm
Leamington
•
•
Montréal
N
OR
TH
W
ES
T
TE
RR
IT
ORIE
S
•
Calgary
•
2,3
Iqaluit
R
Source: PSEPC, 2005b.
Of the 25 hailstorms listed in the Canadian Disaster Database that occurred between
1985 and 1998, 21 (70%) took place in the Prairie provinces. They caused damages of
$1.95 billion, mainly through the destruction of agricultural crops and damage
to automobiles, buildings and other property. The most frequently and most severely
affected city during this timeframe was Calgary, with eight major hailstorms and total
damages exceeding $1.4 billion (PSEPC, 2005b). Information on hailstorms in the
Canadian Disaster Database (PSEPC, 2005a) attributes seven deaths and no injuries
to this hazard since 1900.
Average annual number
of days with hail
none
0 to 0.9
1 to 2.9
3 to 5
greater than 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
66
3.3.7
Avalanches, Rock-, Mud- and Landslides, and Debris Flows
A warmer climate increases the rate of evaporation, atmospheric transport, and precipitation
as either rain or snow. Mountain regions are subject to heavy rains or snowfalls, and may
experience glacier, snowfield or permafrost thaw. Therefore, the risk of avalanche and of
excessive runoff that can trigger rock-, mud- and landslides or debris flows is likely to
increase in these regions as a result of climate change.
In Canada, mountain regions with steep slopes and heavy precipitation are found in the
Rocky Mountains in British Columbia, Alberta and Yukon, as well as in northeastern Quebec
and Labrador, and along the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence shorelines and the Atlantic coast
(Evans et al., 2002; Atlas of Canada, 2007b). The geographic features of these areas favour
increased precipitation, which during winter may result in snowslides (avalanches). In
addition, the infiltration of rainwater and meltwater into soils, subsoils and rocks creates
unstable layers that are highly susceptible to land-, mud-, rock- and debris slides.
The busy transportation and communications corridors along the river valleys of the
Rocky Mountains, which are also lifelines for the communities depending on them, are
at high risk of catastrophic avalanches and landslides, rockfalls and mudslides. This
risk may be increased by greater precipitation resulting from a warmer climate (Miles &
Associates Ltd., 2001; Evans et al., 2002).
Figure 3.6 Regions of Canada with unstable sedimentary rocks or clay deposits
that are susceptible to rockfalls, debris flows or landslides
Chapter 3
0
500
km
Four areas are particularly
prone to landslides:
1. Steep slopes in mountainous
terrain of Western Canada (green
shading).
2. Areas of fine-grained soil once
covered by glacial lakes (orange
shading) and glacial seas (purple
shading).
3. Valley sides in the Prairies
where rivers have cut down into
the Cretaceous bedrock (yellow
shading).
4. Ice-rich, fine-grained soils in
permanently frozen ground
(permafrost) in Canada's North
(north of dashed black line).
Source: J. Aylsworth, Natural Resources Canada.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
67
In the Peace River lowlands of Alberta, unstable sedimentary Ice Age deposits favour
the development of large landslides, which in the past have disrupted highways and partly
blocked rivers (Cruden et al., 2000). In southern Saskatchewan, rivers have cut through
deep silt and clay deposits that are susceptible to erosion and landslides, and have formed
valleys with steep and unstable slopes. The deep gravel, clay, sand and silt sediments
of past glaciers and huge lakes, which existed in the Prairie region at the end of the
last Ice Age, are susceptible to river erosion and landslides; these threaten parts of
Calgary and Saskatoon (NRCan 2005b, 2006b, 2006c). In eastern Canada, the up to
70-metre-thick Leda clay and silt deposits of the former Champlain sea are very susceptible
to large-scale slumping and mudflows after heavy precipitation (Hugenholtz and
Lacelle, 2004).
Between 1900 and 2005, there were at least 38 major rock-, mud-, debris- or landslides
(mostly in British Columbia, but also in Alberta, Quebec and Newfoundland and
Labrador) that killed 371 people, injured 56 others and led to the evacuation of more
than 2,230 people. Such events have also caused significant economic damage (PSEPC,
2005c; NRCan, 2007). The long-term average occurrence for major rockfalls or landslides
in Canada is 1 per 3.7 years. Rockfalls or landslides in western Canada, and landslides
of Leda clay in eastern Canada have been the most destructive, and have together
caused nearly one-half of the deaths (Evans, 2001). They are of particular concern when
they occur along rivers, as this can result in damming or flooding along highways,
railways, and power or gas transmission lines, where they can interrupt vital energy
supplies and communications, or when they hit human settlements, causing injuries
and deaths.
Avalanche at Kangiqsualujjuaq, Ungava Bay
On New Year’s Day 1999, an avalanche at Kangiqsualujjuaq, Ungava Bay, an Inuit
community in northeastern Quebec, struck a school where the community had gathered
for a celebration, as well as six other buildings. The avalanche occurred on a steep
slope in an area that frequently experiences heavy snowfalls, killing nine people, five
of whom were children under 8 years old, and injuring 25. The avalanche also exposed
the 400 to 500 children and adults in the school gymnasium to 100 km/h winds and
a temperature of -20°C. Those who were seriously injured had to be transported in
the very cold weather and strong winds on snowmobiles and an open flatbed truck on
a 300-kilometre road to the nearest community with a hospital. Bad weather prevented
medical teams from reaching the site immediately; they reached the community only
nine hours after being notified.
3.3.8
Fog, Smog and Mist
Reduced visibility, caused by dense fog along major aerial, marine or terrestrial transportation
routes is a common natural hazard in Canada, particularly during the transitional seasons
of fall and spring. Low visibility caused by fog, smog or mist was a major contributor
to several mass road vehicle collisions and fatalities in the past decade. These weather
conditions contributed to three times more fatalities than freezing rain. On average,
between 40 and 80 fatal road vehicle collisions occurred annually in Canada between
1988 and 2000 due to fog conditions. However, insufficient driver attention, highway
congestion, high speed, increased truck traffic and other factors also typically contribute
to accidents of this type (Whiffen et al., 2004).
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
68
3.4
EVIDENCE AND IMPLICATIONS OF CLIMATE CHANGE
FOR NATURAL HAZARDS IN CANADA
3.4.1
Evidence of Climate Change
Over the past recent decades, numerous national and international efforts have sought to ascertain
the causes, progression, and environmental and public health implications of climate change.
Among them, the periodic assessment reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change are the most comprehensive. Its Fourth Assessment Report concluded that warming of
the climate system is “unequivocal” and that most of the warming in the last 100 years is very
likely due to the observed increase in GHGs, such as carbon dioxide, largely as the result of human
activity (IPCC, 2007c). This warming is evident in the increase in global average air and ocean
temperatures, sea level rise and the decline in snow and ice cover (IPCC, 2007c). Numerous
long-term changes in climate variables have been observed, including changes in precipitation,
ocean salinity, wind patterns and aspects of extreme weather, such as droughts, heavy precipitation,
heat waves and tropical cyclone intensity (IPCC, 2007c).
These climate variables are important indicators for assessing the risks associated with natural
hazards described earlier, such as storms, floods and landslides. By looking at historical records
to derive trends, researchers can use sophisticated models to obtain more accurate projections
of a future climate. According to the IPCC (2007c), it is “virtually certain” that throughout
much of the world there will be further increases in average and extreme temperatures, and that
the increase in average temperatures in turn will increase the rate of surface water evaporation
and precipitation, thereby increasing episodes of violent weather.
The IPCC provides judgments on the estimates of confidence based on existing scientific
literature.2 Table 3.3 provides information on recent trends and projections for extreme
weather events for which there is an observed late 20th-century trend.
Table 3.3
Recent trends and projections for extreme weather events for which
there is an observed late 20th-century trend
Source: Adapted from IPCC, 2007c.
Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis (Table SPM.2, p.8)
Chapter 3
Likelihood that trend occurred
in late 20th century
Very likely
Very likely
Likely
Likely
Likely in many regions since 1970
Likely in many regions since 1970
Likely
Phenomenon and direction of trend
Warmer and fewer cold days and nights
over most land areas
Warmer and more frequent hot days
and nights over most land areas
Warm spells/heat waves. Frequency
increases over most land areas
Heavy precipitation events. Frequency
(or proportion of total rainfall from
heavy falls) increases over most areas
Areas affected by droughts increases
Intense tropical cyclone activity increases
Increased incidence of extreme high
sea level (excludes tsunamis)
Likelihood of future trends based
on projections for the 21st century
using SRES scenarios
Virtually certain
Virtually certain
Very Likely
Very likely
Likely
Likely
Likely
2
Judgments are based on the following scale: virtually certain (>99% chance) that a result is true; very likely (90 to <99% chance);
likely (66 to <90% chance); medium likelihood (33 to <66% chance); unlikely (10 to <33% chance); very unlikely
(1 to <10% chance); exceptionally unlikely (<1% chance).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
69
3.4.2
Future Climate in Canada and Risks of Natural Hazards
Over the past 50 years, Canada’s average temperature has increased 1.2°C. However,
this average temperature increase hides important regional variations. The Yukon and the
Northwest Territories are experiencing the greatest warming. Across the country, the
percentage of precipitation that falls in heavy events is increasing. In Canada, governments
at all levels, businesses and the general public have recognized that climate change
will increase the risk of certain natural hazards.
Although the work of the IPCC provides projections of trends on a continental scale,
its assessment of scientific literature does not constitute forecasts; it cannot predict where
and when some of these events will occur or what their intensity will be. It does, however,
provide information to identify where action is required to further investigate the risks
or introduce measures to protect the health of Canadians.
Regional climate modelling combined with technical aids, such as projections of population
changes, information about vulnerability provided by geographic information system
tools, and photographic or satellite images and databases, have been used to identify where
human populations might be exposed to natural hazards, and specifically those natural
hazards that climate change is expected to exacerbate. Such models generally show that
in the U.S. and Canada, heat
waves and heavy precipitation
events are very likely to become
more common during this century
(Easterling et al., 2000; IPCC,
2007d). In Canada, researchers
have access to some regional
data from the Canadian Regional
Climate Model, Canadian
Centre for Climate Modelling and
Analysis, Environment Canada.
The Ouranos Consortium provides
support for the development of
this model and has used scenarios
based on regional climate models
for the analysis of climate change
impacts. For example, in recognition of the growing need to plan institutional responses to the
effects of climate change, Vescovi et al. (2005) assessed the potential impact of extreme heat on
southern Quebec communities. To accomplish this, they integrated climate variables and
socio-economic parameters by using a geographic information system tool to create maps that
estimate present and future health risks (Vescovi et al., 2005).
Figure 3.7 shows a projected scenario of how much the annual mean temperatures might
change in different regions of Canada during the years 2040 to 2060. However, there
are inherent uncertainties in projections; these increase when calculating what is likely
to happen many decades from now compared with what is likely to happen just a few
years from now.
Chapter 3
Photo Credits: RADARSAT-1 (c) 2006
Canadian Space Agency, Courtesy NRCan/ESS/CCRS
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
70
Figure 3.7 Projected increases in annual mean temperatures in different regions
of Canada, 2040 to 2060
Chapter 3
Notes: Projected increases are those compared with annual mean temperatures
during 1961 to 1990, based on the Coupled Global Climate Model developed
by Environment Canada. Yellow, up to 3°C; light orange, 3–4°C; dark orange,
4–5°C; red, 5–6°C.
Source: Atlas of Canada, 2003.
Climatic changes and weather events that increase slowly over time may also indirectly
cause or aggravate natural hazards. For example, they may alter changing structural geologic
or geographic components of the landscape (i.e. its geomorphology), or contribute to
alterations in biologic components of ecosystems. Such hazards may not become obvious
until gradual changes in climate or weather conditions exceed a critical threshold and
trigger a disaster in a vulnerable community. For example, a warmer climate in mountain
regions can release water from glaciers or thawing permafrost, creating slope instabilities
that may result in landslides. In boreal forests in British Columbia, a warmer climate is
reducing the winter mortality of bark beetles and leading to beetle population explosions,
followed by large-scale forest die-offs and forest fires. Natural Resources Canada has
published a series of maps showing regional vulnerabilities of Canadian landscapes and
ecosystems to such effects (NRCan, 2000).
The extent to which climate change might cause an increase in weather-related disasters
will depend very much on the extent to which communities, governments and individuals
recognize hazards and work to mitigate the risk of their occurrence and the potential
scope of the effects. A natural hazard triggers a disaster when it interacts with various
factors (i.e. physical, social, economic and environmental) that increase the vulnerability
of a community to the impacts (F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response,
2004). Because natural disasters often occur unexpectedly or with little advance warning,
they strain or overwhelm the capacity of affected communities or regions to cope. There is
therefore an urgent need to improve capacities to foresee and to cope with climate change
and its related natural hazards through greater national and international cooperative efforts.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
71
3.5
INDIVIDUAL AND COMMUNITY VULNERABILITY
3.5.1
Human Health Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards and Disasters
Risk is the product of the likelihood of an event happening and the vulnerability associated
with the population affected (Etkin et al., 2004; F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness
and Response, 2004; PSEPC, 2007). Consequently, it is important to understand the charac-
teristics of individuals and communities that contribute to their vulnerability to natural
hazards, as well as their ability to alleviate and cope with the impacts. This information
informs decision making and reduces health risks before, during and after an extreme
weather event occurs (PSEPC, 2007). Not all natural hazards lead to disasters. Disasters
occur when the demands created by a larger-scale event exceed the community’s normal
coping resources; this is often called the disaster threshold (F/P/T Network for Emergency
Preparedness and Response, 2004).
3.5.2
Vulnerable Individuals
Inherent vulnerabilities are found in populations and communities across Canada. The
sections below examine how age, health status, socio-economic conditions and livelihoods
affect the ability of people to reduce exposure and protect themselves from natural hazards,
as well as cope during an event and recover afterwards.
3.5.2.1 Age
Seniors
The cohort of seniors is rapidly growing in Canada. Between 1981 and 2005, the over-65 segment
of society increased by roughly 3% (from 10% to 13%) (Statistics Canada, 2006). This
proportion of the population is expected to almost double to 24.5% by 2036. From this date,
the seniors population will continue to increase, but at a slower rate, with their population
reaching 11.5 million (27.2% of the total population) by 2056 (Turcotte and Schellenberg, 2007).
The proportion of the oldest seniors (80 years and over) will also increase sharply; by 2058,
about one in every 10 Canadians will be 80 years or older. In 2005, only one in 30 was older
than 80 years. Compared with other adult populations, seniors are often more vulnerable because
increasing age is highly correlated with increasing illness, disability, medication use and reduced
fitness (McMichael, 2003). The specific vulnerabilities of seniors are important to investigate,
because they may rely more heavily on the health system to reduce their vulnerabilities (Powell,
2006) and because their proportion within the Canadian population is increasing. It is, however,
important to note that age alone cannot be used as the sole predictor of vulnerability; many older
people continue to have good health and mobility, and remain socially active into their older
years (Powell, 2006).
Nevertheless, aging for most individuals is associated with a decline in general health.
Seniors may have limited physical capabilities (Turcotte and Schellenberg, 2007), and their
physiological systems are generally less capable of handling stressors, such as extreme
heat (McMichael, 2003). Seniors are more likely to have underlying health problems that
need regular medical attention, cause limited mobility or impair their ability to care for
themselves (Turcotte and Schellenberg, 2007). These vulnerabilities are important because
several types of natural hazards (e.g. severe snowstorms, floods) can exacerbate existing
conditions causing illness or death (e.g. older men are at increased risk of heart attack
while shovelling snow). Furthermore, natural hazards may disrupt the management of
existing illnesses or the provision of health services (e.g. unable to attend chemotherapy
or dialysis). Seniors are also more likely to be reliant on others to ensure their personal
and property safety before, during and after an event (e.g. power outages may leave a
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
72
senior without heat). They may also lack the required mobility to move out of harm’s
way, thus increasing the likelihood of physical stress and harm.
Turcotte and Schellenberg (2007) found that many of the 25 chronic conditions most reported
by seniors can influence their vulnerability to natural hazards. These conditions include
arthritis, high blood pressure, cataracts, heart disease, diabetes, chronic bronchitis, effects
of a stroke, and Alzheimer’s or other dementia. It should be noted that stress tends to
decline with age, and seniors are less likely to report emotional distress following a disaster
(Powell, 2006; Turcotte and Schellenberg, 2007).
Seniors are at particular risk
for heat-related illnesses and
death because heat tolerance
and thermoregulatory capacity
decrease with age (Flynn et al.,
2005). When a heat wave struck
France in August 2003, causing
almost 15,000 excess deaths,
the observed excess mortality
first affected those 75 years of age
and over (Vandentorren and
Empereur-Bissonnet, 2005).
However, excess deaths were also
severe for 45- to 75-year-olds
(Vandentorren and Empereur-
Bissonnet, 2005). In addition, medications commonly used by seniors, such as those used
to treat chronic cardiovascular disease, may exacerbate the effects of extreme heat along
with the effects of physiological changes associated with aging (Flynn et al., 2005).
Seniors are often on fixed incomes, which can make it more difficult for them to meet
additional costs associated with natural hazards. For example, limited income may mean that
individuals are unable to purchase adequate insurance coverage or an air conditioner, or
to pay to replace property losses. Furthermore, they are less likely to apply for and receive
financial aid (Powell, 2006), leaving them overwhelmed and unable to cope or recover
from their losses (Shrubsole, 1999; Soskolne et al., 2004). In addition, medical expenses
resulting from a natural hazard, such as unexpected prescriptions, ambulance rides or
mental health services, can have a significant economic impact on low-income seniors
who are without insurance.
Because networks of family and friends tend to decrease in size as people age, social
isolation and loneliness tend to increase (Hall and Havens, 2002). Although only 2% of
Canadian seniors reported that they had no close friend or relatives to talk to (Turcotte
and Schellenberg, 2007), during a disaster or natural hazard severe disruption in existing
networks can occur, and individuals may be hidden from social service providers and
left alone to cope with the emergency (Powell, 2006). These contacts and networks are
often key to maintaining good health or managing an illness for seniors. For example,
a close friend or relative living in another community may not be able to provide
timely assistance. Seniors are also more likely to be fearful during an event. During
the Chicago heat wave, fearing for their safety, seniors were more likely to keep their
windows and doors closed, which increased their risk of heat-related illnesses and
death (Klinenberg, 2002).
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
73
Children
Statistics Canada (2006) estimates that approximately 24% of Canada’s population are
children (aged 0–19 years). Young children are especially vulnerable to natural hazards
because their perception of danger is not fully developed, and they require more assistance
to move out of harm’s way and to adopt protective behaviours. After a natural hazard
event, they are particularly at risk from subsequent hazards such as water, soil and air
contamination. This is because their physiology, metabolism, and behaviours increase
the risk of disease or illnesses. Furthermore, disruption of their growth and development
at critical times may cause irreversible damage, and their exposures to contaminants
per unit of body mass are higher via water and air than an adult (Tamburlini, 2002;
Health Canada, 2005b).
Young children and infants are much more vulnerable
to water- and food-borne illnesses than adults because
they have immature immune systems and are unable
to avoid risks alone (e.g. follow boil water advisories)
(Jermini, 2002; Pond, 2002). Children also tend to
take in more water and food per unit body mass than
adults, which increases their exposure to water- and
food-borne pathogens (Health Canada, 2005b). For
example, after a flood a child is more likely to ingest
or be exposed to contaminated water than an adult
because of their inability to understand the health hazards associated with floodwater
contamination, as well as their hand-to-mouth behaviour.
Thermoregulatory capacity in children is underdeveloped until 1 year of age, and their
higher ratio of surface area to body mass (up to age 5) makes them more vulnerable
to heat stress (Longstreth, 1999; Mathieu-Nolf, 2002; Health Canada, 2005b). As a result,
infants are particularly at risk during heat waves. However, their greatest vulnerability
to extreme heat may be that they are reliant on caregivers to be diligent by requiring
them to drink fluids and retreat to cooler environments (Health Canada, 2005b).
As young children are dependent on others for their health and well-being and safety, they
also carry the vulnerability of their caregivers. Compounding this situation is the fact
that they have little or no means with which to change their situation. For example, children
from low-income families are more vulnerable to heat waves if they reside in substandard
housing without access to air conditioning. Children rarely have the capacity or resources
to reduce their own exposure or vulnerability; they do not go to cooling centres on their
own, may not understand how to relieve the stresses from heat (e.g. more fluid intake),
or adopt other protective measures.
Natural hazards can also contribute to psychological trauma during and after the event
(Heinz Center, 2002; Shea, 2003; McDermott et al., 2005). In his review of hazard literature,
Shrubsole (1999) found that children’s reactions to a natural hazard depended, in part,
on the ability of their parents to deal with it; if the parents handled the disaster period
adversely, so did the child. It was also found that children are more at risk from the psycho-
logical trauma of natural hazards because they have lower coping capabilities, and perceive
the world according to their level of cognitive and emotional development Shrubsole,
1999; Hutton, 2005). Children can experience any number of psychological illnesses as
a result of the trauma inflicted by a disaster. The effects can be as severe as losing recently
developed skills, eating and sleeping disorders, as well as behavioural issues (Heinz Center,
2002; Hutton, 2005).
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
74
3.5.2.2 Underlying health problems
Chronic health conditions, acute illnesses, neurological disorders, mental illnesses (including
addictions) and limited mobility increase the vulnerability of individuals to natural hazards.
Chronic and acute illnesses are exacerbated by subsequent degraded environmental conditions
and contamination, resulting in a lack of safe food and clean drinking water, and exposure
to disease-causing pathogens and poor air quality (Mokdad et al., 2005). Illnesses that require
regular medical attention can be worsened by the stress of a disaster, and can lead to death.
Problems arise when people are not able to access required medications or life-sustaining
treatments. Natural hazards may damage health equipment that is required to sustain life,
such as ventilators or oxygen generators (Powell, 2006).
Access to medical services during an event or disaster is essential for individuals with a
compromised health status. High demand for needed medical services, as well as availability
of medication and equipment, can become life-determining factors. Health centres can be
overwhelmed with ill or injured people during an event or disaster, placing chronically ill patients
at further risk. In addition, emergency shelters may not have the equipment to deal with their
special needs (Powell, 2006). Those with limited mobility will likely require aid from others
to evacuate or reach a safer location. For example, individuals who are bedridden in nursing
or extended-care facilities, who have spinal cord injuries or who have acute arthritis which
restricts movement will require the assistance of others.
Neurological and mental illnesses can have a serious impact on a person’s ability to function
effectively in the face of a natural hazard event or during a disaster. Mental illness can
take various forms, such as mood disorders, schizophrenia, anxiety disorders, personality
disorders and eating disorders (Health Canada, 2006c). Neurological illnesses include
brain diseases that impair cognitive functions, such as Alzheimer’s and dementia (National
Advisory Council on Aging (NACA), 2004). Depending on the illness, a hazardous event
may cause serious disturbances in thinking, behaviour or mood. As a result, mental illness
can affect one’s ability to make the right decisions regarding health and safety before,
during and after a natural hazard event or disaster. It should be noted that McMurray and
Steiner (2000) concluded that patients with severe mental illness who had access to
psychiatric services during the 1998 Ice Storm in Quebec coped well with the disaster.
Drug or alcohol dependency also increase vulnerability to natural hazards. Long-term
consequences of substance abuse include impairment of judgment, interference with learning
and retention of new material, and loss of self-control (Health Canada, 2007a). In addition,
individuals on specific medications or those addicted to drugs are less capable of thermoregulation
during heat waves (McGeehin and Mirabelli, 2001). Individuals who are impaired, or preoccupied
with obtaining a substance, are less likely to make appropriate decisions about their health
and safety, before, during or after a natural hazard event or a disaster.
3.5.2.3 Socio-economic conditions
Two key determinants of health are socio-economic status and education. Those with higher
socio-economic status and education tend to have better overall health (Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC), 2004). Income and education allow for greater control over one’s circumstances,
especially during stressful situations. Those with higher income and education usually have
more coping options available to them before, during or after a disaster (PHAC, 2004). Education
equips people with skills and knowledge to access the information and resources to better
their outcomes.
Canadians with low literacy levels are more likely to have low income or be unemployed
(PHAC, 2004). Lower income often creates conditions that limit the ability of individuals and
families to reduce their risk to natural hazards by, for example, choosing where one lives
(e.g. avoiding floodplains, avalanche chutes), adopting protective behaviours and adaptations
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
75
(e.g. air conditioners), and accessing measures that facilitate recovery (e.g. insurance, financial
resources). Although it is possible to protect one’s self and limit exposure to some hazards,
it is not possible to avoid all exposures. If low-income individuals have a harder time staying
healthy under “normal” conditions, when a natural hazard occurs they are especially vulnerable
and their ability to recover may be limited.
Homelessness is often associated with drug and alcohol
addiction, and mental illness (Fisher and Breakey,
1991; Hwang, 2001). People without permanent
shelter are more vulnerable to extremes in temperature
because they are more exposed (Hwang, 2001),
and they are also less able to physiologically adapt
to extreme heat (Koppe et al., 2004). Furthermore,
they may not have the means to protect themselves
from the effects of extreme cold, such as hypothermia
and frostbite. A study in Montreal showed that
homelessness, along with alcoholism, mental illness
and advanced age increased the risk of cold injuries
(Koutsavlis and Kosatsky, 2003). Other groups at risk of cold weather-related injuries or death
are people in frail health and outdoor workers.
3.5.2.4 Aboriginal peoples: First Nations, Inuit and Métis
The Aboriginal population of Canada comprises First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples. In 2001,
3.4% of Canadians identified themselves as Aboriginal (Statistics Canada, 2003). More
specifically, 2.1% identified themselves as First Nations, 1% Metis and 0.1% as Inuit. Children
under 14 years of age represent 33% of the Aboriginal population, compared with 19% in
the non-Aboriginal population (Statistics Canada, 2003). Thus, many Aboriginal communities
have a high proportion of children; as discussed earlier, children have particular sensitivities,
including the fact that they are dependent on adults to protect them from hazards.
Many factors come together to create unique vulnerabilities
for Aboriginal people and communities, such as poor health status
and socio-economic conditions and inadequate infrastructure.
Compared with the general population, there is a higher incidence
of some chronic diseases among First Nations and Inuit people.
For example, the prevalence of heart disease and diabetes are 1.5 and
3-5 times higher among Aboriginals, respectively, and 15% of
new HIV infections occur in Aboriginal people (Health Canada,
2000; Health Canada, 2006b). Alcohol consumption has been
identified as a problem in some Aboriginal communities, as is the
increasing use of prescription or illicit drugs (Health Canada,
2006d). Poor health status renders individuals more vulnerable
and less resilient to natural hazard events.
Vulnerability among Aboriginal people is compounded by
existing infrastructural deficits (e.g. roads, housing, water and
wastewater infrastructure). In 2000–2001, only 55.8% of
homes on First Nations reserves were deemed adequate (Health
Canada, 2007b). The isolation of many First Nations and Inuit
communities makes evacuation and access to emergency and
health services difficult, traumatic and costly during disasters.
Further information on the vulnerabilities of Aboriginal people
and communities is provided in Chapter 7, Health Impacts of
Climate Change in Canada’s North.
Chapter 3
A warmer climate causes new
natural hazards for Inuit
Aboriginal people who live off the land,
especially Inuit, are vulnerable to
climate change because their environ-
ment is changing rapidly and becoming
more dangerous. A warmer climate is
compromising the health and safety
of Inuit people; melting sea ice and
permafrost are causing damage to
infrastructure, such as houses and
health centres, and decreasing the
availability of some traditional wildlife
for food. Deviations from a traditional
diet have been linked to a decrease in
nutritional status. More unpredictable
weather also makes travel dangerous
(Health Canada, 2005b). Although
a warmer climate may be outside the
definition of a natural hazard in terms of
an extreme event, it is considered a
natural hazard for the Inuit people—it
is a threat that increases the risk of
adverse health outcomes, such as poor
nutrition, injury and death (Arctic Climate
Impact Assessment (ACIA), 2004).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
76
3.5.2.5 People relying on natural resources
Individuals whose livelihoods depend on natural resources as a source of employment or
as a direct source of food for themselves and their family can be particularly vulnerable
to the impacts of natural hazards. Financial concern is one of the most important aspects of
farming that tends to increase personal stress and distress levels (Deary et al., 1997; Simkin
et al., 1998; Soskolne et al., 2004). Stress in farmers, which is related to financial pressures,
has the potential to lead to many negative health outcomes such as depression or suicide
(Malmberg, et al., 1997). Stress in agricultural occupations also negatively impacts family
life (Plunkett et al., 1999).
Industries that rely on natural resources cannot completely protect their assets from natural
hazards and changes in climatic conditions. Droughts can cause substantial decreases in
crop yields and large export losses of agricultural products unless farms are equipped with
reliable irrigation. This can lead to an increased reliance on financial assistance and crop
insurance payouts. When climate-related stressors affect natural resources, they can affect
an individual’s employment, regardless of whether the employer is small, privately
owned, or a large industry. Infrastructure may be affected as well. Increased storm activity,
including storm surges and high winds, can cause costly damage to infrastructure that
underpins business operations. This was the case in Atlantic Canada in January 2000 when
a storm surge drove blocks of ice through coastal buildings and damaged fishing equipment
(Canadian Institute for Climate Studies (CICS), 2000). For freshwater fisheries, drought
will likely have the largest impact by decreasing water levels; this would increase salinity,
and could degrade shoreline wetlands and facilitate the invasion of exotic or aggressive
aquatic plant species (NRCan, 2004a). Loss of employment within a predominant sector
of a small community can also have a domino effect on the provision of many services
within that community and on the employment of individuals in other sectors (Heinz
Centre, 2002).
3.5.3
Vulnerable Communities
When individuals in a community are vulnerable, the vitality of that community is often
affected. Likewise, when the characteristics of a community make it more vulnerable to
a natural hazard, individuals are at greater risk. Lessening community vulnerability will
ultimately reduce individual vulnerability and minimize negative health outcomes. Communities
become more vulnerable because of increased population and property density, human
habitation in high-risk areas, aging infrastructure, poor urban planning, and inadequate municipal
capacity and resources, and emergency planning (McBean and Henstra, 2003; Etkin
et al., 2004).
3.5.3.1 Infrastructure
Infrastructure refers to facilities with permanent foundations that are the essential elements
of a community, and support human activity and improve the quality of life within the
community. It includes various types of buildings and structures, such as hospitals and
schools, as well as facilities like roads, railways, harbours, power stations, and water
and sewage lines. Infrastructure is usually designed for a specific climate.
Questions arise as to whether Canada’s current infrastructure will meet the challenges posed by
climate change and the projected increase in natural hazards. It is well documented that impacts
from a natural disaster can be exacerbated by weaknesses in infrastructure (Henstra et al., 2004).
Damaged or destroyed infrastructure has the potential to affect health and well-being. Soskolne
et al. (2004) found, in their study of newspaper reporting on disasters in Alberta, that service
interruption was one of the most commonly reported outcomes associated with extreme weather,
including washed-out roads, disruption of power, telephone and water services, closure of
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
77
medical facilities (e.g. hospitals) and water contamination. Palecki et al. (2001) reported
similar impacts from the July 1999 heat wave in the midwestern U.S., including a record-
setting usage of electric power, a burned-out transformer causing 72,000 residents to lose
power at the peak of the heat wave, buckling highways leading to road closures, and small
communities with well-water systems facing problems in meeting water demand. The
1998 Ice Storm in eastern Canada caused the collapse of thousands of hydro towers, resulting
in massive power outages. Many people were without power for weeks during the coldest
time of the year.
While all urban infrastructure is important, special attention needs to be paid to a community’s
critical infrastructure. Critical infrastructures are the “physical resources, services and information
technology facilities, networks and assets which, if disrupted or destroyed, would have serious
impacts on the health, safety, security or economic well-being of Canadians” (PSEPC, 2005a).
They include infrastructure related to energy and utilities, communications and information
technology, finance, health care, food, water, transportation, safety, government and manufacturing.
Community vulnerability often depends on where critical infrastructure is located, and its
physical capability to withstand the assault of a natural hazard event. Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities,
Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity
in Canada, examines concerns
regarding the state of critical
infrastructure in Canada and its
implications for vulnerability
to the health impacts of climate
change.
Infrastructure can also exacerbate
the effects of a natural hazard event.
For example, materials used in
buildings and infrastructures are
directly related to the urban heat
island effect. This effect is primarily
due to an absence of vegetation
and the thermal properties of
dark surfaces, such as paved roads and tarred rooftops (Frumkin, 2002). Some simple changes
in building design and infrastructure, such as living or green roofs and reflective light-coloured
surfaces, can mitigate this effect. As well, cities with a high density of impervious surfaces
severely limit the potential for the infiltration of water, causing increased surface runoff.
This runoff has the potential to overwhelm storm-sewer systems during intense precipitation
events, possibly increasing the vulnerability of the population to environmental and public
health impacts.
Many cities across Canada face significant pressures from aging infrastructure and the
needs of growing populations. The level of deterioration and the age of current infra-
structure may render it vulnerable in today’s climate (Henstra et al., 2004), let alone
for future climate for which extreme weather events are projected to increase. The capacity
required to upgrade infrastructures, or to make significant new capital investments, often
exceeds the capacity of one level of government (Federation of Canadian Municipalities,
2003). Smaller and rural communities face particular pressures when it comes to investing
in infrastructure to protect their populations. In rare cases, protection from and/or
mitigation of natural hazards is not possible; relocation of the community is the only
option. In many northern communities, infrastructure such as roads and buildings is
in danger because of shorter winters, a longer thaw season and melting permafrost
(ACIA, 2004).
Chapter 3
Damage from Hurricane Juan, 2003
Photo Credits: Peter Young
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
78
3.5.3.2 Public health and emergency response services
A successful emergency management program aims to provide communities and individuals
with appropriate health care and emergency social services in times of disaster (F/P/T Network
for Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004). Primary health care services are the first
point of contact with the health care system and include basic emergency services. Secondary
services, such as hospitals and long-term care institutions, provide more specialized care (Health
Canada, 2006a). Both primary and secondary services are affected to various degrees during natural
hazard events or disasters. Hospitals and emergency centres not only have to cope with people
who have acute injuries and illness as a consequence of the event, but also those who can no
longer manage their pre-existing health conditions (e.g. diabetes), and those with health conditions
that may be exacerbated by the event (e.g. HIV/AIDS) (Powell, 2006).
A natural hazard can quickly become a disaster if the health service infrastructure is not prepared
or cannot respond. This may require relocating or retrofitting health infrastructure, such
as hospitals, clinics and nursing homes that could be severely damaged by disasters; ensuring
continuity of services for current or emergent individuals during times of internal system
disruptions and external community impacts; and providing an alternate system of communi-
cation (F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
Case study: Lessons from the tornado at Pine Lake, Alberta, 2000
In July 2000, a tornado, with winds of up to 300 kilometres per hour, struck a campground
and trailer park at Pine Lake, Alberta, killing 12 people and injuring more than 140. Close
to 1,000 people were displaced from the site as their recreational vehicles were damaged
(PSEPC, 2005a). The experience at Pine Lake demonstrates the importance of disaster
planning, the critical role of communications systems and the response of paramedics
and other emergency personnel. Sookram et al. (2000) noted areas requiring improvement
for future disaster responses, in particular ensuring that the response is proportionate
to the disaster and strengthening communication systems (primary and alternate).
More ambulances than required were dispatched
to the disaster site; this resulted in no ambulance
coverage for emergencies in other communities. An
organized dispatch system coordinating the various
emergency medical services should balance the
needs of the disaster scene with the needs of the
surrounding communities. In addition, the cellular
communications system failed, and reliable informa-
tion could not be passed from the disaster site to the
receiving hospitals. A potential solution identified for
future disasters was a mobile communications trailer
to be used as an on-site command and control post.
In the absence of reliable casualty estimates, Calgary and Edmonton hospitals fully activated
their disaster plans; hospital beds were vacated, city ambulances were diverted, and
physicians and nursing staff were called in. But the number of casualties did not require this
level of response. For a disaster of this size, a staged response would have been more
appropriate (e.g. call in some extra staff and have others on stand-by) (Sookram et al., 2000).
A staged response permits staff rotation and prevents staff fatigue if the disaster proves
more serious or prolonged.
Sookram et al. (2000) also reported that this disaster demonstrated that well trained
emergency physicians can contribute to on-scene patient care, although to be most effective,
physicians should have experience and be familiar with the protocols, equipment and
problems associated with field medicine.
Chapter 3
Tornado damage at Pine Lake,
Alberta, 2000
Photo Credits: Dan Kulak
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
79
Emergency physicians need to be familiar with their hospital’s disaster plan, and be prepared
to lead or participate in the disaster response. Support services and staff with appropriate training
must also be available. Other ways health care institutions and personnel may be vulnerable
during an emergency include:
• hospitals that contract out certain essential services (e.g. laundry and food) may have
them interrupted during an emergency;
• overcrowding in emergency shelters during a disaster may increase exposure to
infectious diseases (e.g. influenza) of health care workers and as a result make them
unavailable to support emergency responses (ICLR, 2003)—mass vaccinations could
be required; and
• electronic medical records could face access delays of up to days or weeks in the event
of a power outage during a disaster, with a consequent delay in care.
3.5.3.3 Urban planning
Urbanization has increased by 66% over the last 50 years in Canada. Approximately 80% of
Canadians now live in cities, with 60% living in urban areas with more than 500,000 people
(ICLR, 2003). The occurrence of natural hazards in urban areas with large concentrations
of people increases the likelihood of disasters. With increased urbanization and population
pressures, people are moving into more marginal land, such as coastlines, floodplains, unstable
slopes and wildland-urban interfaces (Robert et al., 2003; Roy et al., 2003). For example,
there has been a surge in the population of the Lower Mainland region of British Columbia
despite the high risk of earthquakes and floods in the area (McBean and Henstra, 2003).
New construction and urban plans and design rarely incorporate adequate resistance to natural
hazards, such as tornadoes or flooding. Inappropriate land-use planning puts people in harm’s way.
The lack of protection or mitigation measures leaves the inhabitants of vulnerable communities
to bear the full cost of disaster losses (McBean and Henstra, 2003). This settlement pattern
increases the likelihood that the number of people affected by natural hazards will continue to
grow. Key to resolving this issue is, among other practices, strategic and smart land-use planning.
3.5.3.4 Community structure and characteristics
Urban communities are highly vulnerable because of greater population densities, placing
more people and property at risk (McBean and Henstra, 2003). However, community structure
also plays a role in the capacity of communities to adapt to natural hazards. Communities
with more “high-risk” inhabitants will require more resources to effectively manage health
emergencies. For example, a retirement community has more people with special health
needs. In addition, communities with a greater proportion of lower-income families that may
have special needs during an emergency will have a lower tax base for resources to implement
emergency programs.
Communities can face very different challenges. For example, First Nation communities are
often more isolated, making evacuation plans more difficult and emergency medical response
times greater. Economic engines of a community, such as agriculture or fisheries industries,
may increase a community’s vulnerability to natural hazards and disasters. Destruction of
infrastructure is likely to have impacts beyond the cost of repairing damage; not only are
the services and products lost because of the disaster, but jobs and the community tax base
are also reduced. This can have lasting effects on the entire community (Heinz Center,
2002). It is important that communities identify their socio-demographic characteristics and
the inherent vulnerabilities to hazards that may exist within or around their boundaries.
This knowledge assists decision makers in the design and implementation of programs to
improve preparedness and the ability of vulnerable populations to cope. This process
is necessary to improve the resilience of the community to the impacts of natural hazards.
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
80
3.6
MANAGING RISKS FROM NATURAL HAZARDS AND
REDUCING VULNERABILITY THROUGH ADAPTATION
3.6.1
Emergency Management Approach
The field of emergency management is structured around well-defined concepts, approaches
and frameworks that should guide the process of adaptation to climate change. However,
terminology used in this field and in the field of climate
change can lead to confusion because different terms are
sometimes used to express similar concepts, while occasionally
the same terms mean different things. For example, disaster
mitigation and climate change adaptation refer to similar
sets of activities—those aimed at reducing risks from hazards.
However, in the climate change field mitigation refers to
actions taken to reduce the emission of GHGs. In the following
sections, the terms disaster mitigation and mitigation are
used interchangeably.
Hazard or disaster risk management is defined by the International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction as the “systematic process
of using administrative decisions, organization, operational
skills and capacities to implement policies, strategies and
coping capacities of the society and communities to lessen
the impacts of natural hazards and related environmental
and technological disasters” (UN/ISDR, 2004). Emergency
management3 uses a risk-based approach to hazards—
that is, a systematic assessment of hazards, threats, risks
and vulnerabilities relating to people in a geographic
area, or an organization, to develop an effective emergency
management plan (PSEPC, 2007). Effective emergency
management incorporates overlapping, complementary
components: mitigation (prevention), preparedness, response
and recovery.
In the international community, there is a growing consensus
that emergency management policies must incorporate
a greater emphasis on mitigation. The Hyogo Declaration
of the 2005 United Nations World Conference on Disaster
Reduction stated:
“We, delegates to the World Conference on Disaster Reduction...are deeply
concerned that communities continue to experience excessive losses of precious
human lives and valuable property as well as serious injuries and major
displacements due to various disasters worldwide... We recognize as well that
a culture of disaster prevention and resilience, and associated pre-disaster
strategies, which are sound investments, must be fostered at all levels, ranging
from the individual to the international levels... We affirm that States have
the primary responsibility to protect the people and property on their territory
from hazards, and thus, it is vital to give high priority to disaster risk reduction
in national policy, consistent with their capacities and the resources available
to them.” (UN/ISDR, 2005c, p. 1)
Chapter 3
Mitigation: The prevention of natu-
ral hazards from becoming natural
disasters. It includes policies and
actions taken before or after a
disaster to reduce the impacts on
people and property, such as build-
ing public awareness and support,
developing local and regional plans
for land use to prevent inappropriate
development in hazardous areas,
and changing building codes
and standards to protect people,
property and infrastructure.
Preparedness: The activities and
measures taken in advance to
ensure effective response to the
impact of hazards, such as the
issuance of effective early warnings
and the temporary evacuation
of people and property from
threatened locations.
Response: Actions taken imme-
diately before, during and after
a disaster to protect people and
property and to enhance recovery,
such as emergency public com-
munication, search and rescue, and
medical assistance to those in need.
Recovery: Actions taken after
a disaster to restore critical
systems and return a community
to pre-disaster conditions.
3
In the literature emergency management and disaster management are often used interchangeably. For the purposes
of this Chapter, the term emergency management will be used.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
81
In addition, based on global consultations held in 2006 which brought together experts
in emergency management from around the world, the WHO released Risk Reduction
and Emergency Preparedness: Six-Year Strategy for the Health Sector and Community
Capacity Development. The strategy, which is to inform both developed and developing
countries, has the following priorities (WHO, 2007):
• assessing and monitoring baseline information on the status of risk reduction and
emergency preparedness in the health sector at regional and country levels;
• institutionalizing risk reduction and emergency preparedness programmes in ministries
of health and establishing an effective all-hazard whole-health programme for this purpose;
• encouraging and supporting community-based risk reduction and emergency preparedness
programmes; and
• improving knowledge and skills in risk reduction and emergency preparedness and
response in the health sector.
Many governments around the world have changed, or are in the process of changing, their
disaster management policies to incorporate a greater emphasis on mitigation. Although Canada
endorsed the Hyogo Declaration, Canadian emergency management policies do not yet
incorporate significant mitigation activities. However, in January, 2008 the federal government
released Canada’s National Disaster Mitigation Strategy which incorporates disaster mitigation
into Canada’s evolving emergency management framework. The Strategy sets out a common
vision for disaster mitigation activities in Canada through enhanced leadership and coordination,
education and outreach activities, scientific research and increased federal, provincial and
territorial mitigation investments (PSC, 2008).
Another important element in the development of mitigation policies is federal Bill C-12,
the Emergency Management Act, which received Royal Assent in June, 2007. It provides
for enhanced emergency management activities in Canada by granting the federal Minister of
Public Safety the responsibility for exercising leadership relating to emergency management
in Canada. To this end the Minister coordinates emergency management activities among
government institutions and in cooperation with the provinces. The Act assigns responsibilities
for all aspects of emergency management including mitigation, preparedness, response, and
recovery to protect Canadians from disasters. Requirements for prevention and mitigation
activities in the new Act provide an important opportunity to make progress on adaptation
efforts aimed at reducing risks to health from climate-related natural hazards in Canada by
adopting a more balanced and comprehensive approach to emergency management.
Canada still faces a number of challenges in implementing a national disaster mitigation
strategy (McBean and Henstra, 2003). As a federal state, Canada relies on intergovernmental
collaboration for the development and implementation of policies on disaster mitigation.
A strong federal desire to move forward with and sustain an initiative may not be sufficient to
support the implementation of programs and policies across Canada. There is also uncertainty
regarding current risks from natural hazards and existing vulnerabilities, which makes it difficult
to identify areas where policies should be targeted to be most effective. More information is
needed through community-level assessments and research to develop appropriate responses
or mitigation measures to protect health.
As well, because disasters occur infrequently, interest in disaster mitigation can be sporadic
and short-lived, and citizens generally perceive a low probability of loss from such events. As
a result, officials are not inclined to make adequate investments in mitigation. The post-disaster
opportunity and policy window for improving mitigation measures is usually overtaken by the
primary goal of returning the community to “normal” as quickly as possible.
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
82
3.6.2
Emergency Management in Canada: Current Capacity and Initiatives
3.6.2.1 Overall capacity and advances in preparedness
In Canada, all levels of government and a wide range
of sectors have important and generally well defined
roles in managing risks to health from natural hazards
and disasters. Inter-governmental collaboration between
federal and provincial authorities is essential for the
development and implementation of emergency
management policies. Municipal governments play
a key role in Canada in reducing risks to health
from climate change through their activities related
to police, fire and ambulance services, utilities,
local public health and social services, and commu-
nity emergency preparedness and planning. Most
emergencies in Canada are local in nature and are
managed by municipalities or at the provincial or
territorial level (PSEPC, 2005a). Non-governmental
organizations (e.g. Canadian Red Cross, Salvation Army), the business community
(e.g. insurance companies) and individual Canadians also play key roles in reducing risks
from natural hazards.
Concern about existing vulnerability to the impacts of natural hazards on the health of
Canadians and their communities has resulted in recent efforts to better prepare for disasters
and appropriately manage existing risks. The actions taken by the Government of Quebec
to revise and extend public safety legislation to improve the emergency preparedness
of local and regional municipalities in response to the Saguenay flood and other events
(Beauchemin, 2002) is one example. In Ontario, the new Emergency Management and
Civil Protection Act stipulates that all communities and the provincial government must
establish an emergency management program based on hazards and risks that the people
of Ontario may face (Government of Ontario, 2006). The Act provides the emergency powers
necessary for the provincial government to react quickly to an emergency (e.g. evacuations,
closing private and public places to limit access, disposing of environmental or animal
waste) (Government of Ontario, 2006). In recent years, considerable progress has also
been achieved within the health sector to develop a more integrated and robust emergency
management capacity (Health Canada, 2005b). A number of the actions that have been
taken to increase the ability of communities and governments to manage health risks
associated with extreme weather events and natural hazards are presented in Chapter 8,
Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity in Canada.
3.6.2.2 Health emergency management
The health sector plays a key role in efforts aimed at protecting Canadians from extreme
weather events and natural hazards which can turn into disasters. Health emergency
management plans and activities set up processes to guide and prepare the health
and social services sectors at all levels of government, or within institutions, for a
range of public health emergencies. The National Framework for Health Emergency
Management in Canada highlights the key stages and requirements of health emergency
management for decision makers (Figure 3.8).
Chapter 3
Photo Credits: Canadian Red Cross
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
83
Figure 3.8 National Framework for Health Emergency Management
Chapter 3
Source: F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004.
Health emergency management activities are aimed at reducing vulnerabilities, at the individual
and community levels, to the risks associated with extreme weather events and natural hazards.
The Framework provides information and an organizational structure for Canada’s health and
emergency social services sectors to properly mitigate hazards, prepare for emergencies, respond
quickly and help communities recover (F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness and
Response, 2004). The Framework is pan-Canadian and trans-jurisdictional in scope in order to
ensure that the information is useful to community-based programs, companies in the private
sector, local jurisdictions (municipalities, provinces, territories) and federal departments.
Under the Framework, four facets of the health and social services sector are emphasized: physical
health (individual perspective), public health (population perspective), emergency social services
(societal perspective), and maintenance of activities (organizational perspective). Each facet is
examined in every phase of emergency management (i.e. mitigation, preparedness, response,
recovery) with a view to minimizing the health impacts associated with natural hazards (F/P/T
Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004). Work continues on the development
and implementation of Canada’s National Health Emergency System, based on the principles and
guidelines set out in the National Framework for Health Emergency Management. Key activities
include (Expert Group on Emergency Preparedness and Response, n.d.):
• National Health Incident Management System, which is intended to facilitate a coordinated
response capacity across the F/P/T health system during health emergencies or crises;
• Memorandum of Understanding on Mutual Aid, which provides a mechanism for F/P/T
governments to provide and to receive assistance from one another during a public health
emergency in an efficient and timely manner;
• Pandemic Preparedness Health Operations Coordination Working Group to enhance
operational capacity and consistency across all jurisdictions on pandemic issues; and
• National Surge Capacity Strategy to facilitate a timely and efficient response to the increased
health demands placed on health care systems across all jurisdictions during emergencies.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
84
3.6.2.3 Identifying hazards and issuing warnings
The identification and analysis of hazards at the local level is the cornerstone of emergency
management and is necessary for the establishment of community response plans. In a
survey of eight cities across Canada conducted in 2005 for this Assessment, it was found
that all municipalities had identified and analyzed the hazards that were prevalent in their
geographic regions (Health Canada, 2005c). Natural hazards, particularly extreme weather
events and situations involving hazardous materials, were generally considered to pose
the highest risks. For emergency management officials, public health hazards, particularly
pandemic influenza and risks associated with water or food were considered to be
of somewhat lower priority. The methods used to analyze and rank the hazards varied
considerably. In Ontario, the provincial government introduced a process called Hazard
Identification and Risk Assessment (HIRA) which provides a standardized technique for
assessing risks to communities and establishes a common foundation for the development
of emergency plans. In other cases, cities integrated the assessment of hazards and their
potential consequences into a broader risk management process which helped identify
preventive and mitigation actions in addition to effective emergency response measures.
It was noted by many officials that without available methods for analyzing hazards
and ranking risks, smaller municipalities with fewer resources would not be able to undertake
comprehensive analyses.
In the emergency management context, early warning implies the means by which a potential
danger is detected or forecast and an alert issued (UN/ISDR, 2005a). The goal of early
warning systems is to maximize the probability that people at risk will take the appropriate
actions to protect themselves from a natural hazard event, whether its onset is sudden or
gradual (Thomas and Mileti, 2003). Several recent international conferences have focussed
on early warning systems as key strategies for reducing the health impacts of natural hazards.
The Third International Conference on Early Warning in 2006, the Potsdam International
Conference on Early Warning Systems for the Reduction of Natural Hazards in 1998, and
the Yokohama Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction in 1994 recognized the importance
of early warning systems as part of overall disaster reduction strategies. Among the many
benefits of implementing an early warning system, the most important is a reduction in the loss of
life and impacts on human health (O’Neill, 1997; National Health Assessment Group (NHAG),
2001; Comerford, 2005; Rego and Subbiah, 2005; World Meteorological Organization (WMO),
2005). Ancillary benefits include a reduction in impacts on individual property and on a range
of economic sectors (e.g. construction, agriculture and shipping) that contribute significantly
to a nation’s prosperity and to the health and well-being of individuals.
Due to an increase in the power of new technologies and a decrease in their costs, early warning
systems are becoming easier to implement all over the world. However, proper development
and implementation are essential for recognizing the full benefits provided by such systems.
The disseminated message must have a clear meaning, and the public must have adequate
knowledge of the procedures to follow during a response to effectively reduce risks to health.
An “all-hazards” approach provides benefits to all segments of society by using one
system to warn against multiple hazards. Canada has yet to implement an all-hazards approach
to emergency management. At present, it relies on several systems that issue warnings
for a number of specific natural hazards. Some communities have recognized their
vulnerability to extreme weather events or natural hazards and, along with other levels
of government, are taking action to reduce health risks associated with such events.
Early warning systems for a range of natural hazards (e.g. heat waves, storms) have
been implemented in jurisdictions across the country. A frequent problem with the
systems is the weak linkage between the technical capacity to issue the warning and
the capability of the public or institutions to respond effectively to it. Often, the capacity
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
85
of the warning to trigger the appropriate response by emergency management agencies,
community-based organizations and the public at large is not adequate (UN/ISDR, 2005b).
Efforts are under way in several communities around the world to increase public awareness
of hazards and to promote individual protective measures. Canada could draw useful
lessons from international experience in developing and implementing warning systems
to protect health.
Satellite data, in combination
with geographic information
systems, are very useful for
ascertaining the causes, pro-
gression, extent and impact
of extreme weather events,
and for discerning how natural
disasters might be avoided
or impacts reduced. Satellite
images can help planners
and emergency response teams
to quickly pinpoint vulnerable
locations and populations
affected by natural hazards
(Jedras, 2003). Weather and
climate monitoring data from
satellites are provided or used in this way by the Canada Centre for Remote Sensing, the
Meteorological Service of Canada, the Canadian Hurricane Centre, the Canadian Wildland
Fire Information Service, the Canadian Lightning Detection Network, and the Earth
Observatory of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Current measures
to identify and monitor the progression of extreme weather events in Canada that may
pose health risks are highlighted below.
Heat waves
Environment Canada defines a heat wave as three or more consecutive days when the air
temperature reaches at least 32°C, and issues weather advisories when a heat wave is expected
to occur (Environment Canada, 2005a). A comprehensive scan of public health websites
revealed that only a small number of communities in Canada presently engage in heat management
activities, including heat alert systems. These systems are found largely in urban communities
in Ontario and Quebec (Paszkowski, 2007). Examples of warning systems used in communities
across Ontario are found in Table 3.4. Few urban communities in other regions, including the
Atlantic and the Prairie provinces, have formal warning systems in place, although some
communities do include heat response information and advice for vulnerable populations
on their websites. However, the majority of urban communities and many small urban
communities engage in “greening” activities that may contribute to a reduction in the urban
heat island effect. In most cases though, heat mitigation is often not explicitly mentioned
as a purpose or benefit of the existing activities (Paszkowski, 2007).
Cold waves
When unusually low winter temperatures, cold waves or winter storms are expected, weather
forecasts issued by Environment Canada usually include short-term warnings to take protective
measures (Environment Canada 2003e, 2005b). These forecasts are used by municipal and
regional health agencies to issue local-level cold weather alerts or warnings. It would be helpful
to have more accurate long-term forecasts of cold waves that communities can use to aid in
preparations aimed at protecting vulnerable populations.
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
86
Chapter 3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
System
No dedicated system –
mention health unit system
No dedicated system – link to
health unit heat alert program
No dedicated system –
post health unit heat alerts
No dedicated system – mention
health unit alert system
Mention of health unit heat
alert system
No dedicated system – mention
EC humidex advisory system
No dedicated system – mention
EC humidex advisory system
Humidex-based system.
Three phases:
Phase 1 – heat advisory
Phase 2 – heat warning
Phase 3 – heat alert
Have a heat alert plan, no details
provided
Humidex-based system; extreme
heat alert issued by MOH
Threshold
Not indicated
Not indicated
Not indicated – high temperature
humidex, smog
Issuance of humidex advisory
by EC
Extreme heat day: humidex of 40
EC humidex advisory: Humidex
of 40
EC humidex advisory: Humidex
of 40
Phase 1 – humidex of 40, 1 day
Phase 2 – humidex of 40, > 1 day
Phase 3 – humidex of 40, > 3 days
OR 45, 1 day
Not indicated
Maximum humidex: 40
Alert
Notification to media,
notice posted on website
Notice on website; link to
health unit alert program
Notice on website;
link to health unit
Post health unit notice
on website
Issue media advisory
None indicated
Notice on website;
media release
Notification to media;
notice posted on website
Notice posted on website;
may notify media
Notice on website; media
alert issued, may call 311
phone line for information
Response
Information about cooling options:
community centres, libraries,
and pools
Not indicated
Information about cooling options:
shopping centers, libraries, pools
Air conditioned public facilities
used as cooling centers. Pool
hours extended.
Extend hours for city owned
pools and splash pads
None indicated
Community centres used as
cooling centres; water is
distributed
Phase 1 – issue media advisory
Phase 2 – issue media advisory
with additional info
Phase 3 – control group determines
response; may include cooling
centres, extended pool hours,
targeted outreach
Not indicated. Have an emergency
response plan
Air conditioned recreation facilities
opened 7 days a week
Information
Heat risk and protection information.
Vulnerable: seniors, children, the disabled,
the chronically ill
Heat risk and protection information,
no vulnerabilities specified
Link to health unit information; health
unit identifies vulnerabilities
Heat risk and protection information.
Vulnerable: seniors, children, the disabled,
the chronically ill
No heat risk or protection information
Heat risk and protection information.
Vulnerable: seniors, children, overweight
or ill individuals
Heat risk and protection information.
Vulnerable: seniors, children, overweight
or ill individuals
Heat risk and protection information.
Vulnerable: seniors, chronically ill,
infants/small children, the socially isolated,
individuals with limited mobility and
on certain medications, those who work
or exercise vigorously outdoors
No heat risk or protection information;
extreme heat identified as a potential risk
faced by a community
Heat risk and protection information.
Vulnerable: seniors, children, the frail,
individuals who live alone
Table 3.4
Examples of heat warning and response activities of urban communities in Ontario
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
87
Chapter 3
11
12
13
14
15
Humidex-based system.
Three phases:
Phase 1 – heat advisory
Phase 2 – heat alert
Phase 3 – extreme heat alert
Humidex-based system
Temperature or humidex based
system, 3 levels:
Level 1 – heat alert
Level 2 – heat warning
Level 3 – heat emergency
Humidex-based system, 3 phases:
Phase 1 – heat alert
Phase 2 – heat warning
Phase 3 – heat emergency
Synoptic classification system,
2 phases:
Phase 1 – heat alert
Phase 2 – extreme heat alert
System
Phase 1 – humidex of 36, 2 days
Phase 2 – Phase 1 and smog
OR humidex of 40, 2 days
Phase 3 – Phase 2 and smog
OR humidex of 45, 2 days
Humidex of 40, 1 day OR 36,
3 days; other factors may be
considered
Level 1 – 36, 2 days
Level 2 – Level 1 and smog OR 40,
2 days
Level 3 – Level 1 and situational
factors OR Level 2 and smog
OR 45, 2 days
Phase 1 – humidex of 36, 2 days
Phase 2 – humidex of 40, 2 days
Phase 3 – humidex of 45+,
situational factors
Phase 1 – 0.65 probability
of excess death
Phase 2 – 0.90 probability
of excess death
Threshold
Notification on community
and health unit websites;
media release
Alerts issued by the
public health unit;
no further details
Notification posted on
website; notify public
via media releases
Public is notified via
website, notification
of media, notification
to service providers
Public is notified via
website, notification
of media, notification
to service providers
Alert
Information dissemination,
extension of pool hours, extension
of shelter hours; community
indicates presence of a heat
emergency plan
Not indicated. Have an emergency
response plan
Level 1 – information disseminated,
air conditioned locations promoted
Level 2 – level 1 actions plus cooling
centres open to vulnerables
Level 3 – level 2 actions plus
“municipal control group”
determines further action
Information dissemination,
extension of pool hours, extension
of shelter hours; community
indicates presence of a heat
emergency plan, no further details
Phase 1 – Red Cross operates a
phone line, information dissemi-
nated, water distributed, trans-
portation provided as necessary,
extended hours at shelters
Phase 2 – All phase 1 steps
plus 5 cooling centres opened,
extended pool hours
Response
Heat risk and protection information.
Vulnerable: seniors, the socially isolated,
those with low income, those with chronic/
pre-existing illnesses (including mental
illness), children, the homeless
Heat risk and protection information (from the
health unit). Vulnerable: seniors, young children,
work or exercise vigorously outdoors, have
chronic heart/lung conditions, individuals on
certain medications, have risk factors like obesity,
fever, dehydration, poor circulation, sunburn
Heat risk and protection information.
Vulnerable: children, unacclimatized persons,
seniors, persons with chronic medical
conditions
Heat risk and protection information. Vulnerable:
the isolated, homeless, those on certain medica-
tions, those with health conditions (heart/kidney
disease, respiratory problems), seniors, young
children, the unacclimatized – specific info for
service providers to the homeless
Heat risk and protection information.
Vulnerable: seniors, individuals with chronic
illnesses or impaired mobility or on certain
medications, infants/preschool children, people
who work/exercise outdoors, homeless or
marginally housed persons, the overweight;
specifics on children and persons on medication
Information
Source: Paszkowski, 2007.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
88
Thunder and lightning
When there is a risk of severe storms, including thunderstorms, Environment Canada issues
severe weather warnings. Lightning strikes in Canada are monitored by an automated
Lightning Detection Network (Environment Canada, 2003b). In combination with weather
(Doppler) radar systems, this enables high-risk areas for thunderstorms and lightning
flashes (“hot spots”) to be identified and mapped as thunderstorms progress (Environment
Canada, 2003a, 2003b, 2003c, 2007c). Often triggered by lightning strikes, the threat of
wildfires can pose an ongoing risk to communities, particularly during summer months.
Daily updated maps and satellite images of wildfire risk and wildfire hot spots across
Canada are prepared and made accessible on the Internet by the Canadian Forest Service
(NRCan, 2006a). GeoEye Incorporated also frequently publishes satellite images of
wildfires and their air pollution plumes.
Floods
There are several flood forecasting centres in communities and provinces across Canada.
(e.g. Alberta, British Columbia, Great Lakes, Kennebecasis River, Saint John River).
Each system reflects the characteristics of the community that it serves to protect through
variations in data acquisition, allocated resources, information services, administrators
and partners, education and outreach activities, and nomenclature of event (e.g. High Water
Advisory versus Flood Warning). Most systems integrate information on factors affecting
flooding, such as snow conditions, temperature, precipitation patterns, water level and
stream flow conditions. This information is provided by public agencies in Canada and in
the U.S., as well as by private enterprises. The flood warnings are distributed most commonly
to emergency measures organizations, local government officials, pertinent provincial and
federal government officials and the news media (Environment Canada, 2007e).
Tornadoes
The identification and forecasting of tornadoes relies on weather radar surveillance systems
and on satellite images; this allows only short-term forecasts (Marsh et al., 2007). Presently,
available weather and climate models are not sophisticated enough to be used for simulating
and accurately predicting tornadoes, which tend to be localized. Nevertheless, the models
can be used to simulate the conditions under which such events occur.
Hurricanes
Since the 1970s, satellite data and images have been used to forecast the development
and movement of hurricane-force storms in the Atlantic (Böttger et al., 1975). Since then,
improvements in satellite instrumentation, monitoring instruments dropped from planes,
weather radar equipment, computer programs, communications technology and international
cooperation have greatly improved the accuracy of hurricane forecasts and their availability
to the public. The Canadian Hurricane Centre of Environment Canada in Dartmouth, Nova
Scotia, used these and other means to provide early warnings of Hurricane Juan and other
tropical storms that have threatened the inhabitants of the Canadian East Coast. Among the
improvements made since Hurricane Juan is a new and more secure building for the Atlantic
Storm Prediction Centre (Environment Canada, 2006a, 2006b).
Landslides
For some populated high-risk areas such as the Saguenay-Lac-Saint Jean region, the shores of
the lower St. Lawrence River in Quebec, and parts of southern British Columbia, government
agencies have established risk maps and risk zoning guides to help protect people and property
from landslides (Lajoie, 1974; Miles & Associates Ltd., 2001; Evans et al., 2002; Bilodeau
et al., 2005; Rouleau et al., 2006).
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
89
Chapter 3
3.6.2.4 Response, recovery and resilience
In the past decade, many regions and large cities in North America have fallen victim to large-scale
disasters and emergencies. This has tested existing capacity to protect the lives and health and
well-being of citizens, and has exposed weaknesses in the ability of governments to respond
to such events and support the recovery of communities. As a result, several investigations
have been conducted to examine preparedness for a range of large-scale emergencies and
disasters. One such investigation was undertaken in Canada in mid-2000 by the Standing
Senate Committee on National Security and Defence, with the purpose of determining where
federal government leadership was most needed “to ensure that the nation provided its
citizens with the best protection possible at a reasonable cost” (Standing Senate Committee
on National Security and Defence, 2004). Findings from this study, which focussed on first
responders, were based on extensive interviews with key emergency preparedness officials at
all levels, field visits and survey results. Key findings from this study are presented below.
• Larger cities are generally better prepared than smaller communities to deal with emergency
or disaster situations.
• More than half of medium and large cities are able to respond effectively to an emergency,
according to interviewed officials.
• Few smaller communities are able to respond effectively to an emergency, according
to interviewed officials.
• The major capacity issues identified were related to communications and coordination
among response agencies, communications with the public, and access to critical supplies
and professional training.
• There was a strong desire for better linkages on emergency preparedness matters among
municipal, provincial and federal governments, and for the large cities, between municipal
and federal governments.
• A national plan for critical public health emergencies should be developed and municipalities
should be fully informed about the plan.
Further evidence suggests that, overall, larger cities are generally better prepared to deal with
emergency or disaster situations than small communities. A survey of emergency management
officials in eight large Canadian cities in 2005 revealed that almost all medium and large
communities had designated a full-time official to be responsible for emergency preparedness,
and officials in most large cities felt able to effectively respond to an emergency (Health
Canada, 2005c). However, in most cases, the development of response capabilities has used
an increasing share of the municipal budget, resulting in fewer funds for other municipal
functions. For many of the communities very little funding has been provided for first
responders from higher levels of government (e.g. provincial or federal). As well, many
activities related to preparedness training have
been constrained by tight municipal budgets
(Health Canada, 2005a).
Because many Canadians exposed to natural hazards
live in small communities and regions outside
metropolitan areas, efforts are needed to increase
the capacity to manage hazards present in
these areas. Table-top simulation exercises in two
small communities in New Brunswick and
Newfoundland and Labrador to test local capacity
to respond to a storm surge provided insights
into the kind of support and improvements that are
needed to manage future emergencies (Health
Storm surge table-top simulation excercises in
Shediac, Newfoundland and Labrador, 2005
Canada, 2007c). While there is capacity in small communities to deal with events of a smaller
scale and duration, the kinds of hazards that extreme weather events can trigger may often
overwhelm local services and, in some situations, regional capacity. Both exercises found benefits
in examining how authorities across municipal boundaries, sectors and agencies, as well as
across different levels of government, coordinate and collaborate in responding to large-scale
emergencies and identify ways to improve preparedness (Health Canada, 2007c).
Case study: Forest fires near Kelowna, British Columbia, 2003
During 2003, the driest spring and summer since 1929 occurred in the southern interior
of British Columbia (B.C). The previous year, local, regional and provincial firefighting
and emergency plans had been revised to better deal with “interface” fires in areas where
buildings had been constructed in wildland environments with flammable vegetation
such as grasses, bushes and trees (Government of British Columbia, 2002). However, these
plans had underestimated the possibility of a record drought producing huge amounts of
dry fuel that might combine with high winds to produce large forest fires. This combination
of environmental factors enabled large forest fires which were uncontrollable to develop.
Moreover, the emergency plans had not included any provisions for dealing with the
aftermath of the physical, health and social consequences of large forest fires.
That summer, over 266,000 hectares of forest in British Columbia were swept by
more than 2,500 wildfires. They cost the lives of three pilots engaged in fire fighting,
forced the evacuation of more than 45,000 people, destroyed at least 350 homes and
businesses, damaged transportation and communications infrastructure, and required
the deployment of about 6,000 firefighters; total costs amounted to about $700 million
(Anderson et al., 2003; Filmon et al., 2004). Among the wildfire outbreaks with the
worst effects on community health and well-being was the Okanagan Mountain Park
fire near Kelowna (figure 3.9). This fire started on August 16, 2003, spread rapidly
because of strong winds, and required tremendous efforts to bring it under control.
The fire invaded the outskirts of Kelowna, where it burned 238 homes and forced
the temporary evacuation of about 5,000 residents (Anderson et al., 2003).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
90
Chapter 3
Figure 3.9 Forest fires in British Columbia in 2003 (left), and Interior Health
Authority administrative districts most affected by the fires (right)
Sources: Filmon et al., 2004; B.C. Interior Health Authority, 2007.
Legend
0.0-0.5ha
0.5-2.0ha
2.0-10.0ha
10.0-25.0ha
25.0-100.0ha
100.0ha+
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
91
Chapter 3
In the Thompson Cariboo Shuswap Health Service Area, patients had to be evacuated over
distances of up to 55 kilometres, and emergency accommodations for these patients had to be
made available in public and private health care facilities in other regions. In the East
Kootenay Health Service Area, patients also had to be transferred to emergency accommo-
dations. This early experience was useful when about 100 patients in a private care facility
in Kelowna had to be evacuated to other towns. The evacuation and care of hospital patients
and residents of chronic care facilities demanded significant efforts by the health authorities,
as well as ambulance services managers and staff, some of whom had also lost their homes
to the fire (Anderson et al., 2003; B.C. Interior Health Authority, 2003).
Non-governmental organizations, such as the Canadian Red Cross, the Salvation Army,
the Mennonite Disaster Relief Fund and others also provided much needed help to evacuees
and other people affected by the wildfire disasters. In October 2003, the federal government
provided $100 million to the government of British Columbia for disaster relief.
In November 2003, the B.C. Ministry of Health commissioned a review of the performance
of health services during the wildfire disasters of August 2003. The report was completed
in January 2004. On the whole, it spoke well of their performance; nevertheless, it included
21 recommendations for improvements (Lynch, 2004). The Government of British
Columbia also established a 2003 Firestorm Provincial Review Team to recommend
improvements to the provincial emergency program, and to local and regional community
emergency plans. It focussed mainly on the performance of provincial agencies
responsible for forest management, forest fire prevention and control, emergency services
and evacuations, and post-emergency recovery, and made many recommendations
for improvement (Filmon et al., 2004). In 2006, the British Columbia Forest Service
produced a revised strategy to better cope with future wildfires (Foglam, 2006).
The lessons learned by emergency and health services during the 2003 wildfire
disasters in British Columbia (e.g. as summarized by Filmon et al. (2004) and Lynch
(2004)) can be applied to other regions of Canada at risk from forest or wildfires.
Effective adaptation through emergency management activities increases individual and
community resilience to disasters. Resilience refers to the capacity of a system, community
or society to persevere, recuperate or change in reaction to an extreme weather event or
disaster, in order to reach and maintain an acceptable level of functioning (PSEPC, 2005a).
Increasing resilience requires an all-hazards approach and an “all-vulnerabilities” approach
that involves identifying and addressing all key aspects of vulnerability (Henstra et al.,
2004), including vulnerabilities of specific populations. Resilience also depends on the
health of the population; healthier people adapt better to health risks associated with
climatic and other environmental changes (McMichael, 2003).
To determine if individuals and communities are resilient to natural hazards, it is necessary
to better document and understand the long-term effects of natural disasters on important
determinants of health such as employment, health services, social networks and physical
environment (e.g., water quality). No multi-disciplinary studies have been undertaken
in Canada to address these research needs for any of the natural hazards of concern.
This type of research would help identify whether Canadians will be able to cope with
the expected increase in frequency and intensity of many natural hazards due to
climate change.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
92
3.6.3
Barriers and Opportunities for Adaptation
Studies carried out as part of the Canadian Natural Hazards Assessment Project indicated
that despite some improvements in planning and response capacity, Canada has become
more vulnerable to natural hazards because of population growth, urbanization, an aging
population and infrastructure, increasing environmental degradation and over-reliance
on technologies (Environment Canada, 2003d). Similarly, a study of fatalities and increasing
economic losses due to weather and climate-related extremes during the 20th century
in the U.S. indicated that these were due primarily to factors contributing to increased
vulnerability—population growth in large urban areas, flood plains and coastal zones,
more property subject to damage, higher property values, and other societal changes (Kunkel
et al., 1999). As discussed in Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity
in Canada, concerns have been raised about current efforts by all levels of government
to reduce health risks associated with natural hazards in Canada. Gaps in efforts to mitigate,
plan, and prepare for the impacts of natural hazards contribute to the vulnerability of
communities and individual Canadians. Existing barriers to making strides in emergency
management efforts in Canada to improve adaptation to health risks from natural hazards
are discussed in the next section, as are opportunities for taking needed actions.
3.6.3.1 Barriers
The development and implementation of efficient and effective strategies, policies and
measures to reduce current and future vulnerability to climate change-related health
impacts face certain barriers. Having the capacity to adapt does not necessarily ensure
that individual Canadians or health and emergency management authorities will take
the measures needed to reduce risks from natural hazards; this is because societal values,
perceptions and levels of cognition are all important in shaping adaptive behaviours
(Schneider, 2004). Most adaptive decisions are made by individuals in government, industry
and within communities so that they can preserve their interests in areas of immediate
concern, including their health, the health of their families, and the value of their assets.
Investments and measures to mitigate impacts from natural hazards are often only
made after a disaster has taken place in an effort to reduce the risks of similar impacts
in the future.
Barriers to adaptation may also arise when there are technological challenges associated
with the proposed measures. For example, due to the short timeframe for detection
and warning, many extreme weather events, such as tornadoes, allow little time to
prepare or to seek shelter, hence morbidity and mortality is proportionally higher compared
with some other types of disasters (Greenough et al., 2001). The effects of Hurricane
Juan in Nova Scotia in September 2003 also showed that some of the damage caused by
severe storms such as hurricanes mays be unavoidable, although emergency management
measures for hurricanes envisage both damage prevention and recovery.
Constraints on adaptations at the community level may also include the environmental
implications of proposed actions (e.g. stormwalls), economic costs, lack of training
and institutional capacity (particularly for small communities), as well as social and
legal acceptability (Ebi et al., 2006). The resources available for disaster mitigation
may be shared or in competition with those for a variety of public health issues
(McMichael, 2003). Deliberations over the distribution of costs for adaptation measures
between public and private agencies can be an important barrier to action. Any
potential return on investments to mitigate natural hazards is realized only after
a disaster is averted, whereas the investment costs are immediate and potentially
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
93
Chapter 3
significant. There may be little economic incentive for a community to invest in prevention
measures because most of the financial costs of recovery are paid by insurers and
higher-level governments.
Perceptions, attitudes and knowledge of the roles of decision makers in addressing climate
change health risks are important elements in the process of adaptation and can constitute
important barriers to action. Interest in disaster mitigation is sporadic, and citizens generally
perceive a low probability of loss from such events; this is because specific disasters
have occured infrequently and rarely in the same locale within a short time span. However,
with an increased frequency of extreme weather events, public perceptions may change
regarding the need for disaster mitigation investments. These and other barriers to adaptation
are discussed in Chapter 6, Health Impacts of Climate Change in Quebec, and Chapter 8,
Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity in Canada.
Case study: Lessons from the Quebec Saguenay flood, 1996
An official inquiry into the causes and consequences of
the 1996 Saguenay flood found a “culture of denial”
among residents and municipal and regional govern-
ments; all disregarded the possibility of serious
flooding (Conseil pour la prévention et la gestion
des sinistres et des crises (CPGSC), 1998). This
situation was probably not unique to the Saguenay
region. Another study found that, in communities
along the upper St. Lawrence River, there had been
little attention given to flood prevention; flood plain occupancy had continued and
in some cases had even greatly increased from the 1970s on, with urban expansion
appearing to be unrestricted by flood plain designations. Reliance on government indemnity
payments as a kind of insurance may have encouraged this trend (Doyon and Côté, 2006).
After the Saguenay flood, recommendations were made for the creation of a “public
safety culture”: (1) strengthening and integrating municipal and public safety planning
and cooperation; (2) providing greater support for Securité publique Québec so that
more staff for public safety would be available, along with better training for them
and backup personnel; (3) increasing awareness among individuals and organizations
about their responsibilities for collective safety; and (4) supporting applied research
through a special institute that would focus on training, research and action in the
area of public safety (CPGSC, 1998).
3.6.3.2 Opportunities
There is sufficient knowledge about the risks and impacts of natural hazards to take proactive
measures to protect health. For example, a suite of tools and technologies such as geological
hazard surveys, aerial photographs, satellite images, mathematical modelling and geographic
information systems can be used to identify and map geomorphological hazards, such as areas
prone to avalanche, landslide or rockfall. Terrain stability mapping can be legislated, and
guidelines can be provided for its implementation (Resources Information Standards Committee
(RISC), 1997; Evans et al., 2002; Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of
BC (APEGBC), 2006; NRCan, 2006a; Klamath Resource Information System (KRIS), 2007;
McLaren, 2007). Under the Aboriginal and Northern Community Action Program, studies
Photo Credits: Canada Centre for
Remote Sensing, Natural Resources
Canada, 1996
are being funded to assess the implications of climate change for northern communities both
above and below the Polar Circle. The purpose of these studies is to ensure the health and
safety of northern residents, the sustainable development of communities, and to improve the
ability to manage the risks posed by natural hazards related to climate change (Indian and
Northern Affairs Canada (INAC), 2006). As well, in some cases, stabilization measures
can be taken to reduce the likelihood of property damage or loss, and of injuries or deaths
resulting from landslides (Chatwin et al., 1994; Government of Alberta, 2005). This can
include the installation of stabilizing or protective structures on slopes, the planting of bushes
or trees on slopes, the protection of existing forests, planned releases of hazardous snow
burdens, and avoidance of unstable snow masses or unstable ground.
Many adaptation options are accessible and affordable. For
example, buildings can be protected from lightning at limited
cost according to a National Standard of Canada for Lightning
Protection Systems (CAN/CSA-B72-M87) (International
Association of Electrical Inspectors (IAEI), 2000). The effective-
ness of such systems was shown in a 10-year survey conducted
in Ontario during the 1930s. During that time, 10,079 unprotected
structures were damaged by fires caused by lightning, but only
60 such fires occurred in protected buildings, and in most of
these the lightning conductors had not been installed properly
(Aulich et al., 2001).
Canada’s National Disaster Mitigation Strategy recognizes the need for climate change
adaptation activities to reduce the risks of disasters (PSC, 2008). Smart land-use planning
and development can prevent much harm and property loss from natural hazards. New
information about the impacts of natural hazards on health can facilitate the development
of needed risk management strategies and can be incorporated, or mainstreamed, into
a range of professional practices (e.g. land-use planning, public health and medical practices,
environmental management). The concept of mainstreaming climate risks describes processes
that bring explicit consideration of climate and related risks into decision making processes.
This concept is key to improving the basis upon which decisions are made by institutions
and individuals regarding the risks they face today and in the future.
Health studies concerning specific individual vulnerabilities are also yielding knowledge
that can inform adaptation. For example, results of laboratory and epidemiologic studies
indicate that humans have a well defined “temperature comfort and tolerance range.”
Temperature-related vulnerability changes with age, and is affected by gender, state of
health, degree of acclimatization to seasonal changes, and socio-economic factors. This
makes it possible to identify the most vulnerable population groups locally and regionally,
to direct protective measures toward them, and to improve the accuracy of mathematical
modelling (projections) of the impacts of future climates on health. Professionals in many
fields need to take into account new knowledge about climate and its impacts in order to
improve current systems, protect growing populations, and communicate with researchers
about additional information and data required to improve risk management practices.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
94
Chapter 3
A floodway was built in 1960
with $63.2 million in public funds
to redirect occasional excess
water from the Red River around
the city of Winnipeg. Although
expensive to build and even
more to modify, it has saved an
estimated $8 billion in potential
damage and recovery costs
(PSC, 2008).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
95
Chapter 3
3.7
KNOWLEDGE GAPS
Several knowledge gaps have been identified with regards to natural hazards, their implications
for human health, and the effects of climate change on the exposure of Canadians to these
hazards. Addressing the following knowledge gaps will be crucial to the development of effective
public health and emergency management measures to protect Canadians from increased
health risks associated with climate change:
• the risks to health from specific natural hazards (e.g. floods);
• data on and indicators of health impacts from natural hazards in Canada, including improved
reporting of the impacts of natural hazards on health;
• the social, psychological and mental health impacts of natural hazards, so that communities
and health care providers will be able to better anticipate disasters, prepare vulnerable
populations and develop adequate programs to address their effects;
• the role of health services in the mitigation of natural hazards and in aiding the victims
of natural disasters;
• the effectiveness of warning and prevention systems;
• the characteristics or qualities that make specific populations more vulnerable to climate
change and health impacts arising from more frequent and severe extreme weather events,
and the distribution of such vulnerable groups within Canada; and
• the effectiveness of messages and outreach strategies for changing individual behaviours
to reduce health risks (e.g. appropriate messaging during emergency situations) and of
interventions by public health officials.
3.8
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
3.8.1
Conclusions
Natural hazards pose diverse risks
of varying magnitude to the health
of Canadians in all regions of the
country. Drought, severe storms,
extreme heat and cold events,
storm surges, floods and other
climate-related natural hazards
can affect health and well-being by
causing increased risk of injuries,
illnesses, stress-related disorders
and, in extreme cases, death. Natural
hazards can also impact health
indirectly by causing local or regional
economic disruptions, interruption in health care services, infrastructure damage and population
displacement. During the 1990s in Canada, natural hazards caused approximately 170 deaths
and 1,000 injuries, and affected 700,000 people. Extreme weather events, such as the 1998 Ice
Storm that affected eastern Canada, Hurricane Juan that impacted Atlantic Canada in 2003,
and recent wildfires and floods across the country are examples of natural hazards that have
had important impacts on the economies and health and well-being of people living in the affected
communities. Although mortality in Canada attributed to natural disasters has decreased in the
past several decades, injuries and economic costs have risen.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
96
Chapter 3
The full scope of the impacts of natural hazards on health is not well understood and documented.
Impacts tend to be under-reported because only events of a certain scope and size are taken
into account in existing studies and in currently available databases. Comprehensive health data
needs to be collected during and after extreme weather events to enable the study of population
vulnerabilities. Given the diversity across Canadian regions, it is not possible to apply the
findings of a few studies of a specific disaster or extreme weather event to the entire population.
Increased funding and new methodological approaches are needed to broaden research in this
area and engage the various disciplines required to conduct such research.
Extreme weather events can have significant psychological and social impacts on people, and
effects can be felt long after emergency response personnel have left the affected communities.
Recent studies have shown that the longer an event disrupts a person’s life, the greater
the level of stress experienced; as a result, a person’s ability to cope may become diminished.
Some research exists, mostly outside Canada, on the psychological and social impacts of
sudden and devastating weather events on people. More attention should be paid in future
investigations to long-term health effects on individuals and on communities of natural
disasters of varying magnitude.
Certain populations in Canada are at greater risk from the health impacts of natural hazards.
People with low incomes may find it more difficult to cope with the stressful effects of disasters
because they may already be experiencing chronic stress due to inadequate housing and nutrition,
and because they cannot afford the cost of needed support such as mental health professionals,
medications or other aids, and repairs or replacement of belongings. Seniors are one of the
highest-risk groups because they may be socially isolated and may have fewer economic
resources on which to rely. Some seniors may also lack the required mobility to move out of
harm’s way, thus increasing the likelihood of physical stress and trauma. Children, like seniors,
are considered one of the most vulnerable groups in weather-related disasters.
Climate change will influence a broad range of natural hazards to which Canadians and
communities from coast to coast are already exposed. Warming of the climate system is
“unequivocal” and the risks of health-impacting natural hazards will increase. Around the globe
and in North America, the occurrence of hazardous events, except cold days, that impact on
health is expected to increase. More hot days and more frequent and intense heat waves are
expected. Cities that currently experience heat waves in Canada (such as Montreal, Toronto,
Hamilton, Winnipeg, Saskatoon and Calgary) can expect the challenge of an increasing
number, intensity and duration of these events, posing serious risks to health to vulnerable
populations. More frequent and intense heavy precipitation events and hurricanes, leading
to increased risks from flooding, are expected in various regions of Canada, as are more
droughts and wildfires.
There is a strong foundation of emergency management in Canada to build upon to adapt
to future risks from natural hazards related to climate change. Although some communities
and provincial and federal authorities are taking actions to reduce the risks, greater actions
are required by others to safeguard Canadians from the risks. Recent investments in
emergency management activities have generally focussed on enhancing warnings, mapping
hazards or strengthening response activities; while these are necessary activities, there
has been limited investment in prevention and mitigation efforts across the country. Many
health risks are heightened by cumulative environmental and social conditions that can
increase the impacts of events and lead to disasters; in many cases communities are not
prepared for a change in the magnitude of events or in the increasing occurrence of
different events in quick succession. The rising costs of natural hazards and disasters may
well act as drivers for investments in mitigation but perceptions of limited threats from
these events continue to act as a barrier to action.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
97
Chapter 3
As well, there are institutional challenges involved in protecting Canadians from natural hazards.
In Canada, intergovernmental collaboration on emergency management activities is essential for
the development and implementation of effective policies to protect Canadians. While responsi-
bility for emergency management is largely delegated to municipal governments, mechanisms
for collaboration and coordination across all levels of government and with the voluntary
sector need to be enhanced in order to fully benefit from the capacities present in society.
Because disasters occur relatively infrequently, interest in disaster prevention can be sporadic
and short-lived, particularly if citizens generally perceive a low probability of loss from such
events. The post-disaster opportunity and policy window for improving preventive measures
is usually overtaken by the primary goal of returning the affected community to “normal” as
quickly as possible. The successful management of risks from many types of natural hazards
can require long-term commitment and significant public and private investments. Awareness
of the risks by the population is needed for such actions to be taken. The monitoring and
reporting of impacts from the full range of natural hazards is essential to inform decisions
on priority areas for action. To this end, climate modelling can be used to predict changes in
conditions that may affect the risk to populations and help in identifying potential hazards
and vulnerabilities.
3.8.2
Recommendations
Through public and private institutions, Canadians have a wide range of adaptive capabilities,
with a number of notable successes and failures in mitigating, preparing for, responding to
and recovering from extreme weather events. In most cases, improvements in emergency
management systems have been implemented in response to disasters or large scale events;
there is now a need to look ahead to the future and take more proactive measures to mitigate
and prepare for the expected increase in the frequency and severity of extreme weather
events. Knowledge exchange and cooperation in policy and planning among the public health,
emergency management and climate change hazards communities should be strengthened.
Innovative efforts are needed to work across these areas of responsibility and engage other
sectors in reducing health risks. For example, the appropriate design of infrastructure and
transportation systems can reduce health vulnerabilities while enhancing resiliency to natural
hazards and environmental sustainability. There are many opportunities for collaborative work
across levels of government, through the dissemination of best practices, and the integration
of warning systems. Priority areas of action to improve the management of health risks
from extreme weather events and disasters and enhance resilience include:
Renewing and strengthening infrastructure
Large portions of Canada’s infrastructure are slated for service renewal and expansion in many
cities and smaller communities. The Building Canada infrastructure plan provides $33 billion from
2007–2014 to help meet infrastructure needs across Canada. Announced in 2007, it provides a
framework for the federal government to collaborate with provinces, territories and municipalities to
take actions to improve infrastructure in Canada. It is imperative that new or upgraded infrastructure
is able to withstand the more frequent and intense natural hazards expected in the coming decades
as the climate continues to change. Opportunities exist to make progress in this regard: they include
the collaboration between the Canadian Council of Professional Engineers and Natural Resources
Canada to upgrade building and design codes and standards to reflect changing climatic conditions.
Planners and government officials need to use this information and adopt a long-term outlook in
their decision making process to ensure that individuals and their communities are protected.
Investing in knowledge to reduce uncertainty for decision making
Canadian research on natural hazards, existing vulnerabilities and health impacts will help reduce
the uncertainties in this area, and highlight the need for immediate actions. More knowledge of
climate change risks and effects on health is required by public health and emergency management
professionals, and increased attention needs to be paid to research on the adaptive capacity of
health and social services organizations to plan for and manage extreme weather events and
natural hazards. This chapter builds on the results of the Canadian Natural Hazards Assessment
Project—a joint effort of the Meteorological Service of Canada, Public Safety and Emergency
Preparedness Canada, and the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction—which assessed natural
hazards in Canada, identified existing vulnerabilities, and sought to inform policy making.
Research and advocacy within the emergency management community is becoming better
coordinated through the Canadian Risk and Hazards Network (CRHNet), which was formed
in 2003 to promote disaster risk reduction and management in Canada. This network provides
the opportunity to continue building research capacity in Canada and increase the integration
of research results into policy development and planning at all levels of government.
Increasing Canadians’ preparedness
All levels of government need to increase efforts to inform and empower individual Canadians
so that they can adequately protect themselves from existing risks. Canadians do not yet see the
need to take personal action to protect their health from the hazards that will change with the
climate. There is a need to increase awareness of the risks and knowledge of the measures that
can be taken in order to reduce exposure
to them. The development of a culture of
disaster preparedness and mitigation, as
advocated by the Nicolet Commission
which examined societal responses to the
1998 Ice Storm (Government of Quebec,
1999), is an important part of adapting to
climate change. It is also important to ensure
that Canadians have reasonable access to
preparedness information and response and
recovery services. This is a common need in
communities across Canada, however, rural
and remote communities face particular
challenges which need to be addressed.
National leadership and advancing prevention
Protecting Canadians and their communities from natural hazards associated with a changing
climate requires coordinated efforts to prevent and mitigate risks. Implementing mitigation
actions, with a focus on reducing the human health impacts resulting from natural hazards,
requires a sustained effort from a wide range of public-and private-sector actors and organizations.
Collaboration at all levels of government is critical to ensure that such activities become
a key component of emergency management in Canada. The role of volunteers in protecting
communities from natural hazards must be more fully integrated into emergency management
activities. Important considerations in this regard include bolstering the volunteer infrastructure
and capacity to cope with large-scale and multiple events, the training of new volunteers and
addressing protection and compensation issues. Collaborative intergovernmental approaches
that are developing in other policy fields, such as health care and the environment, may offer
encouraging examples and provide useful opportunities for knowledge sharing and program
development. Integration across relevant fields is essential. Lessons learned from past successes
will help Canadians plan for future risks associated with climate change.
Risks to the health of Canadians from natural hazards and extreme weather events will increase
as the climate continues to change and as other factors contribute to vulnerability. To protect
all Canadians, in particular those most vulnerable to the health impacts, a comprehensive
commitment is required to guide collaborations in order to improve emergency management
activities, from mitigation to community recovery, across Canada.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
98
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
99
Chapter 3
3.9
REFERENCES
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. (2006). The 2002 Prairie drought summary–December 2002.
Retrieved February 28, 2007, from http://www.agr.gc.ca/pfra/drought/drought02sum_e.htm
—–. (2007). Drought watch. Retrieved February 28, 2007, from http://www.agr.gc.ca/
pfra/drought/nlspi_e.htm
American Meteorological Society. (2000). Glossary of meteorology. Boston, MA: Author.
Anderson, C., Smith, I., Fralic, S., Culbert, L., and Procaylo, N. (2003). Wildfire: British
Columbia burns. Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre.
Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA). (2004). Impacts of a warming arctic: Arctic Climate
Impact Assessment (ACIA). Retrieved June 12, 2005, from http://www.acia.uaf.edu/
Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of BC (APEGBC). (2006). Guidelines for
legislated landslide assessments for proposed residential development in British Columbia.
Retrieved February 24, 2007, from http://www.apeg.bc.ca/ppractice/documents/
ppguidelines/guidelineslegislatedlandslide.pdf
Atlas of Canada. (2003). National annual temperature scenario: 2050. Retrieved February 12, 2008,
from http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/maps/climatechange/scenarios/nationalannualtemp2050
—–.(2007a). Major floods. Retrieved February 12, 2008, from http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/
maps/environment/naturalhazards/floods/majorfloods
—–. (2007b). Major landslides. Retrieved February 12, 2008, from http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/
english/maps/environment/naturalhazards/landslides/landslides
—–. (2008). Forest fire hotspots, 2001–2007. Retrieved March 31, 2008, from http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/
site/english/maps/environment/forestfires/hotspots2007
Aulich, G., Bateman, M., Bering, E.A. III., Brook, M., Byerly, L., et al. (2001). The scientific basis
for traditional lightning protection systems. Report of the Committee on Atmospheric
and Space Electricity of the American Geophysical Union. Retrieved March 24, 2007,
from http://www.lightningsafetyalliance.com/documents/scientific_basis.pdf
B.C. Interior Health Authority. (2003). Special fire edition. Interior Heath. Retrieved March 28, 2007,
from http://www.interiorhealth.ca/NR/rdonlyres/6ED65009-2258-4468-B1E8-A708DDC0C2C5/
98/28Sept122e03.pdf
—–. (2007). Regional information. Retrieved March 28, 2007, from http://www.interiorhealth.ca/
Information/About+Interior+Health/Regions
Beauchemin, G. (2002). Lessons learned – Improving disaster management. In Proceedings
from ICLR’s High Impact Weather Conference, April 11, 2002 (pp. 14–18). University
of Western Ontario: Institute of Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR).
Bilodeau, C., Gneois, A., Demers, D., Potvin, J., Robitaille, D., et al. (Eds.). (2005). Saguenay-
Lac-Saint-Jean. Cartographie des zones exposées aux glissements de terrain dans les
dépôts meubles. Guide d’utilisation des cartes de zones de contraintes et d’application
du cadre normatif. [Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean. Cartography of zones exposed to
landslides in movable deposits. User’s guide for maps of stress zones and the application
of a normative framework]. Gouvernement du Québec.
Bothwell, P. (2004). Wildland-urban interface: General overview. Retrieved February 22, 2007,
from http://www.nofc.forestry.ca/fire/research/management/wui_e.htm
Böttger, H., Eckardt, M., and Katergiannakis, U. (1975). Forecasting extratropical storms with hurricane
intensity using satellite information. Journal of Applied Meteorology, 14(7), 1259–1265.
Brooks, G. (2006). Flood disasters in Canada. Natural Resources Canada. Retrieved February 21, 2007,
from http://gsc.nrcan.gc.ca/floods/database_e.php
Brooks, G.R., Evans, S.G., and Clague, J.J. (2001). Flooding. In G.R. Brooks (Ed.), Natural
geological hazards in Canada: A synthesis (pp. 101–143). Ottawa: Geological Survey
of Canada.
Campbell, G.S., and Norman, J.M. (2000). An introduction to environmental biophysics (2nd ed.,
2nd printing). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Verlag.
Canadian Institute for Climate Studies (CICS). (2000). Aquaculture and climate change in Canada.
University of Victoria. Retrieved March 8, 2007, from http://www.cics.uvic.ca/
workshop/links.htm
Celenza, A., Fothergill, J., Kupek, E., and Shaw, R.J. (1996). Thunderstorm associated asthma:
a detailed analysis of environmental factors. British Medical Journal, 312(7031), 604–607.
Chatwin, S.C., Howes, D.E., Schwab, J.W., and Swanston, D.N. (1994). A guide for management
of landslide-prone terrain in the Pacific northwest (2nd ed.). Land Management Handbook
No. 18., Victoria, B.C.: Research Branch, Ministry of Forests.
Cheng, C., Campbell, M., Pengelly, D., Li, Q., Li, G., et al. (2005). Differential and combined impacts
of winter and summer weather and air pollution due to global warming on human mortality
in south-central Canada. Technical Report submitted to the Health Policy Research Program
(6795-15-2001/4400011).
Chepesiuk, R. (2001). Wildfires ignite concern. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(8), A364.
Clean Air Partnership (CAP). (2004). Cool Toronto project – Toronto’s urban heat island mitigation
and adaptation project. Retrieved February 2, 2007, from http://www.cleanairpartnership.org/
cool_toronto.htm
—–. (2007). Cool Toronto. Retrieved February 2, 2007, from http://www.cleanairpartnership.org/
cool_toronto.php
Comerford, R. (2005). Successful warning systems are dependent upon a successful comprehensive
emergency management program. Presentation at Public Entity Risk Institute virtual
symposium entitled “Early Warning Systems – Interdisciplinary Observations and Policies
from a Local Government Perspective”, Fairfax, VA, April 2005. Retrieved February 12, 2008,
from http://www.riskinstitute.org/PERI/PTR/Early+Warning+Systems+Interdisciplinary+
Observations+and+Policies+from+a+Local+Government+Perspectiv.htm
Conseil pour la prévention et la gestion des sinistres et des crises (CPGSC). (1998). Les apprentissages
stratégiques à tirer du déluge du Saguenay et de la tempête de verglas: Cinq leçons pour la
prévention et la gestion des sinistres et des crises [Strategic lessons drawn from the Saguenay
flood and the ice storm: five lessons for the prevention and management of disasters and
crises]. Retrieved March 4, 2007, from http://neumann.hec.ca/cme/texte_ssi/publications/
rapp_exp/appr_strat_1998.rtf
Cooper, M.A. (1998). Disability, not death, is the main problem with lightning injury. Paper presented
at the NWA Annual Meeting, October, 1998, Oklahoma City, OK. Retrieved March 24, 2007,
from http://www.uic.edu/labs/lightninginjury/Disability.pdf
Couture, A. (2006). Flash floods in the Bois Francs region, Quebec. Geological Survey of Canada,
Natural Resources Canada. Retrieved February 12, 2008, from http://gsc.nrcan.gc.ca/
floods/boisfrancs/index_e.php
Cruden, D.M., Lu, Z.Y., and Miller, B.G.N. (2000). Major landslides and tributary geomorphology
in the Peace River Lowland, Alberta, Canada. Paper presented at the Canadian Society
of Exploration Geophysicists (CSEG) conference: GeoCanada 2000 – The Millennium
Geoscience Summit, May 29 – June 1, Calgary, AB.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
100
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
101
Chapter 3
David, D., Mellman, T., Mendoza, L., Kulick-Bell, R., Ironson, G., et al. (1996). Psychiatric morbidity
following Hurricane Andrew. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 9(3), 607–612.
Deary, I.J., Willock, J., and McGregor, M. (1997). Stress in farming. Stress Medicine, 13, 131–136.
Doyon, B., and Côté, J-P. (2006). Coastal Processes Contextual Narrative for the Lower St. Lawrence
River. In Options for Managing Lake Ontario and St. Lawrence River Water Levels and
Flows, Annex 2. International Lake Ontario – St. Lawrence River Study Board report to the
International Joint Commission. Retrieved February 11, 2008, from http://losl.org/reports/
finalreport-e.html
Duguid, T. (2002). Report to the Government of Manitoba on public meetings: Flood protection
options for the City of Winnipeg. Retrieved March 3, 2007, from http://www.cecmanitoba.ca/
Reports/PDF/ACF44E4.pdf
Easterling, D.R., Meehl, G.A., Parmesan, C., Changnon, S.A., Karl, T.R., et al. (2000). Climate extremes:
Observations, modeling, and impacts. Science, 289(5487), 2068–2074.
Ebi, K.L., Burton, I., and Menne, B. (2006). Policy implications for climate change-related health
risks. In B. Menne, and K.L. Ebi (Eds.), Climate change and adaptation strategies for
human health (pp. 297–344). Germany: Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt on behalf of the
World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe.
Ehara, A., Takasaki, H., Takeda, Y., Kida, T., and Mizukami, S. (2000). Are high barometric pressure,
low humidity and diurnal change of temperature related to the onset of asthmatic symptoms?
Pediatrics International, 42(3), 272–274.
Eisen, C. (2000). Canadian tornado trends: A Canadian tornado climatology for the period 1950 to 1997.
Waterloo, ON: Wilfred Laurier Press.
Emergency Disasters Database. (2007). EM-DAT The International Disaster Database. Center
for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED). Retrieved March 24, 2007, from
http://www.em-dat.net/
Environment Canada. (1995). Thunder, lightning, and hail storms. Ottawa, ON: Author.
—–. (1999). Environment Canada’s fall seasonal forecast for the Prairies and the North. Retrieved
February 22, 2007, from http://www.mb.ec.gc.ca/info/news/cc00s07.en.html
—–. (2003a). Lightning hot spots in Canada. Retrieved March 24, 2007, from http://www.msc.ec.gc.ca/
education/lightning/index_e.html
—–. (2003b). Lightning hot spots in Canada. About the lightning detection network. Retrieved
March 24, 2007, from http://www.msc.ec.gc.ca/education/lightning/network_e.html
—–. (2003c). Lightning safety tips: For the public. Retrieved March 26, 2007, from
http://www.msc.ec.gc.ca/education/lightning/safetypublic_e.html
—–. (2003d). Natural disasters on the rise. Science and the Environment Bulletin, March/April.
Retrieved February 28, 2007, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/science/sandefeb03/a3_e.html
—–. (2003e). Wind chill hazards. Retrieved March 4, 2007, from http://www.msc.ec.gc.ca/education/
windchill/windchill_threshold_chart_e.cfm
—–. (2004a). Canadian Hurricane Centre (CHC). What is the Canadian Hurricane Centre?
Retrieved March 4, 2007, from http://www.atl.ec.gc.ca/weather/hurricane/chc1.html
—–. (2004b). Flooding events in Canada – Atlantic provinces. Retrieved February 22, 2007,
from http://www.ec.gc.ca/water/en/manage/floodgen/e_atlan.htm
—–. (2005a). Fact sheet – Summer severe weather warnings. Retrieved February 28, 2007,
from http://www.london.ca/EmergMed/Acrobat/summerweatherfactsheet2005english.pdf
—–. (2005b). Fact sheet – Winter weather warnings. Retrieved February 28, 2007, from
http://www.london.ca/EmergMed/Acrobat/winterweatherfactsheet2005english.pdf
—–. (2005c). Flooding events in Canada – Prairie provinces. Retrieved February 22, 2007,
from http://www.ec.gc.ca/Water/en/manage/floodgen/e_prair.htm#buffalo
—–. (2005d). Flooding events in Canada – Quebec. Retrieved February 22, 2007, from
http://www.ec.gc.ca/Water/en/manage/floodgen/e_que.htm
—–. (2005e). High Arctic weather stations – 50 years of operation. Retrieved February 22, 2007,
from http://www.pnr-rpn.ec.gc.ca/info/news/cc00s20.en.html
—–. (2006a). Canadian Hurricane Centre (CHC). Retrieved February 21, 2007, from
http://www.atl.ec.gc.ca/weather/hurricane/index_e.html
—–. (2006b). Hurricane Juan September 2003. The track of Juan through Nova Scotia and Prince
Edward Island. Retrieved February 5, 2007, from http://www.atl.ec.gc.ca/
weather/hurricane/juan/track_e.html
—–. (2007a). Canada participates in global dialogue on climate change. Retrieved March 3, 2007,
from http://www.ec.gc.ca/press/2007/070215_n_e.htm
—–. (2007b). Lightning – Lightning activity. Retrieved March 26, 2007, from http://weatheroffice.ec.gc.ca/
lightning/index_e.html
—–. (2007c). Public weather warnings for Canada. Retrieved March 26, 2007, from
http://weatheroffice.ec.gc.ca/warnings/warnings_e.html
—–. (2007d). Temperature and precipitation in historical perspective. Annual 2006 national
temperature. Retrieved February 22, 2007, from http://www.msc-smc.ec.gc.ca/ccrm/
bulletin/national_e.cfm
—–. (2007e). Food forecasting centres across Canada. Retrieved February 22, 2007, from
http://www.ec.gc.ca/WATER/en/manage/floodgen/e_centre.htm
Environmental Prediction in Canadian Cities (EPiCC). (n.d.). Website. Retrieved March 4, 2007,
from http://www.epicc.uwo.ca/about.asp
Etkin, D.A., Brun, S.F., Chrom, S., and Dogra, P. (2002). A tornado scenario for Barrie, Ontario.
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) Research, Paper Series No. 20.
A contribution to the Canadian Natural Hazards Assessment Project.
Etkin, D., Haque, E., Bellisario, L., and Burton, I. (2004). An assessment of natural hazards and
disasters in Canada. A report for decision-makers and practitioners. A version of this
report was published in the Journal of the International Society for the Prevention and
Mitigation of Natural Hazards, 28(2–3).
Evans, S.G. (2001). The record of disastrous landslides and geotechnical failures in Canada
1840–1999: Implications for risk management. In R. Couture, and S.G. Evans (Eds.),
Canadian workshop on geotechnique and natural hazards: An IDNDR perspective.
Achievements and prospects (pp. 19–26). Held within the framework of the 53rd Canadian
Geotechnical Conference, 15-18 October, 2000, Montreal, QC. Report submitted to
the Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and Emergency Preparedness.
Evans, S.G., Couture, R., and Raymond, E.L. (2002). Catastrophic landslides and related processes
in the southeastern Cordillera. Analysis of impact on lifelines and communities. Report
submitted to the Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and Emergency Preparedness.
Expert Group on Emergency Preparedness and Response (EGEPR). (n.d.). An orientation guide
to the expert group. Draft internal document.
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Network on Emergency Preparedness and Response. (2004).
National framework for health emergency management: Guideline for program development.
Prepared for the Conference of F/P/T Ministers of Health. Author.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
102
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
103
Chapter 3
Federation of Canadian Municipalities. (2003). Multi-discipline: An integrated approach to assessment
and evaluation of municipal road, sewer and water networks. Retrieved August 10, 2007,
from http://sustainablecommunities.fcm.ca/infraguide/
Filmon, G., Leitch, D., and Sproul, J. (2004). Firestorm 2003 provincial review. Retrieved February 12,
2008, from http://www.2003firestorm.gov.bc.ca/firestormreport/FirestormReport.pdf
Fischer, P.J., and Breakey, W.R. (1991). The epidemiology of alcohol, drug, and mental disorders
among homeless persons. American Psychologist, 46(11), 1115-1128.
Flynn, A., McGreevy, C., and Mulkerrin, E.C. (2005). Why do older patients die in a heatwave?
Quarterly Journal of Medicine, 98(11), 227–229.
Foglam, P. (2006). British Columbia forest service protection program strategy. Retrieved March 27, 2007,
from http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/Protect/Planning/
Frumkin, H. (2002). Urban sprawl and public health. Public Health Reports, 117(3), 201–217.
Geological Survey of Canada. (2006). Flood disasters in Canada. Natural Resources Canada.
Retrieved February 21, 2007, from http://gsc.nrcan.gc.ca/floods/database_e.php
Government of Alberta. (2005). Infrastructure and transportation. Geotechnical & erosion control.
Retrieved March 2, 2007, from http://www.infratrans.gov.ab.ca/Technical_Resources/
Geotechnical_&_Erosion_Control/index.htm
Government of British Columbia. (2002). British Columbia wild-land / urban interface fire consequence
management plan (interim 2002). Retrieved March 19, 2007, from http://www.pep.bc.ca/
hazard_plans/Interface2002/Interface_Fire_Plan_2002.pdf
Government of Ontario. (2006). Emergency Management and Civil Protection Act. Ontario Statutes
and Regulations. Toronto. Retrieved November 21, 2006, from http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/
html/regs/english/elaws_regs_040380_e.htm
Government of Quebec. (1999). Pour affronter l’imprévisible : Les enseignements du verglas de 98
[Confronting the unforseeable : Lessons from the ice storm of 98]. Author, Commission
scientifique et technique chargée d’analyser les événements relatifs à la tempête de verglas
survenue du 5 au 9 janvier 1998 ainsi que l’action des divers intervenants, chaired by
Roger Nicolet.
Greenough, G., McGeehin, M.A., Bernard, S.M., Trtanj, J., Riad, J., et al. (2001). The potential
impacts of climate variability and change on health impacts of extreme weather events
in the United States. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(Suppl 2), S191-S198.
Hajat, S., Armstrong, B., Gouveia, N., and Wilkinson, P. (2004). Comparison of mortality displacement
of heat-related deaths in Delhi, Sao Paulo and London. Epidemiology, 15(4), S94.
Hales, S., Edwards, S.J., and Kovats, R.S. (2003). Impacts on health of climate extremes. In A.J.
McMichael, D.H. Campbell-Lendrum, C.F. Corvalan, K.L. Ebi, A. Githeko, et al. (Eds.),
Climate change and human health: Risks and responses (pp. 79–102). Geneva: World
Health Organization.
Hall, M., and Havens, B. (2002). Social isolation and social loneliness. Government of Canada,
National Advisory Council on Aging. Retrieved January 15, 2006, from http://www.naca-ccnta.ca/
writings_gerontology/writ18/writ18_3_e.htm
Harju, T., Keistinen, T., Tuuponen, T., and Kivelä, S.L. (1997). Seasonal variation in childhood asthma
hospitalisations in Finland, 1972–1992. European Journal of Pediatrics, 156(6), 436–439.
Havenith, G. (2005). Temperature regulation, heat balance and climatic stress. In W. Kirch,
B. Menne, and R. Bertollini (Eds.), Extreme weather events and public health responses
(pp. 69–80). Germany: Springer-Verlag on behalf of the World Health Organization
Regional Office for Europe.
Health Canada. (2000). Diabetes among Aboriginal (First Nations, Inuit, and Metis) people in
Canada: The evidence. Ottawa: Author.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
104
Chapter 3
—–. (2003). Canadian Climate Change and Health Vulnerability Assessment, Health and Natural
Hazards Scoping Workshop (4-5 December, 2003) – Summary of Recommendations.
Ottawa. Ottawa: Author, Climate Change and Health Office.
—–. (2005a). Climate change: Preparing for the health impacts. Health Policy Research
Bulletin, 11, 1–4.
—–. (2005b). Your health and a changing climate: Information for health professionals. Ottawa: Author,
Climate Change and Health Office.
—–. (2005c). Overview of emergency preparedness at the community level: A focus on public
health aspects. Report prepared by Global Change Strategies International. Ottawa: Author,
Climate Change and Health Office.
—–. (2006a). Canada’s health care system. Retrieved March 4, 2007, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/
hcs-sss/pubs/care-soins/2005-hcs-sss/del-pres_e.html
—–. (2006b). First Nations and Inuit health: Diseases and health conditions. Retrieved March 4, 2007,
from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fnih-spni/diseases-maladies/index_e.html
—–. (2006c). It’s your health: Mental health – Mental illness. Ottawa: Government of Canada.
—–. (2006d). Literature review – Evaluation strategies in Aboriginal substance abuse programs:
A discussion. Retrieved March 4, 2007, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fnih-spni/pubs/
substan_e.html#ads
—–. (2007a). Be drug wise. Retrieved March 4, 2007, from http://drugwise-droguesoisfute.hc-sc.gc.ca/
facts-faits/index_e.asp
—–. (2007b). First Nations and Inuit health – A statistical profile on the health of First Nations
in Canada. Retrieved March 4, 2007, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fnih-spni/index_e.html
—–. (2007c). Assessment of the capacity of the emergency response and public health systems in
Atlantic coastal communities to cope with and adapt to extreme weather events exacerbated
by a changing climate. CCIAP Proposal A1136–27. Ottawa: Author.
Heidorn, K.C. (2007). Significant weather events. Canada. Retrieved February 22, 2007, from
http://www.islandnet.com/~see/weather/almanac/diaryjul.htm
Heinz Center. (2002). Human links to coastal disasters. Washington, D.C.: The H. John Heinz III
Center for Science, Economics and the Environment.
Henstra, D., Kovacs, P., McBean, G., and Sweeting, R. (2004). Backgrounder paper on disaster
resilient cities. Ottawa: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction for Infrastructure Canada.
Herrington, R., Johnson, B., and Hunter, F. (Eds.). (1997). Responding to climate change in the
Prairies. Volume III of the Canada Country Study: Climate Impacts and Adaptation. Ottawa:
Atmospheric Environment Branch, Environment Canada.
Hugenholtz, C.H., and Lacelle, D. (2004). Spatio-temporal controls on landslide activities in
Champlain Sea clays, Eastern Ontario, Canada. Paper presented at the meeting of
the Association québécoise pour l’étude du Quaternaire (AQQUA), and the Canadian
Geomorphology Research Group (CGRG), 14-15 May, Université Laval, Québec.
Hutton, D. (2005). Psychosocial aspects of climate change in Canada: A review of current literature
and research recommendations. Research report prepared for the Climate Change and
Health Office, Health Canada. Ottawa: Public Health Agency of Canada, Centre for
Emergency Preparedness and Response.
Hwang, S.W. (2001). Homelessness and health. Canadian Medical Association Journal,
164(2), 229–233.
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC). (2006). Aboriginal and Northern Community Action
Program (ANCAP). Impacts and Adaptation Funding: Regions North of 60° and Regions
South of 60°. Retrieved March 4, 2007, from http://www.ainc-inac.gc.ca/clc/cp/cp2_e.html
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
105
Chapter 3
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR). (2003). Workshop summary: Natural disaster
health research network. Summary of workshop – Dealing with disasters: Impacts on
human health, September 27-28, 2002.
—–. (2007). Striking back: An assessment of lightning-related fatality and injury risk in Canada.
Retrieved March 24, 2007, from http://www.iclr.org/programs/friday_forum/2007/mills.htm
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2007a). Climate change 2007: Impacts,
adaptation and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani,
J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, and C.E. Hanson (Eds.) Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
—–. (2007b). Summary for policymakers. In M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der
Linden, and C.E. Hanson (Eds.), Climate change 2007: Climate change impacts, adaptation
and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change Fourth Assessment Report (pp. 7–22). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007c). Summary for policymakers. In S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,
et al. (Eds.), Climate change 2007: The physical science basis. Working Group I contribution
to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report (pp. 1–18).
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007d). Technical Summary. In S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,
et al. (Eds.), Climate change 2007: The physical science basis. Working Group I contribution
to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report (pp. 19–91).
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
International Association of Electrical Inspectors (IAEI). (2000). Canadian code – Lightning &
lightning protection. Retrieved March 25, 2007, from http://www.iaei.org/subscriber/
magazine/00_c/canadian_code.htm
Jedras, J. (2003). Satellite images point relief teams to disaster sites. Retrieved March 25, 2007,
from http://www.itbusiness.ca/index.asp?theaction=62&sid=53010
Jermini, M.F.G. (2002). Foodborne diseases. In G. Tamburlini, O.v. Ehrenstein, and R. Bertollini (Eds.),
Children’s health and environment: A review of evidence (pp. 121–129). Environmental
issue report no. 29. Copenhagen: European Environmental Agency (EAA) and WHO
Regional Office for Europe.
Jones, B. (2003). Canadian disasters – An historical survey. In D. Etkin, E. Haque, L. Bellisario,
and I. Burton (Eds.), Natural hazards and disasters in Canada. Retrieved March 25, 2007,
from http://www.ott.igs.net/jonesb/DisasterPaper/disasterpaper.html
King, M.D. (2007). Earth observatory: Grassland. Retrieved February 28, 2007, from
http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Laboratory/Biome/biograssland.html
Klamath Resource Information System (KRIS). (2007). Modeling shallow landslides. Retrieved
March 1, 2007, from http://www.krisweb.com/watershd/slope.htm
Klinenberg, E. (2002). Heat wave: A social autopsy of disaster in Chicago. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Koppe, C., Kovats, S., Jendritzky, G., and Menne, B. (2004). Heat-waves: Risks and responses.
Health and Global Environmental Change Series No. 2. Copenhagen: World Health
Organization.
Kosatsky, T. (2005). The 2003 European Heat Waves. Eurosurveillance, 10(7–9), 148–149.
Koutsavlis, A.T., and Kosatsky, T. (2003). Environmental-temperature injury in a Canadian
Metropolis. Journal of Environmental Health, 66(5), 40–45.
Kunkel, K.E., Pielke, R.A., and Changnon, S. (1999). Temporal fluctuations in weather and
climate extremes that cause economic and human health impacts: a review. Bulletin
of the American Meteorological Society, 80(6), 1077–1098.
Lajoie, P.G. (1974). Les coulées d’argile et la formation des talus et des basses terrasses de l’ancien
et de l’actuel cours de l’Outaouais et du Saint Laurent [Clay flows and the formation
of bluffs and terraces of the former and current Ottawa and St. Lawrence river courses].
Retrieved February 13, 2008, from www.oaq.qc.ca/Les_coulees_argile.pdf
Langford, L., Wittrock, V., Johnston, M., Wheaton, E., Irvine, J., et al. (2006). Relationships of forest,
climate, wildfires and respiratory ailments in northern Saskatchewan. Limited report for
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Program, Natural Resources Canada, Agreement
A573. Saskatoon: Saskatchewan Research Council.
Lecomte, E., Pang, A., and Russell, J. (1998). Ice Storm ‘98. Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR)
Research Paper Series, No. 1. Toronto: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.
Lo, C.P., and Quattrochi, D.A. (2003). Land-use and land-cover change, urban heat island phenomenon,
and health implications: A remote sensing approach. Photogrammetric Engineering and
Remote Sensing, 69(9), 1053–1063.
Locat, J., Gagnon, C., and Pelletier, E. (1998). Comptes rendus du symposium sur le déluge du
Saguenay. Québec City, Québec [Proceedings from the symposium on the Saguenay flood.
Québec City, Quebec]. Retrieved March 4, 2007, from http://www.saguenay.ggl.ulaval.ca/
saguenay/publi/98sagsymfrancais.pdf
Longstreth J. (1999). Public health consequences of global climate change in the United
States: Some regions may suffer disproportionately. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 107(Suppl 1), S169-S179.
Lurie, Z. (2004, April 30). How B.C. was built to burn. The Tyee. Retrieved August 18, 2006,
from http://thetyee.ca/News/2004/04/30/How_BC_Was_Built_to_Burn/
Lynch, T. (2004). BC 2003 forest fires: A test of quality management in health services delivery.
Prepared for the Ministry of Health Planning, Victoria, B. C., and the Interior Health
Authority, Kelowna, B.C., by Info-Lynk Consulting Services Inc., Toronto and Vancouver.
Mackay, B. (2003, August 28). Massive BC fire also affecting resident’s mental, physical health.
Canadian Medical Association Journal News. Retrieved September 12, 2006, from
http://www.cmaj.ca/news/28_08_03.shtml
Makie, T., Harada, M., Kinukawa, N., Toyoshiba, H., Yamanaka, T., et al. (2002). Association
of meteorological and day-of-the-week factors with emergency hospital admissions
in Fukuoka, Japan. International Journal of Biometeorology, 46(1), 38–41.
Malmberg, A., Hawton, K., and Simkin, S. (1997). A study of suicide in farmers in England and
Wales. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 43(1), 107–111.
Marsh, P.T., Brooks, H., and Karoly, D.J. (2007). Assessment of the severe weather environment in
North America simulated by global climate models. Paper presented at the 19th Conference
on Climate Change and Climate Variability, January 2007. Retrieved February 26, 2007,
from http://ams.confex.com/ams/87ANNUAL/techprogram/paper_119536.htm
Mathieu-Nolf, M. (2002). Poisons in the air: A cause of chronic disease in children. Clinical
Toxicology, 40(4), 483–491.
McBean, G., and Henstra, D. (2003). Climate change, natural hazards and cities. Institute for
Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) Research Paper Series, No. 31. Toronto: Institute
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.
McDermott, B.M., Lee, E.M., Judd, M., and Gibbon, P. (2005). Posttraumatic stress disorder
and general psychopathy in children and adolescents following a wildfire disaster.
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 50(3), 137–143.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
106
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
107
Chapter 3
McGeehin, M.A., and Mirabelli, M. (2001). The potential impacts of climate variability and
change on temperature-related morbidity and mortality in the United States. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 109(Suppl 2), S185-S189.
McKeown, D. (2006). Hot weather response plan – Update. City of Toronto Staff Report.
Retrieved February 25, 2007, from http://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/2006/agendas/
committees/hl/hl060227/it013.pdf
McLaren, S. (2007). Suitability mapping of avalanche trigger sites on the north shore mountains,
Vancouver using a digital elevation model and GIS. Retrieved February 22, 2007,
from http://www.sfu.ca/unigis/shirleymclaren.html
McMichael, A.J. (2003). Global climate change and health: An old story writ large. In A.J. McMichael,
D.H. Campbell-Lendrum, C.F. Corvalan, K.L. Ebi, A. Githeko, et al. (Eds.), Climate change
and human health: Risks and responses (pp. 1–17). Geneva: World Health Organization.
McMichael, A.J., Haines, A., Sloof, R., and Kovats, S. (Eds.). (1996). Climate change and human
health. An assessment prepared by a task group on behalf of the World Health Organization,
the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme.
Redhill, UK: Horley Studios.
McMurray, L., and Steiner, W. (2000). Natural disasters and service delivery to individuals with
severe mental illness—Ice storm 1998. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 45(4), 383–385.
Menne, B., Pond, K., Noji, E.K., and Bertolini, R. (1999). Floods and public health consequences,
prevention and control measures. United Nations discussion paper (MP.WAT/SEM.2/1999/22).
Rome: WHO European Centre for Environment and Health.
Miles and Associates Ltd. (2001). Effects of climate change on the frequency of slope instabilities
in the Georgia Basin, BC – Phase 1. Canadian Climate Change Action Fund Project Number 160.
Retrieved March 8, 2007, from http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/projdb/pdf/72_e.pdf
Mokdad, A.H., Mensah, G.A., Posner, S.F., Reed, E., Simoes, E.J., et al. (2005). When chronic
conditions become acute: Prevention and control of chronic diseases and adverse health
outcomes during natural disasters. Preventing Chronic Disease, 2(special issue). Retrieved
February 13, 2008, from http://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2005/nov/05_0201.htm
National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA). (2004). The NACA position on Alzheimer Disease
and related dementias. Ottawa: Author.
National Health Assessment Group (NHAG). (2001). Health sector contribution to the national
assessment on the potential consequences of climate variability and change for the United
States. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University: Bloomberg School of Public Health.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). (2005). National weather service:
Site map. Retrieved February 21, 2007, from http://www.nws.noaa.gov./sitemap.php
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). (2000). Sensitivities to climate change in Canada. Retrieved
February 21, 2007, from http://sts.gsc.nrcan/gc.ca/adaptation/main.htm
—–. (2004a). Climate change impacts and adaptation: A Canadian perspective. Retrieved
February 21, 2007, from http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/perspective/index_e.php
—–. (2004b). Forest fire facts and questions. General facts about forest fires in Canada. Retrieved
March 27, 2005, from http://fire.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/facts_e.php
—–. (2004c). The state of Canada’s forests, 2003–2004. Retrieved August 18, 2006, from
http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/sof/sof04/brief_e.html
—–. (2005a). Geomorphic effects and impacts from July 1996 severe flooding in the Saguenay
area, Quebec. Retrieved August 18, 2006, from http://gsc.nrcan.gc.ca/floods/
saguenay1996/index_e.php
—–. (2005b). Geoscape Canada. A map of Canada’s earth materials. Earth materials – Ice Age
sediment. Retrieved March 8, 2007, from http://geoscape.nrcan.gc.ca/canada/icesed_e.php
—–. (2006a). Canada wildland fire information system. Retrieved February 21, 2007, from
http://cwfis.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/en/index_e.php
—–. (2006b). Geoscape Calgary. Slope stability. Retrieved February 21, 2007, from
http://geoscape.nrcan.gc.ca/calgary/topics/slope_e.php
—–. (2006c). Geoscape southern Saskatchewan. Geoscience for Prairie communities. Landslides.
Retrieved February 22, 2007, from http://geoscape.nrcan.gc.ca/sask/landslides_e.php
—–. (2007). Landslides. North Vancouver landslide: January 19, 2005. Retrieved February 22, 2007,
from http://gsc.nrcan.gc.ca/landslides/nvancouver_e.php
Nkemdirim, L.C. (2007). Chinook. The Canadian Encyclopedia. Retrieved February 22, 2007,
from http://www.canadianencyclopedia.ca
Oke, T.R. (1997). Urban climates and global change. In A. Perry, and R. Thompson (Eds.), Applied
climatology: Principles and practices (pp. 273–287). London: Routledge.
O’Neill, D. (1997). Report on early warning for hydrometeorological hazards, including
drought. Geneva: International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR) Early
Warning Programme.
Palecki, M.A., Changnon, S.A., and Kunkel, K.E. (2001). The nature and impacts of the July 1999
heat wave in the Midwestern United States: Learning from the lessons of 1995. Bulletin
of the American Meteorological Society, 82(7), 1353–1367.
Parker, G. (1977). Cyclone Tracy and Darwin evacuees: On the restoration of the species. The
British Journal of Psychiatry, 130, 548–555.
Paszowski, D. (2007). Heat Management in Canadian Communities. Report prepared for
Health Canada.
Plunkett, S.W., Henry, C.S., and Knaub, P.K. (1999). Family stressor events, family coping, and
adolescent adaptation in farm and ranch families. Adolescence, 34(133), 149–171.
Pond, K. (2002). Waterborne gastrointestinal diseases. In G. Tamburlini, O.v. Ehrenstein, and
R. Bertollini (Eds.), Children’s health and environment: A review of evidence. Environmental
Issues Report No. 29. Copenhagen: European Environmental Agency (EAA).
Powell, S. (2006). Draft background paper. Prepared for the Public Health Agency of Canada
Invitational Meeting on Emergency Preparedness and Seniors; Feb 26-28, 2006. Toronto:
Division of Aging and Seniors, Public Health Agency of Canada.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2004). Population health: What determines health?
Retrieved March 15, 2007, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/ph-sp/phdd/determinants/
determinants.html#income
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC). (2005a). Keeping Canadians
safe. Canadian disaster database. Retrieved February 21, 2007, from http://
www.psepc-sppcc.gc.ca/res/em/cdd/index-en.asp
—–. (2005b). Keeping Canadians safe. Hail. Retrieved February 21, 2007, from http://
www.psepc-sppcc.gc.ca/res/em/nh/ha/index-en.asp
—–. (2005c). Keeping Canadians safe. Landslides and avalanches. Retrieved February 21, 2007,
from http://www.psepc-sppcc.gc.ca/res/em/nh/lsa/index-en.asp
—–. (2007). Keeping Canadians safe. An emergency management framework for Canada. Retrieved
March 15, 2007, from http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/prg/em/emfrmwrk-en.asp#1
Public Safety Canada (PSC) (2008). Canada’s National Disaster Mitigation Strategy. Ottawa: Author.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
108
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
109
Chapter 3
Ranhoff, A.H. (2000). Accidental hypothermia in the elderly. International Journal of Circumpolar
Health, 59(3–4), 255–259.
Rego, L., and Subbiah, A.R. (2005). “Actionable” early warning: One of the key ingredients
of Preparedness Systems. Presentation at World Conference on Disaster Reduction,
18-22 January 2005, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. Cluster 2: Plenary Session.
Resources Information Standards Committee (RISC). (1997). Terrain stability mapping in British
Columbia. Victoria, BC: Government of British Columbia.
Rittmaster, R., Adamowicz, W.L., Amiro, B., and Pelletier, R.T. (2006). Economic analysis of
health effects from forest fires. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 36(4), 868–877.
Robert, B., Forget, S., and Rouselle, J. (2003). The effectiveness of flood damage reduction measures
in the Montreal region. Natural Hazards, 28, 367–385.
Roth, M., Oke, T.R., and Emery, W.J. (1989). Satellite-derived urban heat islands from three
coastal cities and the utilization of such data in urban climatology. International Journal
of Remote Sensing, 10(11), 1699–1720.
Rouleau, K., Guimond, A., and Michaud, M. (2006). Adapter les infrastructures du ministère des
transports du Québec aux changements climatiques: Pergélisol et érosion cotière [Adapting
the infrastructure of the Quebec Ministry of Transportation to climate change : Permafrost
and coastal erosion]. Paper presented at the Session technique sur la mobilité durable,
41e Congrès annuel de l’association québécoise du transport et des routes, Québec, QC.
Roy, E., Rouselle, J., and LaCroix, J. (2003). Flood Damage Reduction Program (FDRP) in Québec:
Case study of the Chaudiére River. Natural Hazards, 28, 387–405.
Sapkota, A., Symons, J.M., Kleissl, J., Wang, L., Parlange, M.B., et al. (2005). Impact of the 2002
Canadian forest fires on particulate matter air quality in Baltimore City. Environmental
Science and Technology, 39(1), 24–32.
Scala, J.R., Hain, C., MacKenzie, W.M. Jr., and Bachmeier, S. (2002). Meteorological conditions
associated with the rapid transport of Canadian wildfire products into the northeast
during 5-8 July 2002. Paper presented at the 2002 International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium of the American Meteorological Society, Boston, MA. Retrieved
February 21, 2007, from http://ams.confex.com/ams/pdfpapers/68737.pdf
Scheler, K., Carter, P., and Hood, E. (2004). The relationship between synoptic weather patterns
and snowpack stability in a high-latitude maritime snow climate. Paper presented at
the 72nd annual Western Snow Conference, 2004. Retrieved February 27, 2007, from
http://www.avalanche.org/~seaac/PDFs/WSC_2004%20paper.pdf
Schneider, S.H. (2004). Abrupt non-linear climate change, irreversibility and surprise. Global
Environmental Change, 14, 245–258.
Standing Senate Committee on National Security and Defence. (2004). National Emergencies:
Canada’s Fragile Front Lines, An Upgrade Strategy, Volume 1. Retrieved February 13, 2008,
from http://www.parl.gc.ca/37/3/parlbus/commbus/senate/Com-e/defe-e/rep-e/rep03vol1-e.htm
Shea, K.M. (2003). Global environmental change and children’s health: Understanding the challenges
and finding solutions. Journal of Pediatrics, 143, 149–154.
Shrubsole, D. (1999). Natural disasters and public health issues: A review of the literature with
a focus on the recovery period. Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) Research
Paper Series – No. 4. Toronto: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.
Simkim, S., Hawton, K., Fagg, J., and Malmberg, A. (1998). Stress in farmers: A survey of farmers
in England and Wales. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 55, 729–734.
Slovic, P. (Ed.). (2000). The perception of risk. London, U.K.: Earthscan Publications.
Smit, B., and Pilifosova, O. (2003). From adaptation to adaptive capacity and vulnerability reduction.
In J. Smith, R.T.J. Klein, and S. Huq (Eds.), Climate change, adaptive capacity and
development (pp. 9–28). London: Imperial College Press.
Smoyer, K.E., Rainham, D.G.C., and Hewko, J.N. (2000). Heat-stress-related mortality in five cities
in southern Ontario: 1980–1996. International Journal of Biometeorology, 44(4), 190–197.
Smoyer-Tomic, K.E., Klaver, J.D.A., Soskolne, C.L., and Spady, D. (2004). Health consequences
of drought on the Canadian prairies. EcoHealth, 1(Suppl. 2), 144–154.
Smoyer-Tomic, K.E., Kuhn, R., and Hudson, A. (2003). Heat wave hazards: An overview of heat
wave impacts in Canada. Natural Hazards, 28(2–3), 465–486.
Smoyer-Tomic, K.E., and Rainham, D. (2001). Beating the heat: Development and evaluation of a Canadian
hot weather health-response plan. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(12), 1241–1248.
Solomon, G.M., Hjelmroos-Koski, M., Rotkin-Ellman, M., and Hammond, S.K. (2006). Airborne
mold and endotoxin concentrations in New Orleans, Louisiana, after flooding, October –
November 2005. Environmental Health Perspectives, 114(9), 1381–1386.
Sookram, S., Borkent, H., Powell, G., Hogarth, W.D., and Shepard, L. (2000). Tornado at Pine Lake,
Alberta – July 14, 2000: Assessment of the emergency medicine response to a disaster.
Canadian Journal of Emergency Medicine, 3(1), 34–37.
Soskolne, C.L., Smoyer-Tomic, K.E., Spady, D.W., McDonald, K., Rothe, J.P., et al. (2004).
Climate change, extreme weather events, and health effects in Alberta. Health Canada
Health Policy Research Program (HPRP) Project No. 6795-15-2001/4400013.
Statistics Canada. (2003). 2001 Census: Analysis series. Aboriginal peoples of Canada: A demographic
profile. Ottawa: Minister of Industry.
—–. (2006). Population by sex and age group. CANSIM table 051-0001. Retrieved March 15, 2007,
from http://www40.statcan.ca/l01/cst01/demo10a.htm
Tamburlini, G. (2002). Children’s special vulnerability to environmental health hazards: An overview.
In G. Tamburlini, O.v. Ehrenstein, and R. Bertollini (Eds.), Children’s health and environment:
A review of evidence (p. 18). Environmental Issues Report No. 29. Copenhagen, Denmark:
European Environmental Agency (EAA) and the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional
Office for Europe
Thomas, D., and Mileti, D. (2003). Designing educational opportunities for the hazards manager
of the 21st Century. Workshop Report, October 22–24, 2003, Denver CO. Boulder, CO:
University of Colorado.
Toronto Public Health. (2007). Hot weather response. Heat notification. Retrieved February 25, 2007,
from http://www.toronto.ca/health/heat_notification.htm
Trudeau, R. (1997). Monthly and daily patterns of death. Statistics Canada Health Reports, 9(1), 43–50.
Tudor, C. (1997). EPC electronic disaster database and its characteristics. Project Report 97-1.
Office of the Scientific Advisor, Emergency Preparedness Canada. Retrieved February 22,
2007, from http://dsp-psd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/D83-5-97-1E.pdf
Turcotte, M., and Schellenberg, G. (2007). A portrait of seniors in Canada: 2006. Ottawa: Minister
of Industry, Statistics Canada.
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN/ISDR). (2004). Terminology:
Basic terms of disaster risk reduction. Retrieved August 8, 2007, from http://www.unisdr.org/
eng/library/lib-terminology-eng%20home.htm
—–. (2005a). Four elements of people-centered early warning systems. UN-ISDR/Platform for the
Promotion of Early Warning.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
110
Chapter 3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
111
Chapter 3
—–. (2005b). Progress report: Worldwide survey of early warning systems. A briefing prepared
for the Executive Office of the Secretary-General (EOSG) by the ISDR secretariat.
—–. (2005c). Hyogo Declaration. Extract from the final report of the World Conference on Disaster
Reduction, January 18-22, 2005, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. Retrieved February 12, 2008,
from www.unisdr.org/wcdr/intergover/official-doc/L-docs/Hyogo-declaration-english.pdf
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA). (1995). Algal and microbial communities as
indicators of prairie wetland integrity. Retrieved February 28, 2007, from http://www.epa.gov/
owow/wetlands/wqual/pph2_2.html
Vandentorren, S., and Empereur-Bissonnet, P. (2005). Health impact of the 2003 heat-wave in France.
In W. Kirch, B. Menne, and R. Bertollini (Eds.), Extreme weather events and public health
responses (pp. 81–87). Germany: Springer-Verlag on behalf of the World Health Organization
Regional Office for Europe.
Vescovi, L., Rebetez, M., and Rong, F. (2005). Assessing public health risk due to extremely high
temperature events: Climate and social parameters. Climate Research, 30, 71–78.
Walker, J., Walker, L., and MacLennon, P. (1986). An informal look at farm stress. Psychological
Reports, 59(2), 427–430.
Wheaton, E., Wittrock, V., Kulshreshtha, S., Koshida, G., Grant, C., et al. (2005). Lessons learned from
the Canadian drought years of 2001 and 2002: Synthesis report. Prepared for Agriculture and
Agri-Food Canada. Saskatchewan Research Council Publication No. 11602-46E03. Retrieved
February 28, 2007, from http://www.agr.gc.ca/pfra/drought/info/11602-46E03.pdf
Whiffen, B., Delannoy, P., and Siok, S. (2004). Fog: Impact on road transportation and mitigation options.
Paper presented at the National Highway Visibility Conference. Retrieved March 30, 2007,
from http://www.topslab.wisc.edu/resources/NHVC_presentations/Paul_Delannoy.pdf
World Health Organization (WHO). (1989). Coping with natural disasters: The role of local health
personnel and the community: Working guide. Geneva: Author in collaboration with the
League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
—–. (2002). Floods: Climate change and adaptation strategies for human health. Report on a
WHO meeting, London, U.K. 30 June-2 July, 2002. EUR/02/5036813. Denmark: Author,
Regional Office for Europe.
—–. (2007). Risk reduction and emergency preparedness: WHO six-year strategy for the health
sector and community capacity development. Retrieved February 12, 2008, from
http://www.who.int/hac/techguidance/preparedness/en/index.html
World Meteorological Organization (WMO). (2005). Early warning saves grief and money.
Retrieved March 15, 2007, from http://www.wmo.ch/web/Press/warning.html
Chapter 4
Air Quality, Climate Change 
and Health
Serge Lamy
Véronique Bouchet
Contributors:
Kathleen Buset
Sophie Cousineau
Barry Jessiman
Branka Jovic
Stan Judek
Cheryl Khoury
Tom Kosatsky
Eric Litvak
Radenko Pavlovic
Nedka Pentcheva
Dave Stieb
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
115
CONTENTS
4.1
Introduction ................................................................................................................ 117
4.2
Health Impacts of Air Pollution and Extreme Heat .............................................. 117
4.2.1 Health Impacts of Extreme Heat ...................................................................... 118
4.2.2 Health Impacts of Ground-Level Ozone .......................................................... 119
4.2.3 Health Impacts of Particulate Matter ................................................................ 119
4.2.4 Interactions of Heat and Air Pollution ............................................................ 120
4.2.4.1 Seasonal variations in air pollution .................................................... 121
4.2.4.2 Cross-city comparisons ...................................................................... 122
4.2.4.3 Studies of extreme heat events and their effects 
on air pollution-related population health risk .................................. 123
4.2.4.4 Synoptic air mass studies .................................................................. 124
4.2.4.5 Laboratory and field studies .............................................................. 124
4.2.5 Vulnerable Populations .................................................................................... 125
4.2.5.1 Persons with cardiovascular disease .................................................. 125
4.2.5.2 Seniors ................................................................................................ 125
4.2.5.3 Children .............................................................................................. 126
4.3
Climate Change and Air Pollution .......................................................................... 126
4.3.1 Effect of Climate Change on Particulate Matter and Ozone ............................ 127
4.4
Air Quality Modelling in Canada ............................................................................ 129
4.4.1 AURAMS: Scenarios and Assumptions .......................................................... 129
4.4.2 Modelling Results ............................................................................................ 131
4.4.2.1 Ozone .................................................................................................. 131
4.4.2.2 Fine particulate matter ........................................................................ 135
4.5
Estimation of Human Health Impacts Associated With Changes 
in Ambient Air Quality Due to Climate Change .................................................... 138
4.5.1 Estimated Health Benefits: Incremental Climate Change Scenario ................ 138
4.5.2 Climate Associated Air Quality Impacts in Perspective .................................. 139
4.6
Risk Management and Adaptation .......................................................................... 140
4.6.1 Norms and Trends ............................................................................................ 140
4.6.1.1 Ground-level ozone ............................................................................ 140
4.6.1.2 Fine particulate matter ........................................................................ 141
4.6.1.3 Canadian sources and transboundary pollution ................................ 141
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
116
4.6.2 Air Quality Index Forecasts and Adaptation .................................................... 141
4.6.2.1 The Air Quality Health Index ............................................................ 141
4.6.2.2 Outreach to the public, at-risk populations and health 
professionals ...................................................................................... 142
4.6.2.3 Links to other adaptation programs .................................................. 142
4.7
Discussion and Conclusions ...................................................................................... 143
4.8
Annexes ...................................................................................................................... 144
Annex 1: Literature Search Methodology .................................................................. 144
Annex 2: AURAMS Model ........................................................................................ 144
Annex 3: AQBAT Model ............................................................................................ 147
Annex 4: Detailed AQBAT Results, Valuation Information 
and Concentration Response Functions ...................................................... 151
4.9
References .................................................................................................................. 160
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
117
4.1
INTRODUCTION
This chapter focuses on the potential impact of climate change on air quality and related
health impacts in Canada. The chapter begins by providing a summary of the potential 
adverse health impacts of air pollution with a focus on ground-level ozone (O3) and particulate
matter (PM), and of extreme heat, including heat waves. An examination of potential 
additive or synergistic effects between extreme heat and air pollution was also conducted
because heat may modify the nature of potential air pollution-related health impacts. 
Studies examining seasonal air pollution effects, air pollution effects among cities with 
different climates and different temperatures, as well as studies of population responses 
to extreme heat events are reviewed. (See Annex 1 for more information on the literature
search methodology.) The literature review covered sources to 2006 except for the 
citing of a few authoritative sources that were published subsequent to that (e.g. the 2007
IPCC Assessment).
The chapter also examines how an increase in mean temperature (of 4°C) due to climate change
might impact summer time levels of O3 and PM in Canada. Two scenarios were considered: one
examining the independent effect of increased temperature on air quality and the second examining
the effect of both increased temperature and the potential contribution of changing natural
emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) to the formation of these pollutants. The results
of these two modelling scenarios were then compared with a reference year (2002). Other potential
effects of a warmer climate on anthropogenic emissions, climatology (e.g. humidity, wind) and
natural constituents of the atmosphere affecting air quality, such as pollen and spores, were not
considered.
Lastly, the potential impacts of modelled changes in O3 and PM concentrations on human
health were investigated. Changes in air pollution-related morbidity and mortality were 
estimated according to each scenario and their associated costs were calculated. The chapter
reviews some measures used to manage air pollution-related risks in Canada and concludes 
by offering recommendations for future research efforts.
4.2
HEALTH IMPACTS OF AIR POLLUTION AND EXTREME HEAT
Air pollution exposure, both acute and chronic, is associated with a number of adverse health
impacts which have been evaluated in many formal risk assessments (e.g Working Group 
on Air Quality Objectives and Guidelines (WGAQOG), 1999a, 1999b; World Health
Organization (WHO), 2003; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA), 2005). The
research available to the scientific community which describes these effects is voluminous and
addresses worldwide issues as well as specific Canadian situations and mortality associations
(Burnett et al., 2000; Goldberg et al., 2000; Krewski et al., 2000; Goldberg et al., 2001a, 2001b,
2001c, 2001d; Pope et al., 2002; Burnett and Goldberg, 2003; Vedal et al., 2003; Villeneuve 
et al., 2003; Finkelstein et al., 2004; Jerrett et al., 2004; Pope et al., 2004). Extreme heat and
heat waves have also been implicated as a growing health concern. For example, large numbers
of heat wave-related illnesses and deaths occurred in the U.S. and Europe in the 1990s (Ballester 
et al., 1997; Dematte et al., 1998; Semenza et al., 1999; Keatinge et al., 2000; McGeehin and
Mirabelli, 2001; Curriero et al., 2002; Diaz et al., 2002; Hajat et al., 2002; Naughton et al.,
2002; Koutsavlis and Kosatsky, 2003). In August 2003, the extreme heat wave that struck Europe
was implicated in many thousands of deaths and contributed to public concern about the
potential health impacts related to climate change (Ledrans and Isnard, 2003; Diaz et al., 2004;
Koppe et al., 2004; Kovats et al., 2004; Johnson et al., 2005; Carcaillon et al., 2006).
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
118
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projects a continued rise of atmospheric
greenhouse gases (GHGs) during the next century, resulting in further warming of the climate
(IPCC, 2007a). Climate change has been observed through recent increases in global 
average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice, and the rising global
average sea level (IPCC, 2007a). It is very likely that such warming will result in more frequent
heat waves. It may affect levels of air pollution exposure by changing local and regional weather
conditions and by affecting both natural and anthropogenic sources of air pollutant emissions
(Watson et al., 1998; IPCC, 2007b; U.K. Department for Environment, Food and Rural 
Affairs (DEFRA), 2005). Climate change may also result in changes in patterns of activity
and associated air pollution exposures. The independent effects of heat, ground-level O3
and particulate matter on human health are described below. This is followed by a discussion 
of the potential synergistic health effects of extreme heat and air pollution.
4.2.1
Health Impacts of Extreme Heat
Beyond a narrow comfortable zone (“thermoneutral zone”) in which body heat loss and heat
gain are equal, exposure to the heat or cold can cause illness (morbidity) and eventually death
(mortality). The body regulates environmental heat exchange by controlling the metabolic 
rate in the internal organs, blood flow through the skin, and shivering or perspiration (Rowell,
1983; Dinarello and Gefland, 2001). Normal adaptation to heat stress involves increased cardiac
output and a relaxation of the blood vessels in the skin to increase blood flow from the core to
the surface of the body. The production of sweat cools the body through evaporation (Bouchama
and Knochel, 2002), although it is less efficient under humid conditions.
Certain people may be unable to increase cardiac and sweat output sufficiently which may
lead to increases in body temperature and potential illness or death. This includes people such as
seniors, post-menopausal women, or those taking certain medications including anticholinergics,
diuretics, beta-blockers, estrogen replacement drugs and some antipsychotic drugs (Lee-Chiong
Jr. and Stitt, 1995; Freedman and Krell, 1999; Brooks-Asplund et al., 2000; Speizer, 2001;
Gauthier et al., 2005). Infants and young children are also particularly susceptible to heat-related
illnesses due to an immature thermoregulatory system (Yeo, 2004). Excessive exertion among
healthy adults can also result in dehydration, heat exhaustion, kidney failure, liver damage, heat
stroke or death (Hart et al., 1980; Hughson et al., 1980; Barrow and Clark, 1998; Dematte et al.,
1998; Bouchama and Knochel, 2002).
Over the previous two decades, it has been estimated in the U.S. that extreme heat episodes
contributed to the death of several hundred people (Confalonieri et al., 2007). Many such
deaths occurred in susceptible subpopulations such as seniors with pre-existing cardiovascular,
cerebrovascular or respiratory conditions. The precise number of persons with heat-related 
illnesses seeking medical treatment in a given year in Canada or the U.S. is unknown because
no reliable statistics are available. Only a small number of deaths are certified as due to heat
stroke in Canada (Koutsavlis and Kosatsky, 2003).
Over a span of several weeks, people can gradually become acclimatized to heat stress by reducing
their basal metabolic rate, increasing their capacity to perspire and increasing skin blood flow
(Koppe et al., 2004). Epidemiological studies have revealed an approximate U- or J-shaped
relationship between temperature and mortality (Ballester et al., 1997; Keatinge et al., 2000; Koppe
et al., 2004). For example, the upward slope of the “J” in Figure 4.1 begins at lower temperatures
and is steeper for northerly cities in the U.S. and Europe than for cities farther south (Keatinge
et al., 2000; Curriero et al., 2002). In populations with cooler climates, or during heat waves
occurring early in the season, people are particularly vulnerable as they are unacclimatized to heat
stress. Under such conditions, the upward slope of the mortality response curve begins at lower
temperatures and is steeper (Keatinge et al., 2000; Curriero et al., 2002). Adaptive measures such as
heat health warning systems, air conditioned living and work spaces, or access to cooling centres
by people at risk of heat stress have been shown to reduce the extent of related health impacts
(Sheridan and Kalkstein, 2004; U.K. Met Office, 2006; Vittiglio, 2006; Confalonieri et al., 2007).
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
119
Figure 4.1 Dose-response curve for mortality and temperature in 11 cities of the Eastern
United States1
Note: -20°F, 0°F, 20°F, 40°F, 60°F and 80°F are -28°C, -18°C, -6°C, 4°C, 
16°C and 26°C, respectively.
Source: Curriero et al., 2002.
4.2.2
Health Impacts of Ground-Level Ozone
Ground-level ozone is a pollutant which is formed in the atmosphere primarily from nitrogen
oxides and volatile organic compounds. While there are natural sources of both these ozone
“precursors”, human activities produce huge quantities of both–especially those activities related
to the combustion of fossil fuels. Exposure to O3 may result in various pulmonary and 
cardiovascular effects in healthy individuals but is especially problematic for those with existing
cardiovascular and pulmonary disease (WGAQOG, 1999a, 1999b; U.S. EPA, 2006a).
Considering that some 45% of all deaths in Canada result from cardiopulmonary disease, it
would appear that the potentially susceptible group is very large. The main health impacts of 
O3 include acute and chronic damage to the respiratory system, with increased airway reactivity,
airway permeability, airway inflammation, reduction in lung function and increased respiratory
symptoms. The acute reactions are of particular concern in asthmatics, including children, and
others with chronic airway disease. These effects appear to be worsened as the duration of
exposure to O3 increases (Hyde et al., 1992; Krzyzanowski et al., 1992; Künzli et al., 1997;
Lippmann, 2000b). Short-term exposure to O3 has also been associated in some studies with 
various cardiovascular effects including acute myocardial infarction (Ruidavets et al., 2005),
arrhythmias (Dockery et al., 2005) and heart rate variability (Park et al., 2005). These results
provide evidence concerning possible mechanisms behind the association detected by 
epidemiological studies between O3 and premature mortality (U.S. EPA, 2006a).
4.2.3
Health Impacts of Particulate Matter
Airborne PM varies in composition and concentration and is composed of both organic and
inorganic constituents. Particles are usually categorized as coarse (PM10–2.5), fine (PM2.5)
and most recently, ultrafine (PM0.1), with aerodynamic diameters of 10 µm (micrometres) to
2.5 µm, <2.5 µm and <0.1 µm, respectively. Although regional differences are significant, 
Chapter 4
1
The J-shaped curves depicted in Figure 4.1 were obtained using a software program to handle a statistical method known 
as a “generalized additive model”. Following publication of the figure in Curriero et al., 2002, errors in the software came 
to light; re-analysis of the data in question accounting for these errors led to slightly altered but still J-shaped curves, 
with a slightly greater range of temperatures at which the relative risk of mortality remained flat (Curriero et al., 2003).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
120
in general, about half of PM2.5 is directly emitted into the atmosphere whereas the other half 
is secondarily formed when precursor gases (sulphur dioxide [SO2], nitrogen oxides [NOx],
VOCs and ammonia [NH3]) react or condense to form particles (Environment Canada, 2003a).
Most PM10–2.5 is directly emitted into the atmosphere from the soil, wildfires, combustion 
of fossil fuels, construction activities, and road and sea salt (Environment Canada, 2003a).
While PM10–2.5 can deposit widely
within the lung, it is more likely 
to deposit in the upper portions,
while both PM2.5 and PM0.1
penetrate deep into the lungs and
elicit a range of physiological
responses and even enter into 
the bloodstream (Delfino et al.,
2005; Penn et al., 2005; Urch 
et al., 2005; Lipsett et al., 2006).
Epidemiological, field, controlled
human exposure and toxicology
studies, which have been extensively
reviewed in national risk assessments
(Working Group on Air Quality
Objectives and Guidelines, 1999a, 1999b; U.S. EPA, 2004) have contributed to the evidence 
of PM-associated health impacts. PM has been associated with hospitalizations and increased
respiratory and cardiovascular mortality (Burnett et al., 1999; Burnett and Goldberg, 2003;
Goldberg et al., 2006). It has also been associated with asthma exacerbation, decreased lung
function, inflammation and changes in heart rate variability (McConnell et al., 1999; Gong et al.,
2003c; Ebelt et al., 2005). These effects have been observed at the range of concentrations
found in Canadian urban entres. Particular subpopulations, including children, seniors and
people with pre-existing medical conditions are more vulnerable to the health impacts of PM.
Both the short-term (from days to a few weeks) and long-term (multi-year) health impacts of
exposure to PM depend on the composition of the particles (which may vary with season) and
the exposed population (Goldberg et al., 2000, 2001b; Gordon, 2003; Mueller-Anneling et al.,
2004; Becker et al., 2005; Crighton et al., 2005; Delfino et al., 2005; Li et al., 2005; Goldberg
et al., 2006; Huang and Ghio, 2006; Kreyling et al., 2006; Ostro et al., 2006; Ren et al., 2006),
though this has not been consistently found.
4.2.4
Interactions of Heat and Air Pollution
Most of the underlying mechanisms that have been investigated to explain the biological 
effects of heat or air pollutants on health appear to belong to distinct biological 
pathways. However, there is clearly an overlap in the body’s physiological response to 
the activation of these pathways; this suggests that synergistic effects are quite plausible. 
For example, reduced pulmonary function due to acute O3 exposure, or reduced heart 
rate variability due to PM exposure, will likely impair an individual’s capacity to maintain 
adequate tissue oxygenation under the increased cardiovascular load associated with 
heat stress.
Generally, any limitation in respiratory function due to pollution could interfere 
with cardiovascular thermoregulatory mechanisms and reduce the maximum heat load 
that an individual could sustain before adverse effects appeared. As another example, 
both heat stress and PM can lead to blood coagulation anomalies. These could precipitate 
an event such as a myocardial infarction in a susceptible individual who is in a state 
of increased cardiovascular work due to the heat. Gordon (2003) has also suggested that 
the physiological stress caused by marked changes in ambient temperature can alter the 
physiological response to toxic agents.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
121
Despite a theoretical basis for synergistic effects of heat and air pollution, the specific 
potential individual and population health impacts still need to be clarified; few studies have
explicitly investigated this question. There are also other potential mechanisms by which 
heat could influence the effect of air pollution on health. For example, higher average 
temperatures are in fact associated with greater exposure to air pollution because population
activity patterns change; people spend more time outside and tend to leave their windows
open more often. However, it remains difficult to draw any firm conclusions based solely 
on this evidence. Further studies with more refined air pollution exposure measurements 
and assessments of other modulating factors are required.
4.2.4.1 Seasonal variations in air pollution
Differences in the health impacts of air pollution have been observed in studies examining 
the association between air pollution and health during different seasons. During the 
summer, intense sunlight and elevated temperatures often contribute to increased formation 
of ground-level O3 (a component of photochemical smog), resulting in combined exposures 
to heat, and high levels of O3 as well as PM. Differences in the response to PM10—which 
does not follow predictable variations throughout the year—are more suggestive of an 
interaction with heat, provided that the effect of O3 has been controlled for. O3 levels are 
positively correlated with PM10 levels during the summer months (Ito et al., 2005) and negatively
correlated during the winter months. As with PM10, the observed season- and temperature-
dependent effects of nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulphur dioxide (SO2) and carbon monoxide (CO)
on mortality, physician consultations and hospital admissions (Michelozzi et al., 1998; 
Hajat et al., 1999; Chang et al., 2005), suggest the existence of underlying interactions.
Using a case crossover design to look at hospital admissions for cardiovascular diseases in
Taipei between 1997 and 2001, Chang et al. (2005) performed separate analyses within two
temperature strata: cool days (mean temperature <20°C) and warm days (>20°C). They 
found that NO2, CO and O3 were significantly associated with increases in hospitalizations 
on warm days (after adjusting within the two strata for the effects of potential confounding 
factors such as temperature, humidity and other pollutants). On cool days, only PM10 had 
a statistically significant effect after adjusting for the effects of other air pollutants.
Goldberg et al. (2001d) found positive correlations between O3 and non-accidental deaths 
in Montreal during the summer, whereas during the winter, the correlations were negative. 
In a recent review of 10 time-series studies examining the association between O3 and 
mortality (Ito et al., 2005), nine studies found higher estimates of mortality risk with 
increasing O3 levels during the warm months when O3 levels were higher (winter risk due 
to O3 exposure was only higher in one city in Australia). Adjusting for the effects of PM10
did not markedly affect the results.
In a meta-analysis of studies examining the short-term effects of air pollution in eight 
Italian cities, Biggeri et al. (2005) found a significant difference in the effect of PM10 on 
all-cause mortality by season, with a 0.54% increase in mortality observed in the cold 
season and a 2.53% increase observed in the warm season (both increases are for a 
10 µg/L increase in PM10 concentration). The variability of the size of the effect among 
cities was also greater during the warm season. O3 and other pollutants were not 
considered here.
In a time-series analysis of the effects of major air pollutants, Michelozzi et al. (1998) found 
that total mortality in Rome from 1992 to 1995 was positively associated with PM10 (as well 
as NO2), with a 0.4% increase in mortality observed with each increase of 10 µg/m3 PM,
increasing to 1.0% in the summer months. Sunyer et al. (1996) conducted a similar study 
in Barcelona and found that daily variations in mortality were related to daily variations in 
air pollutants for the period 1985 to 1991. Adjusted for temperature and other factors, black
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
122
smoke (black particles with a diameter of less than 4.5 µm) and SO2 were positively related 
to total mortality, seniors’ mortality, and cardiovascular mortality. The association between SO2
and respiratory mortality in seniors, however, was significant only during the summer months.
NO2 and O3 were positively related with mortality in seniors and cardiovascular mortality during
the summer, but again not during the winter months.
In a study that examined physician consultations for asthma in London (Hajat et al., 1999), 
the effect of various air pollutants was compared between seasons for different age groups.
Statistically significant seasonal differences were observed for NO2 in children, and for 
black smoke and PM10 in seniors, with larger effects observed during the summer months.
Among adults, increasing O3 levels during the summer were associated with an increase 
in medical consultations.
Anderson et al. (1996) found a year-round increase in respiratory mortality due to O3 in
London (U.K.), whereas all-cause and cardiovascular mortality were affected only during 
the warm season. This suggests that persons suffering from cardiovascular diseases 
may be more susceptible to a combination of O3 and heat compared with those suffering 
from respiratory diseases, who appear to be equally susceptible to O3 year-round. Black 
smoke was also positively associated with all-cause mortality during both seasons, but 
more so during the summer months. The results were similar when adjusting for the 
effects of PM10.
4.2.4.2 Cross-city comparisons
Studies examining the effects of air pollution on health between warmer and cooler cities 
have also tended to suggest greater impacts on health in warmer climates. However, the
results of such studies must be viewed cautiously because of the existence of potential 
confounding effects of other factors.
Barnett et al. (2005) examined the relationship between air pollution and child hospital 
admissions for respiratory diseases in five cities in Australia and New Zealand. They found
that increases in respiratory disease admissions associated with PM2.5 and PM10 in the 
1- to 4-year-old age group occurred mostly during the warm season, whereas an association
with NO2 in the older children (aged 5 to 14 years), although greater during the warm 
season, was present during both warm and cool seasons. Cities with higher average temperatures
were also found to have greater increases in hospital respiratory disease admissions in 
the 1- to 4-year-old age group associated with 1-hour NO2 concentrations.
Diaz et al. (2004) investigated the combined effects of heat and air pollution on child 
mortality in Madrid, Spain, between 1986 and 1997. High temperature alone was not found 
to be associated with higher mortality. However, air pollutants such as total suspended 
particles and NOx had a strong seasonal effect on mortality. During the summer months, the 
relative risk of daily mortality from elevated total suspended particles was 1.53 in infants 
aged 1 to 5 years compared with 1.25 during the winter months. NOx had a significant 
effect only in the summer months in the 0- to 1-year-old age group, with a relative risk 
of 1.07 reported.
Aga et al. (2003) also found that temperature partly explained differences observed in air 
pollution-related mortality among seniors in 28 cities examined in the Air Pollution and
Health: A European Approach 2 (APHEA2) study. In cooler cities with a 9°C daily average
temperature (25th percentile), a 10 µg/m3 increase in PM10 caused an increase in mortality 
in seniors of only 0.44%. In contrast, a 0.91% increase was found in warmer cities with 
a 15°C daily average temperature (75th percentile). For black smoke, the mortality increase
varied from 0.39% to 0.75% among cooler and warmer cities, respectively.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
123
As part of the APHEA2 study, Katsouyanni et al. (2001) examined the short-term levels 
of air pollutants, ratios of PM10 to NO2 and black smoke, mean temperature and humidity, 
as well as population characteristics in relation to overall mortality in several cities. The 
daily mortality increase for PM10 was 0.29% at the 25th percentile of average temperature,
which increased to 0.82% at the 75th percentile of average temperature. The effects of 
black smoke depended partly on temperature. The mortality increase varied from 0.23% to
0.70% among cities at the 25th percentile of average temperature compared with those 
at the 75th percentile. This study may have been flawed, however, because of the use of 
inappropriate regression methods.
Choi et al. (1997), in one of few long-term studies examining the influence of temperature 
on the effects of air pollution, assessed lung cancer mortality in 47 Japanese prefectures 
as a function of long-term NO2 and SO2 levels, expenditures on tobacco, car density, 
temperature and geographic gradient (north to south). For the southern and warmest areas, 
the NO2 effect was strongest where average temperatures were highest, possibly suggesting 
an additive or synergistic effect of long-term exposure to air pollution and higher temperature 
on risk of lung cancer mortality.
4.2.4.3 Studies of extreme heat events and their effects on air pollution-related 
population health risk
Heat waves provide opportunities to study the influence 
of temperature on the health impacts of air pollution. 
This is because they often combine high and/or sustained
levels of both heat and air pollutants and the impacts 
of their interactions become more evident. Some 
studies have tended to suggest that interactions between
heat and air pollution do occur but only become 
measurable above a certain temperature threshold 
(Sartor et al., 1997).
In a study of the effects of the 2003 heat wave in 
France, a daily time-series analysis for nine cities was
performed (Institut de veille sanitaire (InVS), 2004).
Daily O3 concentrations, and minimum and maximum
temperatures were inputted for the 8-year period from 
1996 to 2003. Daily deaths were regressed on same-day
and earlier temperatures and on O3 concentrations 
the day of and the day before the deaths occurred. The
effect of O3 alone, temperature alone, and O3 acting with temperature were estimated for
August 3 to 17, the period of the heat wave. It was found that O3 and temperature effects 
differed among some of the nine cities. Although overall the temperature effect was 
preponderant, O3 itself accounted for most of the deaths in two cities, and no interaction 
was observed between O3 and temperature.
Fischer et al. (2004) in Holland and Stedman (2004) in the U.K. used a risk assessment
approach to estimate air pollution-related deaths during the August 2003 heat wave. Deaths
were estimated on the basis of country-specific dose–response relationships for O3 and 
PM2.5 and were subtracted from the overall number of excess deaths during the heat wave. 
For the U.K., Stedman (2004) estimated that 21% to 38% of the total excess deaths were 
associated with elevated concentrations of O3 and/or particles. Fischer et al. (2004) estimated
that in the Netherlands, approximately 40% of the 1,000 to 1,400 excess deaths were 
related to air pollution.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
124
Sartor et al. (1995) studied the association among daily deaths, temperature and air pollutant
concentrations during a prolonged period of above normal temperatures in Belgium in 1994.
Expected mortality was based on the summers of 1985 to 1993. In 1994, a net excess of 
1,226 deaths occurred during a period of hot weather with above average O3 levels. For 
persons more than 65 years of age, the statistical interaction between the logarithm of O3
and temperature, both measured the day before, contributed to 40% of the logarithm of daily
deaths. Additional analyses for this age group were based on tertiles of mean daily temperature
(Sartor et al., 1997). At the lowest temperatures, temperature and O3 were not correlated, and
only O3 was associated with mortality. In the middle tertile, temperature and O3 were highly
correlated, and daily deaths also varied with the concentration of O3. In the tertile where mean
temperature was highest (21–27°C), temperature was the stronger predictor of daily deaths,
with a positive interaction between temperature and O3 observed.
Katsouyanni et al. (1993) studied excess mortality across several urban areas in Greece 
during a heat wave in July 1987. Athens (a “high-pollution” city) was compared with a group
of 14 other smaller (“low-pollution”) cities. The excess of mortality in Athens was statistically
different than that in the other cities after controlling for temperature, suggesting that air pollution
had an effect on mortality independent from air temperature. This result is similar to the 
cross-city effects observed in the APHEA studies, although their designs and methodologies
are different. Study limitations include the fact that mean air temperature was averaged 
over the entire 1-month period and there was a lack of real data for pollutants and other 
confounders.
4.2.4.4 Synoptic air mass studies
Studies of synoptic air masses examining the effects of air pollutants on population health 
outcomes (Pope and Kalkstein, 1996; Samet et al., 1998; Smoyer et al., 2000) did not produce
any evidence that temperature influenced the effects of air pollutants. The synoptic air mass
approach (Kalkstein, 1991) has been used to study the impact of multiple meteorological 
variables on health. Synopses are meteorological descriptors that take into account a number
of weather parameters (e.g. temperature, humidity, cloud cover, wind direction and speed),
describing these grouped variables as air masses, which are generally named according to
their geographic origin. They can also be classified according to a similarity to a classic
weather pattern, or by automatic classification methods that cluster coincident weather variables
into groups having preset characteristics.
Using synoptic classification of air masses in four major Canadian cities (Montreal, Ottawa,
Toronto and Windsor), Cheng et al. (2005) quantified an increase in heat-related mortality 
by the 2050s and 2080s as a result of climate change. Although the influence of temperature
on air pollution effects was not examined specifically, an increase in air pollution-related 
mortality, largely driven by O3, was observed for one of the scenarios where emissions 
were not modified.
4.2.4.5 Laboratory and field studies
Laboratory and field studies, although limited, have provided some evidence of interactions
between air pollutants and temperature. Some data from laboratory studies suggest that high
ambient temperatures increase the toxicity of CO (Yang et al., 1988). The temporal association
between peak expiratory flow rates and ambient O3 was studied in a group of 287 children and
523 non-smoking adults in Tucson, Arizona (Krzyzanowski et al., 1992). In children, peak
expiratory flow rates were reduced on days when there was a higher O3 concentration. In adults,
peak expiratory flow rates were reduced in asthmatics who spent more time outdoors on 
days when O3 levels were higher. After adjusting for other co-variates, significant interactions
among O3, PM10 and temperature were found; the impairment of the respiratory response 
due to low-level ambient O3 increased with temperature and PM10.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
125
4.2.5
Vulnerable Populations
As noted earlier, it is clear that many factors can affect an individual’s health risks resulting
from exposure to environmental stresses such as ambient air pollution and/or heat.
Population groups most vulnerable to the effects of natural and anthropogenic air pollution
emissions and/or extreme heat are relatively well identified (Neas et al., 1996; Lippman, 2000a;
Ledrans and Isnard, 2003; Jerrett et al., 2004; Newhouse and Levetin, 2004; Carcaillon et al., 2006):
• seniors and those in institutions, such as residential care homes;
• young children and asthmatics;
• people with chronic diseases, particularly cardiovascular and respiratory illnesses, renal 
disease, diabetes and obesity, as well as those taking certain medications; and
• people of lower socio-economic status and those living in densely populated urban 
neighbourhoods.
The latter group is at greater risk of the adverse health impacts of air pollution mainly because
of living conditions that lead to higher exposures to ambient PM, gaseous pollutants and traffic
emissions. In addition, people of low socio-economic status have a greater incidence of illness
(Finkelstein et al., 2005).
Under conditions of combined heat and pollution, vulnerable groups may experience greater risks
than the general population. However, it is difficult to evaluate who might exhibit more sensitivity
to potential synergistic effects; such questions have not yet been formally addressed in the 
literature. Evidence pointing to specific groups that might be particularly sensitive is very limited.
4.2.5.1 Persons with cardiovascular disease
As already noted, Anderson et al. (1996) found that the association
between O3 and related respiratory mortality in London (U.K.) was
significant throughout the year, whereas association with cardiovascular
mortality was significant only during the warm season. Similar
findings were reached by Sunyer et al. (1996). This could suggest that
synergistic effects are more prevalent in people with cardiovascular
diseases. In addition, such people appear to be affected by air pollution
only when temperatures are warmer.
4.2.5.2 Seniors
Roberts (2004) observed interactions between air pollutants and ambient
temperatures while studying mortality in people aged >65 years, and
Aga et al. (2003) found suggestive evidence for this in a study of this
age group. In another APHEA study of all-age mortality (Katsouyanni
et al., 2001), the effect modification by temperature on air pollution-
related mortality was comparable to that found by Aga et al. (2003) in
seniors. Mortality due to air pollution in an urban study was slightly
higher in seniors than in the general population; there was also a slightly
higher effect on mortality for the general population in warmer cities.
However, the effect modification by temperature of air pollution-related
mortality was approximately the same in seniors and the general population. This study therefore
suggests that although the adverse health impacts of air pollution are greater in seniors, the impacts
of combined exposure to pollution and variations in temperature may be similar in seniors and 
in the general population. Most of the victims of heat waves in Europe and North America have
been seniors whose health is already fragile (Bouchama and Knochel, 2002; Curriero et al., 2002;
Diaz et al., 2002; Hémon and Jougla, 2003; Ledrans and Isnard, 2003; Fischer et al., 2004; Kovats
et al., 2004; Toulemon and Barbieri, 2004). Future research should investigate the possible
synergistic role of poor air quality in contributing to morbidity and mortality during heat waves.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
126
4.2.5.3
Children
Hajat et al. (1999) observed seasonal variations in the 
effect of pollution on medical consultations for asthma in
children as well as in seniors. Similarly, Barnett et al. (2005)
found that in children aged 1 to 15 years, the association
between air pollution and hospital admissions was greater
during the warm season. Diaz et al. (2004) also found 
that air pollutants had a greater impact on child mortality
during the warm season.
4.3
CLIMATE CHANGE AND AIR POLLUTION
Carbon dioxide (CO2) and other carbon-based GHGs contribute to climate change, whereas airborne
PM (other than black carbon) can have a cooling effect by reflecting incoming solar radiation
back into space (IPCC, 2007a). Figure 4.2 illustrates some of the major physical and chemical
factors that influence the warming and cooling of the Earth’s atmosphere (IPCC, 2007a).
Figure 4.2 Major factors influencing atmospheric warming and cooling
Global average radiative forcing (RF) (watts per square metre) estimates and ranges in 2005 for 
anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) and other important agents
and mechanisms, together with the typical geographical extent (spatial scale) of the forcing and 
the assessed level of scientific understanding (LOSU). The net anthropogenic radiative forcing and 
its range are also shown.
Source: IPCC, 2007a. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Summary for Policymakers
(Figure SPM.2, page 4)
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
127
The atmosphere and the earth’s surface receive heat energy from the sun in the form of visible
and invisible radiation. Global atmospheric warming occurs because incoming solar radiation
energy is retained; this is mediated in part by GHGs and other atmospheric components such as
halocarbons, nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4), CO2, tropospheric O3, dusts, and black carbon
from fossil fuel and biomass burning. Warming is counterbalanced by the cooling effects of
stratospheric O3, sulphate aerosols, organic carbon from fossil fuel and biomass burning, and by
an increased reflectivity of the land surface due to deforestation in snow-covered forests (IPCC,
2007a). Under the present atmospheric conditions, with rising levels of CO2 and other GHGs,
the overall warming effect is of greater magnitude than the overall cooling effect. The reduction 
of secondary aerosol precursors, NOx, NH3, SO2 and VOCs, through efforts to improve air quality,
is expected to lead to an increase in temperature. The cooling effect of sulphate aerosols may
have partially masked the extent of global warming (U.K. DEFRA, 2005).
4.3.1
Effect of Climate Change on Particulate Matter and Ozone
Climate change could alter air quality by modifying the complex mechanisms affecting 
the formation and behaviour of PM and O3. As outlined by Bernard et al. (2001), Lloyd (2001),
IPCC (2007b) and others, climate change could influence levels of ambient pollutants by 
modifying (1) weather and consequently local and regional air pollution levels; (2) anthropogenic
emissions; and (3) natural emissions, which are strongly controlled by temperature.
Figure 4.3 illustrates the complexity of the atmosphere, and the physical and chemical interactions
that affect the behaviour and concentration of air pollutants. Changes in the height of atmospheric
layers that determine the vertical distribution of pollutants can alter their concentration (U.S. EPA,
1989; Hogrefe et al., 2004; Laurila et al., 2004b). Global warming may also accelerate the
transfer of O3 from the stratosphere to the troposphere where it would add to the formation 
of smog (Collins et al., 2003).
Figure 4.3 Interactions among climate, atmospheric composition, chemical and physical
processes driven by solar radiation energy and natural and human activities
Chapter 4
Source: Adapted from Integrated Global Observing Strategy (IGOS), 2004.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
128
Mickley et al. (2004) conducted an analysis of the effect of projected future climate 
conditions (1950–2052) on pollutant levels in the U.S. Their general circulation model 
simulations included black carbon and carbon monoxide (CO) as tracers, and indicated 
that the concentration of both pollutants increased by 5 to 10% during pollution episodes,
although actual emission levels for both tracers were kept constant over the simulation 
period. This suggests that the magnitude and duration of air pollution episodes could increase 
as a result of a warmer climate. Changes in the frequency and magnitude of simulated 
air pollution episodes were also associated with reduced cyclonic weather patterns, which 
are usually indicative of air pollution. Increases in anticyclonic conditions would cause 
more frequent inversions that would result in severe air pollution episodes (Hulme and
Jenkins, 1998).
Leung and Gustafson Jr. (2005) modelled
regional climate change scenarios (based on 
the IPCC A1B scenario for the years 2045 
to 2055) to estimate the potential effects of 
climate change on U.S. air quality compared 
to the 1995–2005 period. They found that 
during autumn in the western U.S., increases 
in air temperature of up to 4°C increased 
solar radiation, reduced rainfall frequency,
increased air stagnation associated with 
large high-pressure systems and resulted 
in deteriorated air quality.
Prather et al. (2003) summarized results from 
14 independent three-dimensional global 
tropospheric chemistry models. Using six 
varying global emissions estimates, they 
arrived at global average increases in tro-
pospheric O3 for the year 2030 of between 
5 ppb and more than 20 ppb, in the case 
of two of the more extreme emissions scenarios.
Using different assumptions, Anderson et 
al. (2001), Tuovinen et al. (2001), Knowlton 
et al. (2004), Laurila et al. (2004a) and 
Langner et al. (2005) found similar results.
Hogrefe et al. (2004) conducted an extensive assessment of the implications of climate 
change for O3 formation in the U.S. for the 1990s, 2020s, 2050s and 2080s. A global 
climate model using the IPCC Special Report on Emission Scenarios A2 scenario (one 
of the most pessimistic scenarios) was coupled with a regional model to obtain current 
and future regional climate fields. Projections of future biogenic emissions and anthropogenic
emissions remained the same. Results for five consecutive summers during the 2020s, 
2050s and 2080s suggested that daily maximum 8-hour O3 levels would be increased 
by 2.7 ppb, 4.2 ppb and 5.0 ppb, respectively, in the central and eastern parts of the 
U.S.. Larger increases were projected in certain urban corridors, whereas some decreases 
were observed in other specific locations. An increase in the number of days with 
exceedances of the current U.S. 8-hour O3 standard and an increase in the length of the 
O3 episodes were also observed.
Chapter 4
Ottawa under smog
Photo Credits: Environzone, Environnement Canada (http://www.eg.gc.ca/envirozine)
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
129
4.4
AIR QUALITY MODELLING IN CANADA
A study was undertaken for the Assessment to investigate how a global climate 4°C 
warmer might affect air quality in Canada. Using A Unified Regional Air-quality 
Modelling System (AURAMS), a model developed at the Meteorological Service 
of Canada, levels of O3 and PM were projected. This section describes the study 
methodology used and the modelling results.
4.4.1
AURAMS: Scenarios and Assumptions
Two scenarios of increasing complexity were used to isolate (1) the individual effects 
of an increase in temperature on air quality (scenario CC4) and (2) the effects of changes 
in biogenic emissions of air pollutant precursors along with increases in temperature 
(scenario CC4b). Because air pollutant levels and temperatures tend to be highest 
during the summer months, the air pollutant concentrations were modelled for June, 
July and August. A detailed description of the model and its components is given 
in Annex 2.
A single temperature increase was used to represent projected climate warming. 
The Third IPCC Assessment Report (2001b) stated that globally averaged surface 
temperatures are expected to increase by 1.4 to 5.8°C over the period 1990–2100, 
based on a range of climate model simulations. Although this may not be representative 
of specific climate changes at the regional level, it provides a reasonable temperature 
bracket within which to work. For comparability with previous studies, a 4°C increase 
in average surface temperature was selected for the current study. This temperature 
increase is identical to that used by Morris et al. (1995) but is somewhat more 
conservative than the 5.8°C simulated by Hogrefe et al. (2004). The Fourth IPCC 
Assessment Report projects that the global average temperature in the decade from 
2090–2099 is “likely” to be 1.1 to 6.4°C higher than that of the 1980–1999 period, 
depending on the emissions outlook used (IPCC, 2007a). The modelled temperature 
increase in the current exercise therefore represents one plausible future scenario 
within this range.
The year 2002 was used as a reference year for the simulations. Although no single 
summer can truly represent average climate conditions, the only alternative 
to performing simulations with multiple years is to choose a base year that is as 
representative as possible of the average. Figure 4.4 illustrates how the meteorological 
conditions experienced during summer 2002 compared with the 30-year normal, 
based on the Climate Trends and Variations Bulletin for 2002 (Environment 
Canada, 2002a).
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
130
Figure 4.4 Year 2002 regional summer time deviations in temperature from “average”
Temperatures across most of Canada were 0.5°C above normal for the summer (June, July and
August) of 2002, and as a whole, Canada experienced its 19th warmest summer above normal
since nationwide records began in 1948. Figure 4.4 does illustrate, however, that the warmth was
neither extreme nor uniform throughout the country. From southern British Columbia through to the
western edge of Quebec, and up into Nunavut, temperatures ranged anywhere from 0.5°C to
1.5°C above normal. Yukon, northwestern Northwest Territories and a small area around the mouth
of the St. Lawrence River were the only areas that experienced a cooler than normal summer.
The analysis focussed on contaminant measurements that reflect current risk management goals in
Canada: namely, the 8-hour daily O3 maximum and the 24-hour PM2.5 mean concentration, which
are the metrics used for the Canada-wide Standards (CWS) for these pollutants. For the purpose 
of the present analysis, only the numerical targets were used, and an exceedance is assumed once
the average 8-hour concentration of O3 or the 24-hour average of PM2.5 exceeds the CWS of 65 ppb
and 30 µg/m3, respectively, throughout the course of a day. For simplicity, the CWS levels are
used as reference values throughout the analysis, although they do differ from the values of the
American National Air Quality Standards. As described later (section 4.6.1), the CWS are based on
feasibility of attainment and thus population health impacts may occur even when pollutant levels
are within the CWS. Resultant impacts on health are presented later in the report (Section 4.5) based
on all population exposures, regardless of the attainment status of the CWS for PM and ozone.
Compared with actual measurements, model simulations may present some discrepancies that
can be attributed to various factors. Model results are nonetheless valuable for estimating the
directions in which the future atmospheric composition may evolve. It is generally recognized that
the differences between two simulations present less uncertainty than those in the reference
simulation when compared to actual observations. Therefore, the present analysis will emphasize
differences among the two modelling scenarios and the base case.
It is important to understand that the scenarios used in the current study were not developed
with the objective of predicting how climate change would precisely impact air quality. Rather,
the current study evaluated only two of the potential factors associated with climate change,
namely increases in temperature and higher biogenic emissions (VOCs from plants and nitric
Chapter 4
Environment Canada
Science and Technology Branch
Climate Research Division
Environnement Canada
Direction g n rale de la Science et de la technologie
Division de la recherche climatique
é é
-6.5
-5.5
-4.5
-3.5
-2.5
-1.5
-0.5
0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5
4.5
5.5
6.5
7.5
°C
500 km
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
131
oxide [NO] from soil). As mentioned previously, climate change would also interfere with
present climatic conditions and likely modify anthropogenic emissions. All of these factors
could in turn affect ambient levels of O3 and PM2.5. Therefore, no definitive conclusions, 
only indications, can be drawn from the results of the current study regarding the effects 
of a future warmer climate on the levels of O3 or PM in the air.
4.4.2
Modelling Results
The following section presents the results of the scenario simulations for O3 and PM2.5. Overall,
results for O3 support the hypothesis that in a 4°C warmer climate, increased emissions of biogenic
VOCs and soil NO may result in higher ambient O3 concentrations. In contrast, reductions in 
the average PM2.5 concentration were observed from baseline. Such reductions in PM2.5 may be
explained by changes in the sulphate–nitrate–ammonium–water system that controls a large
fraction of the PM mass. However, given the relative uncertainty attached to PM atmospheric
processes and modelling, further research is needed to better elucidate the effect of climate
change on PM formation.
4.4.2.1 Ozone
Changes in average daily 8-hour maximum
Figure 4.5 presents the average daily 8-hour O3 maximum over the three summer months 
for the base case (BC) simulation (top panel); the relative change in the CC4 simulation, 
representing a temperature increase of 4°C, compared with the BC simulation (middle panel);
and the relative change in the CC4b simulation, representing the same 4°C temperature
increase and taking into account a change in biogenic emissions of air pollutant precursors,
compared with the BC simulation (bottom panel).
Figure 4.5 Summer time average daily 8-hour O3 maximum (ppb)
Chapter 4
Note: Top panel: Base case simulation. 
Middle panel: Relative change in the CC4 
simulation compared with the base case 
simulation. Bottom panel: Relative change 
in the CC4b simulation compared with 
the base case simulation.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
132
In the BC simulation, the average summer time daily 8-hour O3 maximum value was 
33.5 ppb, with values ranging from 5.4 ppb to 142.3 ppb. The highest concentrations 
(above 75 ppb) were simulated in the most densely populated areas of North America. 
In Canada, the highest average daily 8-hour O3 maximum values are projected for southern
Ontario, Quebec and in the Vancouver area, where they reach values of approximately 
60 to 70 ppb.
In the CC4 simulation, an overall increase in the average daily 8-hour O3 maximum 
values was observed, induced by the increase in air temperature. The average daily 8-hour 
O3 maximum value was 34.5 ppb, an overall 0.9 ppb increase from the BC simulation. 
As in previous studies (Morris et al., 1995; Aw and Kleeman, 2003; Hogrefe et al., 2004), 
an increase in temperature accelerated chemical reaction rates and therefore increased 
the rate at which O3 and other oxidants were produced. The increase in O3 in the CC4 
simulation was not higher than 6.0 ppb in any of the modelled locations.
In the CC4b simulation, where biogenic emissions are also stimulated due to increased 
temperature, the overall average daily 8-hour O3 maximum was 36.9 ppb, a 3.4 ppb 
increase from the BC simulation. The increase in the average daily 8-hour O3 maximum 
also exceeded 10 ppb in places. The highest Canadian increases in O3 concentrations 
(10 to 18 ppb) from the BC simulation were projected for Montreal, Toronto, Vancouver,
Calgary, Edmonton, and Winnipeg. A large increase of up to 18 ppb can also be noted 
in Alberta, mainly in the vicinity of oil sands developments near Fort McMurray. 
The increased soil NO emissions over the Prairie regions (e.g. in Alberta, Saskatchewan 
and midwestern U.S.) also contribute to the increase in O3 concentrations modelled 
for those areas.
In the CC4b simulation, biogenic emissions of VOC species, such as isoprene and 
monoterpenes, increased by 25 to 50%, and in some areas by as much as 100%, as a 
result of the 4°C increase in temperature. The biogenic monoterpene emissions increased 
most prominently over the northwestern and southeastern U.S., with the exception of 
the Illinois and Ohio area. Isoprene emissions increased over the boreal forest regions 
of Canada. The large increases in O3 concentrations observed in the Illinois and Ohio 
regions and extending to large cities in the adjoining states are attributable to the increase 
in biogenic emissions of VOCs in the surrounding regions and to locally increased 
emissions of NO from soil (up by 15%).
In a similar study, Hogrefe et al. (2004) obtained future year climate conditions by coupling 
the MM5 and GISS models.2 Results for the 2080s, where the temperature increased 
by 4.3°C for the GISS and by 5.8°C for the MM5, are comparable to those obtained from 
the CC4b scenario here. Figure 4.6 depicts the spatial distribution of the average summer 
time daily 8-hour O3 maximum projected by Hogrefe et al. (2004) for the 1990s. Figure 4.7
represents the change in the 2080s scenario from 1990. Despite many differences between 
the current study and that of Hogrefe et al. (2004), the magnitude of the projected change 
in both the CC4b simulation here and the corresponding scenario from Hogrefe et al. (2004) 
is similar.
Chapter 4
2
MM5 is the Pennsylvania State University/National Centre for Atmospheric Research mesoscale regional climate model.
More information about this model is available in Grell et al. (1994). GISS AOM is the Goddard Institute for Space 
Studies coupled Atmosphere-Ocean Model. More information about this model is available in Russell et al. (1995).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
133
Figure 4.6 Summer time projected average daily maximum 8-hour 
O3 maximum concentration (ppb) for the 1990s
Chapter 4
Source: Hogrefe et al., 2004.
Figure 4.7 Changes in summer time average daily maximum 8-hour 
O3 concentration (ppb) projected under the 2080s climate change 
scenario simulation relative to that for the 1990s
Source: Hogrefe et al., 2004.
Changes in the frequency of exceedances
The top panel of Figure 4.8 presents the number of exceedances of the CWS for O3 in summer 
in the BC simulation. Multiple exceedances during the day are counted only as a single
exceedance. In Canada, the highest number of exceedances ranges from about 40 to 80%
along the Quebec–Windsor corridor. Areas near Vancouver and in Alberta also present 
a significant number of exceedances of the CWS for O3.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
134
Figure 4.8 Percentage of days with average 8-hour O3 concentration exceeding 
the Canada-wide Standard of 65 ppb
The middle panel of Figure 4.8 presents the relative increase in the number of summer time 
O3 exceedances between the CC4 and the BC simulations. The average number of
exceedances rose slightly from 10.0% in the BC simulation to 11.2%. In Canada, changes 
in the number of exceedances are less intense, and are generally below 10%. Changes 
at the local level varied from -5.4 to 22.8%.
The bottom panel of Figure 4.8 presents the relative increase in the number of summer time 
O3 exceedances between the CC4b and the BC simulations. The CC4b scenario projected
greater changes in the number of exceedances than the CC4 simulation, with some regions 
of the U.S. exhibiting an increase of more than 40%. Overall, the average number of
exceedances in the CC4b simulation was 14.8%, with local variations ranging from 0 to
51.1%. In Canada, the largest increases are again observed in the Quebec–Windsor corridor, 
and range from 10 to 25% in Alberta and Vancouver.
Changes in the duration of exceedances
The top panel of Figure 4.9 presents the simulated average duration (in hours) of summer time 
O3 exceedances in the BC simulation. The average duration of exceedances varied 
between 0 and 52 hours, but tended to be shorter above the continental landmass, where
episodes generally lasted between 0 and 20 hours.
Chapter 4
Note: Top panel: Base case simulation. 
Middle panel: Difference in number of
exceedances between the CC4 simulation 
and the base case simulation. Bottom 
panel: Difference in number of exceedances
between CC4b simulation and the base 
case simulation.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
135
Figure 4.9 Duration (hours) of summer time episodes with O3 concentration 
greater than 65 ppb
To highlight changes in the persistence of extreme O3 events, the middle panel of Figure 4.9
presents the changes in CC4 simulation relative to the BC simulation. Changes above the 
continental landmass generally ranged from -4 to +7 hours with an average change of 0.1 hour.
The bottom panel of Figure 4.9 presents the changes in the CC4b simulation relative to the
BC simulation, and indicates that several parts of Canada would experience average durations
of summer time O3 exceedance of more than 7 hours. The duration of O3 episodes in some
locations in Canada, however, would decrease slightly. The average length of O3 exceedance
increased by 1.5 hours from the BC simulation. In the CC4 and CC4b simulations, the average
duration of O3 exceedances would increase by up to 30 hours in some regions.
4.4.2.2 Fine particulate matter
Figure 4.10 presents the percentage of days with average 24-hour PM2.5 concentrations exceeding
the CWS of 30 µg/m3 for the BC, CC4 and CC4b simulations. Simulated summer time PM2.5
concentrations seem to be less influenced than O3 concentrations by the imposed temperature
increase. In the BC simulation, the number of days with an exceedance was 4.5% overall,
though in some regions including Los Angeles, Vancouver, New Orleans, Toronto and the
Ohio River Valley the increase was over 20%. Although not presented graphically, mean 
daily maximum 24-hour PM2.5 concentrations were 8.9 µg/m3 in the BC simulation.
Chapter 4
Note: Top panel: Base case simulation. 
Middle panel: Difference in average 
duration of exceedance between the CC4 
simulation and the base case simulation. 
Bottom panel: Difference in average duration 
of exceedance between CC4b simulation 
and the base case simulation.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
136
Figure 4.10
Percentage of days with an average 24-hour PM2.5 concentration 
exceeding the Canada-wide Standard of 30 µg/m3
In the CC4 and CC4b simulations, little change was observed overall from the BC simulation
(approximately +0.5%). Mean daily maximum 24-hour PM2.5 concentrations increased 
by 1 and 2% (to 9.0 and 9.1 µg/m3) in the CC4 and CC4b simulations, respectively. 
The duration of the exceedances exhibited a slightly sharper change than mass concentrations,
increasing by 6% from the BC simulation to the CC4 simulation, and almost 7% for 
CC4b simulation. This increase is larger than the increase between the BC and CC4 
simulations for O3 (3.5%), but much smaller than the increase between the BC and 
the CC4b results (43%).
It is striking that in the CC4 and CC4b simulations, some industrialized and/or urban 
areas in Canada (particularly the Quebec-Windsor corridor, Winnipeg and southern B.C.)
would actually experience a decrease in the percentage of days with average 24-hour 
PM2.5 concentrations exceeding the CWS by 0 to 10%. The small difference between 
the levels simulated in the CC4 and CC4b simulations suggests that PM2.5 levels show 
very little response to a change in biogenic emissions. Based on the current limited 
understanding of how biogenic VOCs produce PM2.5 (Pun et al., 2002; Aw and Kleeman, 
2003) and the current results, PM2.5 levels appear not to be strongly influenced by 
such factors. Changes observed in PM2.5 levels between the BC simulation and the 
CC4 and CC4b simulations may relate to a change in the chemistry of the sulphate–
nitrate–ammonium–water system that controls a large fraction of PM mass. Figure 4.11 
Chapter 4
Notes: Top panel: Base case simulation. 
Middle panel: Difference in number of
exceedances between the CC4 simulation 
and the base case simulation. Bottom 
panel: Difference in number of exceedances
between the CC4b simulation and the 
base case simulation.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
137
presents the difference in particle nitrate (NO3-) concentration during the summer 
between the BC and CC4b simulations. Certain regions would experience a decrease 
in particulate NO3- concentration whereas others would see an increase. Patterns 
of particulate NO3- change match those of PM2.5.
Figure 4.11
Difference between the base case and CC4b simulations 
of the NO3- fraction of PM2.5 during the summer
Decreasing particulate NO3- levels with increasing temperature have been observed in other
studies. Aw and Kleeman (2003) conducted a similar analysis of the effect of temperature 
variability on levels of O3 and PM2.5. They found that for some locations, in particular regions 
that had similar concentrations of gas-phase NH3 and nitric acid (HNO3), and especially 
those with relatively high initial temperatures, particulate NO3- concentrations decreased with
increasing temperature.
Increasing temperature produces a net effect of two opposing processes: (1) increasing 
the rate of reaction by which particles are formed (thereby increasing particle concentration) 
and (2) increasing the volatility of the semi-volatile components of PM2.5 (thereby 
decreasing particle formation). Aw and Kleeman (2003) found that, among regions 
with high concentrations of gas-phase NH3 and relatively low initial temperatures, 
particulate NO3- concentrations were less sensitive to an increase in temperature, and 
minor reductions or sometimes small increases in particulate ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3)
concentration were observed. However, the work of Aw and Kleeman (2003) was 
limited geographically to the South Coast Basin surrounding Los Angeles, California. 
In this area, particles of ammonium nitrate dominate the PM2.5 mass fraction, and 
changes in the concentration of secondary sulphate aerosols in this region had a negligible 
effect on the observed change in PM2.5 mass. In regions where SO2 emissions are larger,
such as eastern Canada and the eastern U.S., Aw and Kleeman (2003) suggested that 
increased temperatures would lead to higher particulate sulphate concentrations and 
a reduction in particulate NO3-. However, even for the short period analyzed in this 
study it seems that the decreases in particulate NO3- levels are large enough to drive 
the observed changes in PM2.5 mass.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
138
4.5
ESTIMATION OF HUMAN HEALTH IMPACTS ASSOCIATED
WITH CHANGES IN AMBIENT AIR QUALITY DUE TO 
CLIMATE CHANGE
Modelling was undertaken to explore the potential health impacts and associated costs 
that could result from changes in the atmospheric concentration of O3 and PM2.5 in a 
warmer climate. Estimates were obtained by comparing modelled air quality during three 
summer months of the year 2002 (base year) with modelled O3 and PM2.5 conditions 
that could prevail in North America if the average ambient temperature was 4°C higher.
Changes in ambient concentrations associated with increased biogenic emissions 
of VOCs were also obtained. This exercise made use of Health Canada’s Air Quality 
Benefit Assessment Tool (AQBAT) for characterizing human health risks. A detailed 
description of AQBAT, including its inputs and outputs is provided in Annex 3. The 
AQBAT analysis here is based on air pollution concentrations overall, not solely on 
locations that exceeded the CWS.
Valuation of health impacts of air quality changes (positive or negative) is usually completed 
to complement cost estimates of air pollution mitigation measures. Such a cost-benefit 
analysis provides a value estimate of the health benefits compared to the cost of specific 
pollution management measures. The effects estimated in the current analysis are not 
complemented with an estimation of the mitigation cost of climate change or GHGs, 
which is beyond the scope of this Assessment. However, it provides an indication of 
the impacts Canadian society would face if temperatures rose by 4°C, with anthropogenic 
emissions of air contaminants held constant at 2002 levels.
The precise nature of the potential health impacts is difficult to assess because such 
quantification requires the integration of multiple variables, including human behaviour,
changes in emissions and other climate variables. The estimation of the effect of climate 
change on both ozone and PM2.5 is complex and depends on multiple variables. While the 
relationships with ozone are relatively well understood, those with PM are still the 
subject of much investigation, and these results should stimulate additional research. 
Overall, climate change, according to the CC4b (temperature and biogenic increases) 
scenario, was predicted to result in a 4.6% increase in cost to Canadian society.
4.5.1
Estimated Health Benefits: Incremental Climate Change Scenario
The estimated human health impacts of changes from baseline levels of O3 and PM2.5
concentrations to levels projected under scenario CC4b (+4°C and increased biogenic 
emissions) are presented in Annex 4, Tables 4.6 to 4.8. The CC4 temperature-only results 
are presented in Tables 4.3 to 4.5.
The national average 8-hour O3 concentration was increased in the CC4b scenario by 
14.7%, whereas the 24-hour PM2.5 concentration was reduced by 10.5%. The estimated
increase in O3-related mortality in the CC4b scenario is 658 deaths over the modelled 
3-month period, with an associated cost of over $3 billion (Table 4.6). The increase in 
the number of Acute Respiratory Symptom Days (ARSD) corresponds to 2,940,278 cases 
and a cost of over $42 million. Overall, the total cost of increasing O3 levels under this 
scenario is $3.167 billion. Given the results of the modelling runs, this is primarily associated 
with temperature-induced biogenic increases rather than a direct temperature effect on 
ozone formation.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
139
The modelled reduction in PM2.5 is associated with decreases in all health endpoints, including
a reduction of 346 premature deaths and 810,934 ARSD under the CC4b scenario for the 
3-month period in question (Table 4.7). The overall benefit of PM2.5 reduction corresponds 
to reduced costs of $1.8 billion. Based on the modelling runs, the PM results are relatively
insensitive to the biogenic changes, and are more directly tied to the temperature increase 
than was the case with O3. Given the considerable uncertainty attached to this aspect of the
modelling, more research is required to provide greater confidence in both the direction and
magnitude of the change in PM levels.
The overall pollutant effect in scenario CC4b 
is endpoint-dependent because there are 
increases in the incidence of some endpoints 
and decreases in others (Table 4.8). Overall, 
premature mortality would be increased by 
312 deaths and significant increased morbidity 
of several types would be observed, whereas 
the number of adult chronic bronchitis cases
would be reduced by 450. Other health 
benefits include 20 fewer cardiac emergency
room visits, 54 fewer cardiac hospital 
admissions, and 3,479 fewer child acute 
bronchitis episodes. The overall cost to society
would be approximately $1.4 billion over 
the modelled 3-month period.
4.5.2
Climate Associated Air Quality Impacts in Perspective
An estimation of the amount of illness and death that could be prevented in the complete
absence of ambient levels of O3 and PM2.5 was also calculated. This calculation was performed
to put into perspective the increase of illness and death associated with the climate change
scenario. This estimate was produced by setting O3 and PM2.5 concentrations to zero and then
estimating the differences to the baseline and climate change scenarios.
The average baseline morbidity and mortality estimates associated with O3 and PM2.5, based
on comparisons with the zero-pollutant scenario, are provided in Annex 4, Tables 4.9 and 4.10,
respectively. The AQBAT simulations indicated an increase from baseline in the incidence of 
O3-related morbidity and mortality that ranged from 4.4 to 5.3% for the CC4 scenario. The
range for the CC4b scenario was 19.5 to 23.3%. In other words, the inclusion of biogenic
emissions resulted in considerably higher incidences of health impacts.
Inclusion of the biogenic component had the opposite effect on PM. Temperature increase
alone significantly reduced PM impacts (15.3 to 19.1%) though this result was tempered 
by inclusion of associated biogenic processes (11.9 to 15.3%).
These results indicate that while these pollutants appear to operate in opposite directions
under the influence of climate change, the increase in O3 formation would result in negative
net health impacts overall. This result is most influenced by biogenic aspects of the air quality
modelling, and based on this estimate would result in an approximate 4.6% increase in the air
pollutant-related health burden to Canadian society, subject to a 4°C temperature increase 
with anthropogenic emissions held at 2002 levels. Recall that future changes in anthropogenic
emissions due to economic growth, technological change or regulation would also significantly
affect air quality, but were not considered in this modelling exercise.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
140
4.6
RISK MANAGEMENT AND ADAPTATION
4.6.1
Norms and Trends
In June, 2000, the Canadian federal, provincial and territorial governments, with the exception
of Quebec, agreed on the Canada-wide Standards (CWS) for PM2.5 and O3. The CWS are 
long-term air quality management goals that seek to minimize the risks these substances pose
to human health and the environment. Although the health impacts attributed to PM and O3
have been observed at very low concentrations, the CWS attempt to balance reducing risks from
PM2.5 and O3 exposure with technologically feasible and cost-effective measures to reduce
ambient levels of air pollutants (CCME, 2006). Specifically, the CWS numerical targets and
timeframes are (Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME), 2000):
• PM2.5: 30 µg/m3 based on a 24-hour averaging time. Achievement is based on the 98th percentile
measurement annually, averaged over 3 consecutive years, by 2010; and
• O3: 65 ppb based on an 8-hour averaging time. Achievement is based on the fourth highest
measurement annually, averaged over 3 consecutive years, by 2010.
In addition to the numerical standards, the CWS also contain provisions that commit jurisdictions
to the principles of “Continuous Improvement” and “Keeping Clean Areas Clean.” Although the
processes governing these two principles have taken some time to elucidate, they are likely to
become increasingly important under a warming climate. As larger geographic areas come under
the influence of larger and warmer air masses containing air contaminants, those areas currently
in marginal compliance with the numerical standards may begin to approach or exceed the CWS.
4.6.1.1 Ground-level ozone
In Canada, population-weighted concentrations of ground-level O3 have shown a slight increase
in recent years (Government of Canada, 2007). Between 1990 and 2005, population-weighted
ozone concentrations increased by 12%, with a margin of error of plus or minus ten percentage
points (Figure 4.12). O3 is highest in the Quebec–Windsor corridor, the southern Atlantic region,
and to a lesser degree the Lower Fraser Valley of British Columbia.
Figure 4.12
Historical levels of ozone in Canada
Chapter 4
Source: Government of Canada, 2007.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
141
4.6.1.2 Fine particulate matter
Trends in ambient concentrations of PM2.5 in Canada are difficult to assess because of changes
in monitoring methods over time (Environment Canada, 2003b). Annual averages of PM2.5
concentrations for 11 urban sites across Canada are shown in Figure 4.13 (Environment Canada,
2003a). Although there is a slight decreasing trend in mean PM2.5 concentration over time,
mean levels since the mid-1990s are relatively stable. A large reduction in the value of the
98th percentile is also observed. Such reductions in PM2.5 concentrations from the 1980s and
early 1990s are likely due to decreases in SO2 emissions resulting from acid rain prevention
programs (Environment Canada, 2004).
More recent reports show that population-weighted levels showed no statistically significant
increase or decrease between 2000–2005 (Government of Canada, 2007).
Figure 4.13
Trend in annual mean PM2.5 (µg/m3), 1984–2000 (10th percentile,
98th percentile and mean)
Source: Environment Canada, 2003a.
4.6.1.3 Canadian sources and transboundary pollution
Several North American airsheds extend beyond national boundaries, resulting in transboundary
pollution and air quality problems whereas other areas are dominated by local sources and
conditions. Two regions in Canada with considerable transboundary air pollution are the Great
Lakes Basin airshed and the Georgia Basin–Puget Sound airshed (Environment Canada, 2004).
A recent report, Transboundary Air Pollution in Ontario (Yap et al., 2005) documents that, during
smog episodes, transboundary air pollution in Ontario reaches or exceeds the levels resulting from
local sources. Canada and the United States currently jointly manage aspects of air quality through
the Canada-United States Air Quality Agreement (AQA) (Environment Canada, 2006).
4.6.2
Air Quality Index Forecasts and Adaptation
4.6.2.1 The Air Quality Health Index
Air quality forecasts and the publication of current air quality conditions provide the public with
opportunities to undertake short-term adaptive measures that reduce their exposure to air 
pollutants. With air quality indices designed around ambient air quality objectives for individual
pollutants, attention is often focussed on the air quality advisories that are issued when these
objectives are exceeded. However current scientific evidence shows that health risks increase
more or less linearly as air quality deteriorates, and that several pollutants simultaneously 
contribute to the health risks.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
142
Health Canada and Environment Canada, in conjunction with provinces, municipalities 
and a variety of stakeholders from the health and environmental communities, have 
developed a new index that better reflects the immediate health risks associated with the 
smog mixture. This new Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) was designed to be a personal
health protection tool to be used by the public on a daily basis. The AQHI scale is 
accompanied by health advice targeted to vulnerable groups—children, seniors, and 
people with cardiovascular and respiratory disease—as well as to the general population, 
to enable individuals to make informed decisions about reducing their exposure to air 
pollution and their associated health risks. Several communities have piloted the new 
index and over the next three years it will be implemented throughout Canada as 
part of a renewed air quality forecast program. For example, information on the City of
Toronto’s AQHI can be obtained at www.toronto.ca/health/aqhi/.
4.6.2.2 Outreach to the public, at-risk populations and health professionals
Significant social marketing efforts will be undertaken to make the Air Quality Health 
Index (AQHI) as effective as the Ultraviolet (UV) Index. For example, the federal 
government will work in collaboration with the communications industry, including The
Weather Network and local media providers, to identify the ideal means of communicating 
the AQHI to the public through different media (i.e. television, print, radio, automated 
telephone, Internet). Lessons learned from the 2006 pilots utilizing websites, radio 
and automated telephone for communicating the AQHI will be taken into consideration.
Government On-Line officials will also be engaged to investigate the feasibility of 
creating a nationally branded federal portal for the index, providing one-stop access 
to air quality measurements and forecasts via the AQHI in various jurisdictions.
To facilitate education and endorsement of the AQHI by health professionals, Health 
Canada will develop a toolkit for health professionals based on recent research. The 
toolkit will detail the health impacts of air pollution, information on how to interpret and 
explain the AQHI to their patients, and appropriate actions to reduce exposure to air 
pollution while maintaining a balance of healthy lifestyle factors. Materials will also be 
generated for health professionals to distribute to their clientele.
Outreach materials will be developed for the general public to provide consistent health 
and air quality messaging. Additional efforts will concentrate on messaging targeting 
susceptible populations and their caregivers (children, seniors, and people with cardio-
vascular and respiratory disease). It is envisioned that these resources will be developed 
in concert with and distributed by non-governmental organizations as well as health 
professionals.
4.6.2.3 Links to other adaptation programs
Several communities across Canada have already implemented different types of heat 
alert systems (see Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity in Canada) 
and many more are investigating their applicability in their community. The Government 
of Canada committed in 2007 to working with stakeholders on developing best practices 
for the implementation of Heat Alert Systems and Infectious Disease Alert Systems. 
Lessons learned from the AQHI could provide valuable information to Health Canada’s 
pilot heat alert and response initiative. For example, as is the case with air quality,
the most heat-vulnerable groups include seniors, children, and people with pre-existing 
conditions. The AQHI’s communication and outreach methods could prove valuable 
in designing health messaging around the effects of heat on vulnerable populations.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
143
4.7
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Overall, results from epidemiological studies have provided some evidence, although sparse,
that temperature may influence the impact of air pollution on health. This interaction may 
be due to true synergistic effects, but other plausible explanations must also be considered.
Higher average temperatures are in fact associated with greater exposure to air pollution
because population activity patterns change (e.g. people spend more time outside and tend 
to leave their windows open, though air conditioning may temper this).
Results from atmospheric modelling conducted for this Assessment focussed only on changes 
in temperature and biogenic emissions, ignoring possible changes in anthropogenic emissions.
Nevertheless, modelling has produced a useful basis for future work because the results have
suggested that climate change could change the ambient tropospheric levels of O3 and PM2.5.
Results have also suggested that increased temperature may lead to increases in O3 concentrations
but decreases in PM2.5 concentrations. However, modelling that accounts for all potentially
related factors, such as precipitation and anthropogenic emissions is required to adequately assess
the direction for PM2.5 under warmer climatic conditions.
Modelled changes in air pollutants certainly imply that climate change could lead to increases
in illnesses and premature death in Canada. Valuation estimates clearly indicate that climate
change would result in increased financial burden over the 3-month summer period, largely due
to O3. A similar assessment for a 12-month period would theoretically result in a larger number, 
but not necessarily four times larger because the highest air pollution levels are primarily
experienced in summer. The results of quantifying the human health impacts with AQBAT clearly
suggest that climate change in Canada may result in significant health costs to society.
The scenarios used here are only a first step in improving understanding of the effects of climate
change on air quality. Only two factors, temperature and biogenic emissions, of the multitude of
the factors that may be affected by climate change were considered. More detailed Global Climate
Model, Regional Climate Model, AURAMS and AQBAT assessments might provide more accurate
estimates of how climate change might affect air pollution in Canada and its related health impacts.
Future assessments of the potential
health impacts related to climate
change should integrate the broader
chain of events that would likely be
involved. More accurate estimations
of the potential health effects which
take into account population growth
and change, the climate for various
future time periods (e.g. around 
the years 2020, 2050 and 2080),
anthropogenic and natural emissions,
atmospheric modelling, changes 
in human exposure to pollutants,
environmental changes associated
with climate change and GHG mitigation measures should be conducted. For instance, changes
in weather patterns could modify the energy demands associated with the cooling and heating
of buildings, which in turn could result in changes in pollutant emissions. These assessments
should also consider the existing disparities in the social, economic and health status of the residents
of different provinces and territories. However, they would still leave many uncertainties.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
144
4.8
ANNEXES
Annex 1: Literature Search Methodology
Five bibliographical databases were searched, using several different terms combined in 
a logical expression, to identify all relevant articles in the published literature (Figure 4.14).
Figure 4.14
Bibliographic databases and search terms and logical expressions 
used to identify relevant studies in the literature
Chapter 4
This search resulted in over 600 references published by 2006. These were manually selected,
based on their title and abstract, resulting in approximately 50 core articles. Several other key
articles cited as references to these papers or found elsewhere were added to the list. All articles
were then reviewed, and if deemed relevant, were classified and retained for analysis.
Annex 2: AURAMS Model
1. Model Description
A Unified Regional Air-quality Modelling System (AURAMS) is a unified regional air quality
modelling system developed by Environment Canada for research and policy applications.
Designed as a “one-atmosphere” system, AURAMS allows the study of interactions between
NOx, VOCs, NH3, O3, and primary and secondary airborne PM smaller than 2.5 µm (PM2.5). It can
therefore be used to address a variety of interconnected tropospheric air pollution problems
ranging from surface O3 to acid rain to PM over the entire North American continent.
AURAMS has been exercised over domains covering the whole or parts of the North American
continent at spatial resolutions of 20 to 42 km (Figure 4.15). Although initial applications 
of AURAMS were limited to episodic events, it is now being used for seasonal and annual
simulations, as well as in experimental mode for next-day forecasting of air quality. Evaluations
of the performance of AURAMS can be found in the peer-reviewed literature (Bouchet et al.,
2003; Gong et al., 2003b; Makar et al., 2004; McKeen et al., 2005; Gong et al., 2006) and in
recent joint U.S.and Canada assessments (Canada-U.S. Subcommittee on Scientific Co-operation,
2004). For determination of O3 and PM concentrations for the present study, AURAMS was
run at 42-km resolution on a continental domain.
Databases
Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1966 to June Week 4 2005
Ovid MEDLINE(R) In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations July 05, 2005
Biological Abstracts/RRM 1992 to 2002
Biological Abstracts 2002 to June 2005
Current Contents/All Editions 1993 Week 27 to 2005 Week 28
Search terms and logical expression (? and $ denote wildcards)
heat-wave? or heatwave? or (heat wave?)
OR
heat or hot$ or warm$ or (high$ temperature?)
AND
temperature? or weather or meteorolog$ or climat$ or season$
AND
(air pollut$) or (atmospheric pollut$) or “air quality” or ozone
OR
(particles OR particulate) and pollut$
AND
health or morbidity or mortality or death? or admission? or consult$ or disease? or disorder?
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
145
Figure 4.15
AURAMS modelling domains in North America
Chapter 4
The three major components of the system, namely the meteorological driver, the emission
processor and the chemical transport model, are described below. Additional details 
on the various processes represented in the chemical transport model are also given.
2. Meteorological Component
AURAMS is driven “off-line” by the Canadian operational forecast model, Global
Environmental Multiscale model (GEM). GEM is a non-hydrostatic, two-time-level 
implicit semi-Lagrangian model (Côté et al., 1998a, 1998b). For air quality applications,
meteorological fields from a high-resolution regional window positioned over the 
air quality modelling domain are stored at the frequency required by the AURAMS 
(i.e. 900 seconds), then interpolated spatially to match the grid used by the air 
quality model.
3. Emission Components
Anthropogenic emission component
Hourly point-, area- and mobile-source emissions files are prepared by the Spare-Matrix
Operating Kernel Emissions processor (SMOKE), from the year 2000 Canadian and 
the year 2001 U.S. national criteria-air-contaminant emission inventories for the AURAMS
domain. The total Canadian anthropogenic emissions for the year 2000 are presented 
in Table 4.1. Similar information for the year 2001, which is stored in the U.S. national 
emission inventory, can be readily accessed online. AURAMS-ready emission fields 
include 17 gas-phase species, as well as primary PM2.5 and PM10 emissions. Within the
AURAMS chemical transport component, PM emissions are disaggregated according 
to size and chemical species as a function of the source stream. A plume-rise calculation 
is also applied to major point sources. Two other types of emissions are represented 
online in AURAMS: biogenic emissions using the Biogenics Emissions Inventory System,
Version 3.09 (BEISv3.09) algorithm and sea salt emissions from wave-breaking (Gong 
et al., 2003a).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
146
Table 4.1
Total Canadian anthropogenic emissions (in tons) from area,
mobile and non-road sources for the year 2000
*
In this table, includes industrial sources and small, non-mobile sources that are 
inventoried as a group (e.g. wood stoves and incinerators).
†
Cars, trucks and other on-road mobile sources.
‡
Off-road mobile sources like tractors and backhoes.
Biogenic emission component
Plants emit VOCs that can serve as precursors of O3 and of PM2.5 by reacting in the atmosphere
with other chemicals such as NOx, or with solid or semi-solid particles. These VOCs include
isoprene and methyl butanol, whose highest concentrations occur in the air above large forests 
and above extensive agricultural crops. The biogenic emissions inventory module BEISv3.09,
developed in the U.S. by a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency–National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration partnership (U.S. EPA 2006b, 2006c), was used within AURAMS
to estimate biogenic VOC emissions from vegetation and NO emissions from soil.
AURAMS chemical transport model
The AURAMS chemical transport component includes a representation of all the processes
that influence the formation, release and fate of O3 and PM. Up to eight chemical components
are considered to contribute to PM composition: sulphate, nitrate, ammonium, black carbon, 
primary organic carbon, secondary organic carbon, crustal material and sea salt. These PM
chemical components are assumed to be internally mixed in each of the 12 size bins of the
PM sectional size distribution, spanning diameters between 0.01 µm and 40.96 µm. No data
assimilation is performed in AURAMS.
AURAMS uses a non-oscillatory semi-Lagrangian advection scheme (Pudykiewicz et al.,
1997; Sirois et al., 1999) to describe the transport of up to 145 individual chemical tracers.
The gas-phase mechanism is a modified version of the ADOM-II mechanism (Stockwell and
Lurmann, 1989) and incorporates 42 gas-phase species and 114 reactions based on Lurmann
et al. (1986). It has been extended to include secondary organic aerosol formation based on
the approach of Jiang (2003), inorganic heterogeneous chemistry (i.e. gas-particle partitioning
of the sulphate–nitrate–ammonium–water system) (Makar et al., 2003), and aqueous-phase
chemistry based on a modified ADOM mechanism coupled with explicit aerosol components.
Aerosols are represented by a size-segregated multi-component algorithm (the Canadian
Aerosol Module (CAM)) (Gong et al., 2003a). CAM relies on a sectional approach, 
and includes major aerosol processes in the atmosphere: generation, hygroscopic growth, 
coagulation, nucleation, condensation, dry deposition and sedimentation, below-cloud 
scavenging as well as aerosol activation. Finally, dry deposition of gases and size-dependent
aerosols is based on the resistance approach (Zhang et al., 2001, 2002), and wet deposition
processes to gases and aerosol include cloud-to-rain conversion and below-cloud scavenging 
as well as evaporation (Gong et al., 2003b).
Chapter 4
Mobile†
21,242
21,162
19,415
28,005
936,794
446,438
6,313,751
19,695
Area*
17,490,531
105,311,545
842,433
202,559
435,225
1,938,958
1,870,862
591,966
TPM
PM10
PM2.5
SO2
NOx
VOC
CO
NH3
Non-Road‡
69,771
68,787
60,102
63,323
774,694
354,872
2,915,483
998
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
147
Annex 3: AQBAT Model
1. Model Description
The Air Quality Benefits Assessment Tool (AQBAT) is a computer simulation tool designed 
to estimate the relative human health and welfare benefits or risks associated with changes 
in Canada’s ambient air quality. AQBAT allows users to define a wide range of specific 
scenarios by combining and linking various air pollutants, health endpoints, geographic 
areas and scenario years. AQBAT can provide economic valuation estimates based on 
changes in the incidence of health impacts associated with changes in air quality. 
AQBAT is the successor to the Air Quality Valuation Model (AQVM). It consists of 
one Excel file containing Excel user forms and toolbars with numerous controls, 
and Visual Basic programming to help the user define, run, examine and save a specific 
scenario. An expert panel of the Royal Society of Canada reviewed socio-economic 
analysis tools and provided specific comments on AQVM, the predecessor of AQBAT. 
The expert panel supported AQVM and the inputs used in the model (Royal Society 
of Canada, 2001).
AQBAT contains files of historical and projected population data, and can access preset 
data files of historical and hypothetical pollutant concentrations, as well as baseline health
endpoint rates. The model utilizes and controls the @Risk (trademark) add-in software 
to perform Monte Carlo simulations, which entail sampling the input distributions, tracking
the calculated sample outputs, and providing descriptive statistics on the distributions of 
these outputs.
2. AQBAT Approach
The net risk or benefit associated with changes in the ambient air pollutant concentration 
is estimated using concentration response functions (CRF) that are assigned to specific 
pollutant concentrations and to exposed populations. The AQBAT user defines a CRF for 
a pollutant-health endpoint combination and assigns it to one or more geographic areas.
Different geographic areas may be assigned either the same quantified impact of a pollutant 
on a health endpoint, or different ones (i.e. there can be multiple CRFs for the same 
pollutant-health endpoint combination). Each CRF applies to every year of the scenario.
The count estimate formulation, in its simplified form, consists of multiplying the 
following factors:
• CRF expressed as % excess adverse endpoints per unit concentration increase 
of pollutant;
• pollutant concentration change as the difference between the status quo and forecast 
concentrations;
• baseline rate of incidence of the health endpoint in the target population; and
• target population count.
These counts are derived for individual scenario years.
3. Concentration Response Function
The CRF is a quantification of the impact of an air pollutant on a health endpoint. It is 
a statistically derived estimate of the percent excess health endpoint associated with a unit
increase in the pollutant concentration. It is generally derived from a statistical model, 
or from the pooling of estimates from several models or studies. CRFs therefore have an
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
148
uncertainty in their quantification, reflected in the selection of a distribution form (normal, 
triangular or 3-point discrete), with corresponding parameter inputs in AQBAT. During 
a scenario model simulation run, the @Risk tool samples these distribution functions, from
which output sample values are calculated and tracked; these outputs therefore have a 
distribution themselves. There are 13 different health endpoints in this model:
Acute Exposure Mortality
Acute Respiratory Symptom Days
Adult Chronic Bronchitis Cases
Asthma Symptom Days
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits
Cardiac Hospital Admissions
Child Acute Bronchitis Episodes
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Elderly Cardiac Hospital Admissions
Minor Restricted Activity Days
Emergency Room Visits Due to Respiratory Illnesses
Hospital Admissions Due to Respiratory Illnesses
Days of Restricted Activity
Each of these represents a health endpoint resulting either from an acute or short-term 
exposure, or from a long-term or chronic exposure (see Table 4.13 for all CRFs). As well,
each of these endpoints corresponds to a certain proportion of a specific population age 
group. These characteristics of the health endpoints are pre-defined in AQBAT; the user 
cannot change them.
4. Economic Valuation Estimates
Economic valuation estimates for health outcomes consider potential economic and social 
consequences associated with the adverse health impacts that result from air pollution, 
including medical costs, work loss, out-of-pocket expenses, and pain and suffering. Although 
the economic valuation estimates used to assess potential benefits may include medical 
costs, they must not be interpreted in their totality as savings to the health care system. 
The valuation estimates must be considered merely as an indication of the relative 
value that society places on health benefits represented by decreases in the risk of death 
or disease (see Table 4.12 for AQBAT valuation information).
One economic measure of value that represents the reasons why people desire reductions 
in health risks is called “willingness to pay.” Willingness to pay is a measure of the monetary
tradeoffs that people are willing to make in exchange for reductions in risks of mortality 
or morbidity. Unlike many goods and services that Canadians can purchase and enjoy, the 
prevention of health risks cannot be directly purchased in the marketplace. Therefore, 
there are no price and quantity data from which the economic values can be easily estimated.
Over the last five decades, economists have developed and refined a number of techniques 
to estimate the economic value of avoiding adverse health impacts. These techniques estimate
values by examining how people would trade money for reductions in health risks. There are 
a number of empirical methods for valuation; these essentially fall into two categories—those
that rely on observed market behaviour (“revealed preference methods”) and those that do 
not (“stated preference methods”).
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
149
5. Netting
Netting is the subtraction of one health endpoint count from another health endpoint count
(see under section 8, Outputs, later in Annex 3 for a discussion of counts), because the former
endpoint may overlap with the latter. The result of not carrying out the netting may be a double
counting of the latter endpoint. One common example of netting is that Respiratory Hospital
Admissions (RHAs) are subtracted from Respiratory Emergency Room Visits (RERVs), under
the assumption that some RHAs started out as RERVs. In this example, not carrying out the
subtraction would result in some RHAs being counted as both health endpoints. The netting
results in conservative estimates. The user can decide whether a CRF is already netted, or
alternatively, whether AQBAT is to apply the preset netting adjustments to the health endpoint
counts that result in applying the scenario model CRFs.
6. Grouping
Grouping is the accumulation of similar health endpoints. Acute Exposure Mortality counts
and Chronic Exposure Mortality counts are usually added up to obtain total mortality counts.
This could be done outside of AQBAT after the simulation has been run, but grouping during
the simulation reduces the workload for the user. As well, grouping during the simulation 
produces exact percentile values for the distributions of grouped endpoint outputs, whereas
these can be approximated only outside the simulation. However, grouping during the 
simulation requires tracking more outputs, and therefore, a longer run time for the simulation.
7. Geographic Areas
AQBAT was developed for Canada’s geography. There are 442 geographic areas in the 
current version of AQBAT, based on the 2001 Census Geography as determined by Statistics
Canada. Each of the 442 geographic areas is one or two of the following five types by level
(acronym and/or count):
• National level: Canada as a whole
• Provincial level: provinces or territories (13)
• Specific (lowest) level: Census Agglomeration Area (CA, 113), Census Metropolitan 
Area (CMA, 27), and Census Division (CD, 288)
Census Agglomeration Areas (CAs) are towns with a total population between 10,000 and
100,000 and Census Metropolitan Areas (CMAs) are cities with a total population 
of 100,000 or more.
8. Outputs
AQBAT provides estimates of excess or reduced health endpoints in a geographic area that 
is associated with an inputted pollutant concentration change. The CRF has an uncertainty 
and is input into AQBAT as a distribution function. The pollutant concentration change, 
the baseline rates of health endpoints and the population count are deterministic, based on
specific choices or inputs to define the scenario model in AQBAT. The resulting output 
count therefore also has an uncertainty, expressed as a distribution. There are two additional
scenario model output types: percent of baseline and economic valuations. Both of these 
use the counts as a factor in their calculation.
AQBAT allows for the generation of up to 20,000 outputs, tracked by @Risk during the 
simulation; one iteration results in a sampled value for each tracked output. Percentile 
values, means, standard deviations and other statistics are determined from the simulation 
for each set of output sample values. For each output, the user can examine the distribution 
of values on a chart. There are tools available in AQBAT to filter or “home in” on a smaller
subset of outputs, when necessary. All inputs defining the specific scenario model, along 
with the output distributions can also be stored in an external Excel workbook for investigation
and analysis outside of AQBAT.
Chapter 4
It should be noted that the AQBAT estimates for the current project are for a 3-month 
summer period, as the atmospheric modelling for this project covered only the months of
June, July and August 2002. Adjustment to the baseline mortality or morbidity rates was 
completed to report the results for the 3-month period only. Using 2002 as a base year for 
the simulations means that the meteorological inputs are generated for summer 2002.
Although no single summer can really represent the climate average, the only alternative 
to performing years of simulation is to choose a base year that is as representative as 
possible of that average (see section 4.4.1 for additional details).
10. AQBAT Results
AQBAT estimates were generated nationally and for each of the provinces and territories 
as well as for each of the CDs with a population of more than 200,000 people. Twenty 
thousand @Risk iterations were completed for each analysis. Results are provided individually
for each of the two pollutants, and the overall effect is also provided separately. Absolute 
estimates and the valuation associated with each of the health endpoints are provided in each
table of results in Annex 4. The list of endpoints for each of the pollutants differs somewhat, 
as the health impacts of O3 and PM2.5 are not identical.
It is important to remember that AQBAT estimates cover only the months of June, July 
and August. These estimates would likely be higher if computed for a 12-month period, 
but would not necessarily be four times higher as this project covers the predominant 
period for smog events.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
150
9. Definition of the AQBAT Estimates
The atmospheric modelling for O3 and PM2.5 was carried out by scientists at Environment Canada
to estimate average air pollutant concentrations in 2,446 Census Consolidated Subdivisions (CCSs)
(of the census year 2001) during the months of June, July and August 2002. These concentration
levels were then averaged over all CCSs in a Census Division (CD), to determine a concentration
level for each of the 288 CDs under the corresponding hypothesis. AQBAT estimates were based
on a modelled baseline and a scenario where ambient temperature was increased by 4°C without
changes in biogenic emissions of air pollutant precursors (scenario CC4) and a scenario where
ambient temperature was increased by 4°C with associated changes in biogenic emissions
(scenario CC4b). These estimates were used as an indication of the potential health impacts of
these two climate change scenarios (CC4 and CCC4b). AQBAT estimates of the differences
between the CC4 and CC4b scenarios were also used to show the effect of biogenic emissions.
AQBAT estimates of the differences between a scenario in the absence (anthropogenic 
and biogenic) of air pollutants (Zero) and baseline, CC4 and CC4b scenarios were completed.
These estimates were obtained to put into perspective the various estimates against the 
overall mortality and morbidity associated with air pollutants. AQBAT estimates for the 
environmental states identified in Table 4.2 were obtained.
Table 4.2
The six estimates computed as part of this project
Chapter 4
Baseline State
Baseline
Baseline
CC4
Zero
Zero
Zero
AQBAT Estimates
1
2
3
4
5
6
Compared to
CC4
CC4b
CC4b
Baseline
CC4
CC4b
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
151
Some may argue that chronic health impacts should not be part of the Assessment as only 
a 3-month period was modelled. However, the analysis is used as an indication of the 
long-term trend in the potential shift in air pollution as indicated by one segment (June, 
July and August) and is therefore representative of the potential impacts on chronic 
health impacts that would be observed over the long term.
Some values are truncated at Zero because the developers of AQBAT concluded that 
pollution associated with O3 and PM could not result in positive effects to human health.
Annex 4: Detailed AQBAT Results, Valuation Information 
and Concentration Response Functions
Table 4.3
O3: AQBAT estimates from baseline to scenario CC4, national data
Chapter 4
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Endpoint
Acute Exposure Mortality
Acute Respiratory Symptom Days
Asthma Symptom Days
Minor Restricted Activity Days
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Acute Exposure Mortality + 
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Cardiac Hospital Admissions + 
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits +
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
All Endpoints
Absolute Changes from Baseline Mean (95% CI*)
-156 (-207, -105)
-$726,056,312 (-$1,653,546,752, -$311,456,512)
-696,586 (-1,607,940, 0)
-$10,153,797 (-$37,319,304, $0)
-92,291 (-150,091, -34,619)
-$5,148,005 (-$12,521,288, -$1,129,731)
-201,800 (-87,599, 0)
-$7,921,113 (-$40,626,480, $0)
-374 (-783, 0)
-$147,277 (-$328,433, $0)
-92 (-172, -11)
-$421,657 (-$831,809, -$49,016)
-156 (-207, -105)
-$726,056,312 (-$1,653,546,752, -$311,456,512)
-92 (-172, -11)
-$421,657 (-$831,809, -$49,016)
-374 (-783, 0)
-$147,277 (-$328,443, $0)
Not applicable
-$749,848,162 (-$1,678,030,080, -$333,939,776)
Note: A negative value represents a negative effect to society and should therefore be 
considered as an increase in cost or health impacts. A positive value represents a positive
effect to society and should therefore be considered as a reduction in cost or health impacts.
* CI, Confidence Interval
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
152
Note: A negative value represents a negative effect to society and should therefore be 
considered as an increase in cost or health impacts. A positive value represents a positive
effect to society and should therefore be considered as a reduction in cost or health impacts.
Table 4.5
Both pollutants: AQBAT estimates from baseline to scenario CC4, national data
Table 4.4
PM2.5: AQBAT estimates from baseline to scenario CC4, national data
Chapter 4
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Absolute Changes from Baseline Mean (95% CI)
1,010,696 (0, 2,602,081)
$14,691,284 ($0, $57,391,520)
559 (0, 1106)
$184,819,544 ($0, $487,192,096)
40,878 (9827, 71,808)
$2,279,833 ($332,484, $5,871,109)
24 (0, 65)
$9,646 ($0, $26,454)
68 (36, 99)
$383,991 ($182,677, $625,964)
4,298 (0, 9,159)
$1,470,337 ($0, $4,073,960)
428 (227, 629)
$1,995,154,492 ($718,112,448, $4,843,215,872)
176 (100, 253)
$69,460 ($34,899, $110,597)
44 (29, 58)
$200,064 ($182,240, $296,629)
620,980 (366,139, 874,903)
$32,435,121 ($0, $71,797,136)
428 (227, 629)
$1,995,154,492 ($718,112,448, $4,843,215,872)
111 (76, 146)
$584,055 ($365,122, $840,583)
201 (115, 291)
$79,107 ($40,695, $123,901)
Not applicable
$2,231,513,773 ($929,518,016, $5,080,671,744)
Endpoint
Acute Respiratory Symptom Days
Adult Chronic Bronchitis Cases
Asthma Symptom Days
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits
Cardiac Hospital Admissions
Child Acute Bronchitis Episodes
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Restricted Activity Days
Acute Exposure Mortality + 
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Cardiac Hospital Admissions + 
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits +
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
All Endpoints
Continued on next page
Endpoint
Acute Exposure Mortality
Acute Respiratory Symptom Days
Adult Chronic Bronchitis Cases
Asthma Symptom Days
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits
Cardiac Hospital Admissions
Child Acute Bronchitis Episodes
Absolute Changes from Baseline Mean (95% CI)
-156 (-207, -105)
-$726,056,312 (-$1,653,546,752, -$311,456,512)
314,110 (-1,233,611, 2,119,159)
$4,537,487 (-$24,191,136, $43,016,324)
559 (0, 1106)
$184,819,544 ($0, $487,192,096)
-51,413 (-116,874, 14,486)
-$2,868,172 (-$8,925,413, $702,022)
24 (0, 74)
$9,646 ($0, $30,420)
68 (36, 99)
$383,991 ($182,677, $625,964)
4,298 (0, 9159)
$1,470,337 ($0, $4,073,960)
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Note: A negative value represents a negative effect to society and should therefore be 
considered as an increase in cost or health impacts. A positive value represents a positive
effect to society and should therefore be considered as a reduction in cost or health impacts.
Table 4.6
O3: AQBAT estimates from baseline to scenario CC4b, national data
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
153
Chapter 4
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Minor Restricted Activity Days
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Restricted Activity Days
Acute Exposure Mortality + 
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Cardiac Hospital Admissions + 
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits +
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
All Endpoints
Endpoint
428 (227, 629)
$1,995,154,492 ($718,112,448, $4,843,215,872)
-201,800 (-873,599, 0)
-$7,921,113 (-$40,626,480, $0)
-198 (-616, 184)
-$77,817 (-$252,547, $73,374)
-48 (-130, 33)
-$221,593 (-$617,189, $153,411)
620,980 (336,139, 874,903)
$32,435,121 ($0, $71,797,136)
272 (64, 481)
$1,269,098,181 (-$402,231,328, $4,193,872,384)
19 (-69, 105)
$162,398 (-$289,217, $594,437)
-173 (-591, 210)
-$68,171 (-$243,020, $85,423)
Not applicable
$1,481,665,612 (-$198,432,752, $4,416,672,768)
Absolute Changes from Baseline Mean (95% CI)
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Note: A negative value represents a negative effect to society and should therefore be 
considered as an increase in cost or health impacts. A positive value represents a positive
effect to society and should therefore be considered as a reduction in cost or health impacts.
Endpoint
Acute Exposure Mortality
Acute Respiratory Symptom Days
Asthma Symptom Days
Minor Restricted Activity Days
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Acute Exposure Mortality + 
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Cardiac Hospital Admissions + 
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits +
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
All Endpoints
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Absolute Changes from Baseline Mean (95% CI)
-658 (-876, -442)
-$3,065,838,265 (-$6,989,489,664, -$1,324,193,408)
-2,940,278 (-6820468, 0)
-$42,578,915 (-$155,551,872, $0)
-394,438 (-644,376, -147,054)
-$22,064,012 (-$54,112,592, -$4,533,992)
-871327 (-3,816,480, 0)
-$34,602,731 (-$179,627,168, $0)
-1,558 (-3,282, 0)
-$613,496 (-$1,381,587, $0)
-382 (-719, -46)
-$1,756,359 (-$3,479,363, -$206,747)
-658 (-876, -442)
-$3,065,838,265 (-$6,989,489,664, -$1,324,193,408)
-382 (-719, -46)
-$1,756,359 (-$3,479,363, -$206,747)
-1,558 (-3,282, 0)
-$613,496 (-$1,381,587, -$0)
Not applicable
-$3,167,453,777 (-$7,102,102,016, -$1,420,562,304)
Continued from previous page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
154
Chapter 4
Note: A negative value represents a negative effect to society and should therefore be 
considered as an increase in cost or health impacts. A positive value represents a positive
effect to society and should therefore be considered as a reduction in cost or health impacts.
Table 4.8
Both pollutants: AQBAT estimates from baseline to scenario CC4b,
national data
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Absolute Changes from Baseline Mean (95% CI)
810,934 (-1, 208,7633)
$11,786,653 ($0, $46,570,748)
450 (0, 892)
$149,476,645 ($0, $396,918,784)
32,817 (7,890, 57,660)
$1,835,379 ($274,370, $4,700,622)
162 (92, 233)
$63,595 ($32,510, $99,810)
54 (29, 80)
$309,809 ($145,737, $504,069)
3,479 (0, 7,450)
$1,186,541 ($0, $3,302,251)
346 (183, 509)
$1,610,567,933 ($589,880,640, $3,874,233,856)
142 (80, 204)
$55,795 ($27,981, $88,450)
35 (23, 47)
$160,722 ($95,211, $237,069)
498,629 (293,856, 702,787)
$26,020,581 ($0, $57,630,600)
346 (183, 509)
$1,610,567,933 ($589,880,640, $3,874,233,856)
89 (61, 118)
$470,531 ($289,620, $675,508)
162 (92, 233)
$63,595 ($32,510, $99,810)
Not applicable
$1,801,407,857 ($751,893,632, $4,075,342,080)
Endpoint
Acute Respiratory Symptom Days
Adult Chronic Bronchitis Cases
Asthma Symptom Days
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits
Cardiac Hospital Admissions
Child Acute Bronchitis Episodes
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Restricted Activity Days
Acute Exposure Mortality + 
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Cardiac Hospital Admissions + 
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits +
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
All Endpoints
Endpoint
Acute Exposure Mortality
Acute Respiratory Symptom Days
Adult Chronic Bronchitis Cases
Asthma Symptom Days
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits
Absolute Changes from Baseline Mean (95% CI)
-658 (-876, -442)
-$3,065,838,265 (-$6,989,489,664, -$1,324,193,408)
-2,129,344 (-6,178,484, 1,332,933)
-$30,792,263 (-$136,676,912, $21,992,590)
450 (0, 892)
$149,476,645 ($0, $396,918,784)
-361,620 (-612,340, -112,404)
-$20,228,634 (-$50,705,608, -$3,634,177)
20 (0, 60)
$7,800 ($0, $24,460)
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Table 4.7
PM2.5: AQBAT estimates from baseline to scenario CC4b, national data
Continued on next page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
155
Chapter 4
Note: A negative value represents a negative effect to the society and should therefore be
considered as an increase in cost or health impacts. A positive value represents a positive
effect to the society and should therefore be considered as a reduction in cost or health impacts.
Table 4.9
O3: AQBAT estimates from absence of air pollutants to baseline,
CC4 and CC4b scenarios
* Only average values are presented for simplicity.
Cardiac Hospital Admissions
Child Acute Bronchitis Episodes
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Minor Restricted Activity Days
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Restricted Activity Days
Acute Exposure Mortality + 
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Cardiac Hospital Admissions + 
Respiratory Hospital Admissions
Cardiac Emergency Room Visits +
Respiratory Emergency Room Visits
All Endpoints
Endpoint
54 (29,80)
$309,809 ($145,737, $504,853)
3,479 (0, 7,450)
$1,186,541 ($0, $3,320,251)
346 (183, 509)
$1,610,567,933 ($589,880,640, $3,874,233,856)
-871,327 (-3,816,480, 0)
-$34,602,731 (-$179,627,168, $0)
-1,416 (-3,146,134)
-$557,701 (-$1,315,710, $52,460)
-347 (-684, -11)
-$1,595,637 (-$3,295,326, -$46,996)
498,629 (293,856, 702,787)
$26,020,581 ($0, $57,630,600)
-312 (-584, -44)
-$1,455,270,331 (-$5,706,124,288, $1,622,349,824)
-293 (-630, 43)
-$1,285,828 (-$2,997,135, $273,121)
-1,397 (-3,124, 153)
-$549,901 (-$1,309,949, $59,708)
Not applicable
-$1,366,045,919 (-$5,622,451,200, $1,765,228,032)
Absolute Changes from Baseline Mean (95% CI)
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Count
Valuation
Acute Exposure Mortality
Acute Respiratory 
Symptom Days
Asthma Symptom Days
Minor Restricted Activity Days
Respiratory Emergency
Room Visits
Acute Exposure Mortality +
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Cardiac Hospital 
Admissions + Respiratory
Hospital Admissions
Cardiac Emergency Room
Visits + Respiratory
Emergency Room Visits
Baseline 
to CC4b 
(% change)
20.56
19.50
21.55
23.26
20.44
20.56
20.43
20.44
Baseline 
to CC4 
(% change)
4.84
4.43
5.01
5.33
4.91
4.84
4.92
4.91
CC4b*
-4,158
-17,186,586
-2,481,305
-5,818,014
-9,691
-4,158
-2,376
-9,691
CC4*
-3,616
-15,019,056
-2,143,840
-4,971,734
-8,441
-3,616
-2,070
-8,441
Baseline*
-3,449
-14,381,861
-2,041,466
-4,720,256
-8,046
-3,449
-1,973
-8,046
Continued from previous page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
156
Table 4.10 PM2.5: AQBAT estimates from absence of air pollutants to baseline,
CC4 and CC4b scenarios
* Only average values are presented for simplicity.
Table 4.11 Both pollutants: AQBAT estimates from absence of air pollutants 
to baseline, CC4 and CC4b scenarios
Chapter 4
Acute Respiratory 
Symptom Days
Adult Chronic Bronchitis Cases
Asthma Symptom Days
Cardiac Emergency 
Room Visits
Cardiac Hospital Admissions
Child Acute Bronchitis
Episodes
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Respiratory Emergency
Room Visits
Restricted Activity Days
Acute Exposure Mortality +
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Cardiac Hospital 
Admissions + Respiratory
Hospital Admissions
Cardiac Emergency Room
Visits + Respiratory
Emergency Room Visits
Baseline 
to CC4b 
(% change)
-12.45
-13.64
-12.69
-11.88
-12.47
-15.32
-12.86
-12.30
-12.87
-12.86
-12.43
-12.33
Baseline 
to CC4 
(% change)
-15.46
-17.02
-15.81
-15.63
-15.42
-19.08
-15.95
-15.36
-16.06
-15.95
-15.33
-15.39
CC4b*
-5,533,850
-3,456
-230,118
-141
-386
-30,000
-2,541
-1,005
-3,574,568
-2,541
-634
-1,145
CC4*
-5,343,659
-3,321
-221,890
-135
-373
-28,669
-2,451
-970
-3,444,088
-2,451
-613
-1,105
Baseline*
-6,320,702
-4,002
-263,555
-160
-441
-35,429
-2,916
-1,146
-4,102,799
-2,916
-724
-1,306
Acute Exposure Mortality
Acute Respiratory
Symptom Days
Adult Chronic 
Bronchitis Cases
Asthma Symptom Days
Cardiac Emergency 
Room Visits
Cardiac Hospital Admissions
Child Acute Bronchitis
Episodes
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Minor Restricted Activity Days
Respiratory Emergency
Room Visits
Baseline 
to CC4b 
(% change)
20.56
9.75
-13.64
17.63
-11.88
-12.47
-15.32
-12.86
23.26
16.36
Baseline 
to CC4 
(% change)
4.84
-1.64
-17.02
2.63
-15.63
-15.42
-19.08
-15.95
5.33
2.37
CC4b*
-4,158
-22,720,437
-3,456
-2,711,422
-141
-386
-30,000
-2,541
-5,818,014
-10,696
CC4*
-3,616
-20,362,715
-3,321
-2,365,730
-135
-373
-28,669
-2,451
-4,971,734
-9,410
Baseline*
-3,449
-20,702,562
-4,002
-2,305,021
-160
-441
-35,429
-2,916
-4,720,256
-9,192
Continued on next page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
157
* Only average values are presented for simplicity.
Table 4.12 AQBAT valuation information
Note: SD, standard deviation.
Chapter 4
Restricted Activity Days
Acute Exposure Mortality +
Chronic Exposure Mortality
Cardiac Hospital 
Admissions + Respiratory
Hospital Admissions
Cardiac Emergency 
Room Visits + Respiratory
Emergency Room Visits
-12.87
5.23
11.61
15.86
Baseline 
to CC4b 
(% change)
-16.06
-4.68
-0.56
2.06
Baseline 
to CC4 
(% change)
-3,574,568
-6,699
-3,010
-10,836
CC4b*
-3,444,088
-6,068
-2,682
-9,546
CC4*
-4,102,799
-6,366
-2,697
-9,353
Baseline*
Sources of derivation
Jones-Lee et al., 
1985; Cropper and
Freeman, 1991; 
Rowe et al., 1995
Stieb et al., 2002
Viscusi et al., 1991;
Krupnick and 
Cropper, 1992
Stieb et al., 2002
Stieb et al., 2002
Stieb et al., 2002
Krupnick and 
Cropper, 1989
Jones-Lee et al., 1985;
Cropper and Freeman,
1991; Rowe et al., 1995
Stieb et al., 2002
Stieb et al., 2002
Stieb et al., 2002
Stieb et al., 2002
Form
Discrete
Normal
Discrete
Triangular
Normal
Normal
Discrete
Discrete
Discrete
Normal
Normal
Normal
Endpoint
Acute 
Exposure
Mortality
Acute Respiratory
Symptom Days
Adult Chronic
Bronchitis 
Cases
Asthma 
Symptom Days
Cardiac
Emergency 
Room Visits
Cardiac Hospital
Admissions
Child Acute
Bronchitis
Episodes
Chronic Exposure
Mortality
Minor Restricted
Activity Days
Respiratory
Emergency 
Room Visits
Respiratory
Hospital
Admissions
Restricted 
Activity Days
Parameter 3
High valuation=
$9,013,031 
(probability=17%)
High valuation=
$511,105
(probability=33%)
Maximum 
valuation=$129.81
High valuation=
$510.39 
(probability=33%)
High valuation=
$9,013,031 
(probability=17%)
High valuation=
$61.66
(probability=33%)
Parameter 2
Central valuation=
$4,506,516 
(probability=50%)
SD of valuation=
$10.82
Central valuation=
$292,374 
(probability=34%)
Most likely 
valuation=$30.29
SD of valuation=
$65.64
SD of valuation=
$984.64
Central valuation=
$343.96 
(probability=34%)
Central valuation=
$4,506,516 
(probability=50%)
Central valuation=
$35.70 
(probability=34%)
SD of valuation=
$65.64
SD of valuation=
$656.42
SD of valuation=
$27.04
Parameter 1
Low valuation=
$2,637,960 
(probability=33%)
Mean valuation=
$14.06
Low valuation=
$192,351
(probability=33%)
Minimum 
valuation=$7.57
Mean valuation=
$393.85
Mean valuation=
$5,689
Low valuation=
$166.43 
(probability=33%)
Low valuation=
$2,637,960 
(probability=33%)
Low valuation=
$21.64
(probability=33%)
Mean valuation=
$393.85
Mean valuation=
$4,595
Mean valuation=
$51.93
Continued from previous page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
158
Table 4.13 AQBAT concentration response function
Chapter 4
Pollutant Averaging
period
Health 
endpoint
Source for 
derivation 
of CRF
Excess for a unit
concentration
increase
Mean
Standard
error
Baseline rate
(events per 
quarter per 
million specified
population)
Specified
population
Regression
type
O3
O3
O3
O3
O3
O3
PM2.5
PM2.5
PM2.5
PM2.5
PM2.5
PM2.5
PM2.5
1 hour
1 hour
1 hour
1 hour
1 hour
1 hour
24 hours
24 hours
24 hours
24 hours
24 hours
24 hours
24 hours
Acute
Exposure
Mortality
Acute
Respiratory
Symptom
Days
Asthma
Symptom
Days
Minor
Restricted
Activity
Days
Respiratory
Emergency
Room Visits
Respiratory
Hospital
Admissions
Acute
Respiratory
Symptom
Days
Adult
Chronic
Bronchitis
Cases
Asthma
Symptom
Days
Cardiac
Emergency
Room Visits
Cardiac
Hospital
Admissions
Child Acute
Bronchitis
Episodes
Chronic
Exposure
Mortality
Internal AHED
sub-analysis
based on R.
Burnett’s 
1981–2000 data
and methods
Krupnick, 
1990
Stock et al.,1988;
Whittemore
and Korn, 1980
Ostro and
Rothschild,
1989
Burnett et al.,
1997; Stieb et al.,
2000
Burnett et al.,
1997
Krupnick, 
1990
Abbey et al.,
1995
Whittemore 
and Korn, 
1980
Burnett et al.,
1995; Stieb 
et al., 2000
Burnett 
et al., 1995
Dockery 
et al., 1996
Krewski 
et al., 2000
0.127%
0.0786%
0.173%
0.0530%
0.0791%
0.0791%
0.266%
1.33%
0.144%
0.0711%
0.0711%
2.76%
0.678%
0.0212%
0.0386%
0.0552%
0.291%
0.0355%
0.0355%
0.139%
0.689%
0.0559%
0.0170%
0.0170%
1.73%
0.164%
CD specific
16,000,000
12,000,000
2,000,000
CD specific
CD specific
16,000,000
1,600
12,000,000
CD specific
CD specific
16,000
CD specific
Total 
population
94% (non-
asthmatics)
of the total
population
6% (asth-
matics) of
the total
population
94% (non-
asthmatics)
of the total
population
Total 
population
Total 
population
94% (non-
asthmatics)
of the total
population
Population
25 years old
and over
6% (asth-
matics) 
of the total
population
Total 
population
Total 
population
Population
under 
20 years old
Total 
population
Poisson
Linear
Logistic
Poisson
Poisson
Poisson
Linear
Logistic
Logistic
Linear
Linear
Logistic
Poisson
Continued on next page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
159
Note: CD, census division
Chapter 4
Continued from previous page
Pollutant Averaging
period
Health 
endpoint
Source for 
derivation 
of CRF
Excess for a unit
concentration
increase
Mean
Standard
error
Baseline rate
(events per 
quarter per 
million specified
population)
Specified
population
Regression
type
PM2.5
PM2.5
PM2.5
24 hours
24 hours
24 hours
Respiratory
Emergency
Room Visits
Respiratory
Hospital
Admissions
Restricted
Activity
Days
Burnett 
et al., 1995
Burnett 
et al., 1995
Ostro, 1987
0.0754%
0.0754%
0.482%
0.0132%
0.0132%
0.101%
CD specific
CD specific
4,700,000
Total 
population
Total 
population
94% (non-
asthmatics)
of the 
population
20 years 
old and over
Linear
Linear
Poisson
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
160
4.9
REFERENCES
Abbey, D.E., Lebowitz, M.D., Mills, P.K., Petersen, F.F., Beeson, W.L., et al. (1995). Long term 
ambient concentrations of particulates and oxidants and development of chronic disease 
in a cohort of non-smoking California residents. Inhalation Toxicology, 7, 19–34.
Aga, E., Samoli, E., Touloumi, G., Anderson, H.R., Cadum, E., et al. (2003). Short-term effects of
ambient particles on mortality in the elderly: Results from 28 cities in the APHEA2 project.
European Respiratory Journal, 21(Suppl. 40), 28S–33S.
Anderson, H.R., Bentham, G., Derwent, R.G., Gawith, M., Haines, A., et al. (2001). Health effects of
climate change in the UK. Report for the UK Department of Health. London: Expert Group 
on Climate Change and Health in the UK.
Anderson, H.R., Deleon, A.P., Bland, J.M., Bower, J.S., and Strachan, D.P. (1996). Air pollution 
and daily mortality in London, 1987–92. British Medical Journal, 312(7032), 665–669.
Aw, J., and Kleeman, M.J. (2003). Evaluating the first-order effect of intraannual temperature 
variability on urban air pollution. Journal of Geophysical Research, 108(D12), 4365.
doi:10.1029/2002JD002688.
Ballester, F., Corella, D., Perez-Hoyos, S., Saez, M., and Hervas, A. (1997). Mortality as a function 
of temperature. A study in Valencia. International Journal of Epidemiology, 26(3), 551–561.
Barnett, A.G., Williams, G.M., Schwartz, J., Neller, A.H., Best, T.L., et al. (2005). Air pollution 
and child respiratory health-A case-crossover study in Australia and New Zealand.
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 171, 1272–1278.
Barrow, M.W., and Clark, K.A. (1998). Heat-related illness. American Family Physician, 58(3), 749–756.
Becker, S., Dailey, L.A., Soukup, J.M., Grambow, S.C., Devlin, R.B., et al. (2005). Seasonal variations 
in air pollution particle-induced mediator release and oxidative stress. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 113(8), 1032–1038.
Bernard, S., Samet, J.M., Grambsch, A., Ebi, K.L., and Romieu, I. (2001). The potential impacts 
of climate variability and change on air pollution-related health effects in the United States.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(2), 199–209.
Biggeri, A., Baccini, M., Bellini, P., and Terracini, B. (2005). Meta-analysis of the Italian studies 
of short-term effects of air pollution (MISA), 1990–1999. International Journal of
Occupational and Environmental Health, 11(1), 107–122.
Bouchama, A., and Knochel, J.P. (2002). Medical Progress: Heat Stroke. New England Journal 
of Medicine, 346(25), 1978–1988.
Bouchet, V.S., Moran, M.D., Crevier, L.-P., Dastoor, A.P., Gong, S., et al. (2003). Wintertime and 
summertime evaluation of the regional PM air quality model AURAMS. Paper presented 
at the 26th NATO/CCMS International Technical Meeting on Air Pollution Modelling 
and Its Application, May 26–30, 2003, Istanbul, Turkey.
Brooks-Asplund, E.M., Cannon, J.G., and Kenney, W.L. (2000). Influence of hormone replacement
therapy and aspirin on temperature regulation in postmenopausal women. American 
Journal of Regulatory Integrity and Comparative Physiology, 279(3), R839–R848.
Burnett, R.T., Brook, J., Dann, T., Delocla, C., Philips, O., et al. (2000). Association between 
particulate and gas-phase components of urban air pollution and daily mortality in eight
Canadian cities. Inhalation Toxicology, 12(Suppl. 1), 15–39.
Burnett, R.T., Brook, J.R., Yung, W.T., Dales, R.E., and Krewski, D. (1997). Association between 
ozone and hospitalization for respiratory diseases in 16 Canadian cities. Environmental
Research, 72, 24–31.
Burnett, R.T., Çakmak, S., and Brook, J.R. (1998). The effect of the urban ambient air pollution mix on
daily mortality rates in 11 Canadian cities. Canadian Journal of Public Health, 89(3), 152–156.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
161
Burnett, R.T., Dales, R., Krewski, D., Vincent, R., Dann, T., et al. (1995). Associations between 
ambient particulate sulphate and admissions to Ontario hospitals for cardiac and respiratory
diseases. American Journal of Epidemiology, 142(1), 15–22.
Burnett, R.T., and Goldberg, M.S. (2003). Size-fractionated particulate mass and daily mortality 
in eight Canadian cities. In Revised analyses of time-series studies of air pollution and health
(pp. 85–89). Special report. Boston: Health Effects Institute.
Burnett, R.T., Smith-Doiron, M., Stieb, D., Çakmak, S., and Brook, J.R. (1999). Effects of particulate
and gaseous air pollution on cardiorespiratory hospitalizations. Archives of Environmental
Health, 54(2), 130–139.
California Environmental Protection Agency. (2005). Review of the California Ambient Air Quality
Standards (CAAQS) for Ozone, Volume I of IV. Sacramento, CA: Author.
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME). (2000). Canada-wide Standards for 
particulate matter (PM) and ozone. Québec, QC: Author.
—–. (2006). Particulate matter and ground-level ozone. Retrieved January 28, 2008, from
http://www.ccme.ca/ourwork/air.html?category_id=99
Carcaillon, L., Larrieu, S., Hébréard, L., Helmer, C., and Filleul, L. (Eds.). (2006). Étude des 
facteurs individuels et des comportements ayant pu influencer la santé des personnes 
âgées pendant la vague de chaleur de 2003 [Study of individual factors and behaviours 
influencing seniors’ health during the 2003 heat wave]. Report for the Institut de veille 
sanitaire (InVS). Retrieved October 6, 2006, from http://www.invs.sante.fr/publications/
2006/personnes_agees_canicule_2003/index.html
Chang, C.C., Tsai, S.S., Ho, S.C., and Yang, C.Y. (2005). Air pollution and hospital admissions for 
cardiovascular disease in Taipei, Taiwan. Environmental Research, 98(1), 114–119.
Cheng, C.S., Campbell, M., Li, Q., Li, G., Auld, H., et al. (2005). Differential and combined impacts 
of winter and summer weather and air pollution due to global warming on human mortality 
in south-central Canada. Technical Report to Health Canada. Retrieved January 15, 2008,
from http://www.toronto.ca/health/hphe/pdf/weather_air_pollution_impacts.pdf
Choi, K.S., Inoue, S., and Shinozaki, R. (1997). Air pollution, temperature, and regional differences 
in lung cancer mortality in Japan. Archives of Environmental Health, 52(3), 160–168.
Collins, W.J., Derwent, R.G., Garnier, B., Johnson, C.E., and Sanderson, M.G. (2003). Effect 
of stratosphere–troposphere exchange on the future tropospheric ozone trend. Journal of
Geophysical Research, 108(D12), 8528. doi:10.1029/2002JD002617.
Confalonieri, U., Menne, B., Akhtar, R., Ebi, K.L., Hauengue, M., et al. (2007). Human health. 
In M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, and C.E. Hanson (Eds.).
Climate change 2007: Climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working 
Group II contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment
Report (pp. 391–431). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Côté, J., Desmarais, J.-G., Gravel, S., Méthot, A., Patoine, A., et al. (1998a). The operational
CMC/MRB Global Environmental Multiscale (GEM) model. Part I: Design considerations 
and formulation. Monthly Weather Review, 126, 1373–1395.
—–. (1998b). The operational CMC/MRB Global Environmental Multiscale (GEM) model. 
Part II: Results. Monthly Weather Review, 126, 1397–1418.
Crighton, E.C., Mamdani, M.M., and Upshur, R.E.G. (2001). A population-based time series analysis 
of asthma hospitalizations in Ontario, Canada: 1988 to 2000. BMC Health Services 
Research, 1, 7–15, doi:10.1186/1472-6963-1-7.
Cropper, M.L., and Freeman, A.M. III. (1991). Environmental health effects. In B. Braden and C.D.
Kolstad (Eds.), Measuring the demand for environmental quality. New York: North-Holland.
Curriero, F.C., Heiner, K.S., Samet, J.M., Zeger, S.L., Strug, L., et al. (2002). Temperature and mortality
in 11 cities of the eastern United States. American Journal of Epidemiology, 155, 80–87.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
162
Delfino, R., Sioutas, C., and Malik, S. (2005). Potential role of ultrafine particles in associations
between airborne particle mass and cardiovascular health. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 113(8), 934–946.
Dematte, J.E., O’Mara, K., Buescher, J., Whitney, C.G., Forsythe, S., et al. (1998). Near-fatal heat
stroke during the 1995 heat wave in Chicago. Annals of Internal Medicine, 129(3), 173–181.
Diaz, J., Garcia, R., de Velazquez, C.F., Hernandez, E., Lopez, C., et al. (2002). Effects of extremely
hot days on people older than 65 years in Seville (Spain) from 1986 to 1997. International
Journal of Biometeorology, 46(3), 145–149.
Diaz, J., Linares, C., Garcia-Herrera, R., Lopez, C., and Trigo, R. (2004). Impact of temperatures and
air pollution on the mortality of children in Madrid. Journal of Occupational Environmental
Medicine, 46, 768–774.
Dinarello, C.A., and Gelfand, J. (2001). Alterations in body temperature. Fever and hyperthermia. 
In E. Braunwald, E. Hauser, A.S. Fauci, D.L. Longo, D.L. Kasper, et al. (Eds.), Harrison’s
principles of internal medicine, 15th edition (pp. 90–94). New York, San Francisco,
Washington, D.C.: McGraw-Hill Medical Publishing Division.
Dockery, D.W., Cunningham, J., Damokosh, A.I., Neas, L.M., Spengler, J.D. et al. (1996). Health
effects of acid aerosols on North American children: Respiratory symptoms. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 104(5), 500–505.
Dockery, D.W., Luttmann-Gibson, H., Rich, D.Q., Link, M.S., Mittleman, M.A., et al. (2005).
Association of air pollution with increased incidence of ventricular tachyarrhythmias recorded 
by implanted cardioverter defibrillators. Environmental Health Perspectives, 113(6), 670–674.
Dominici, F., McDermott, A., Zeger, S.L., and Samet, J.M. (2002). On the use of generalized 
additive models in time-series studies of air pollution and health. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 156(3), 193–203.
Ebelt, S.T., Wilson, W.E., and Brauer, M. (2005). Exposure to ambient and nonambient components 
of particulate matter: A comparison of health effects. Epidemiology, 16(3), 396–405.
Environment Canada. (2001). Precursor contributions to ambient fine particulate matter in Canada.
Summary report. Ottawa: Author, Meteorological Service of Canada.
—–. (2002a). Climate trends and variations bulletin. Retrieved October 6, 2006, from 
http://www.msc-smc.ec.gc.ca/ccrm/bulletin/
—–. (2002b). Meteorological service of Canada (MSC). Retrieved October 6, 2006, from
http://www.msc-smc.ec.gc.ca/contents_e.html
—–. (2003a). Atmospheric science of particulate matter: Update in support of the Canada-Wide
Standards for particulate matter and ozone. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2003b). Environmental signals: Canada’s national environmental indicator series. Retrieved
October 6, 2006, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/soer-ree/English/Indicator_series/default.cfm
—–. (2004). Canada–United States transboundary PM science assessment. Report undertaken by 
the Canada–U.S. subcommittee on scientific co-operation, in support of the Canada–U.S. 
Air Quality Agreement. Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and Government Services.
—–. (2006). Canada–United States Air Quality Agreement – Progress Report 2006. Clean Air Online.
Retrieved January 24, 2008, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/cleanair-airpur/caol/canus/report/
2006canus/c1_p1_e.cfm#s1_1
Finkelstein, M.M., Jerrett, M., and Sears, M.R. (2004). Traffic air pollution and mortality rate 
advancement periods. American Journal of Epidemiology, 160(2), 173–177.
—–. (2005). Environmental inequality and circulatory disease mortality gradients. Journal 
of Epidemiology and Community Health, 59(6), 481–487.
Fischer, P.H., Brunekreef, B., and Lebret, E. (2004). Air pollution related deaths during the 2003 
heat wave in the Netherlands. Atmospheric Environment, 38, 1083–1085.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
163
Freedman, R.R., and Krell, W. (1999). Reduced thermoregulatory null zone in postmenopausal women
with hot flashes. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 181(1), 66–70.
Fung, K.Y., Krewski, D., Chen, Y., Burnett, R., and Çakmak, S. (2003). Comparison of time series and
case-crossover analyses of air pollution and hospital admission data. International Journal 
of Epidemiology, 32(6), 1064–1070.
Gauthier, J., Morais, J.A., and Mallet, L. (2005). Impact des vagues de chaleur en gériatrie et risques
associés aux médicaments [Impact of heat waves on seniors and risks associated with 
medication use]. Pharmactuel, 38(3), 123–133.
Goldberg, M.S., Bailar, J.C. III., Burnett, R.T., Brook, J.R., Tamblyn, R., et al. (2000). Identifying 
subgroups of the general population that may be susceptible to short-term increases in 
particulate air pollution: A time-series study in Montreal, Quebec. Research Reports of the
Health Effects Institute, 97, 7–113.
Goldberg, M.S., Burnett, R.T., Bailar, J.C. III., Brook, J., Bonvalot, Y., et al. (2001a). The association
between daily mortality and ambient air particle pollution in Montreal, Quebec. 1. Nonaccidental
mortality. Environmental Research, 86(1), 12–25.
—–. (2001b). The association between daily mortality and ambient air particle pollution in Montreal,
Quebec. 2. Cause-specific mortality. Environmental Research, 86(1), 26–36.
Goldberg, M.S., Burnett, R.T., Bailar, J.C. III., Tamblyn, R., Ernst, P., et al. (2001c). Identification 
of persons with cardiorespiratory conditions who are at risk of dying from the acute effects of
ambient air particles. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(Suppl. 4), 487–494.
Goldberg, M.S., Burnett, R.T., Brook, J., Bailar, J.C. III., Valois, M.-F., et al. (2001d). Association
between daily cause-specific mortality and concentrations of ground-level ozone in Montreal,
Quebec. American Journal of Epidemiology, 154(9), 817–826.
Goldberg, M.S., Burnett, R.T., Yale, J.F., Valois, M.F., and Brook, J.R. (2006). Associations between
ambient air pollution and daily mortality among persons with diabetes and cardiovascular 
disease. Environmental Research, 100(2), 255–267.
Gong, S.L., Barrie, L.A., Blanchet, J.-P., von Salzen, K., Lohmann, U., et al. (2003a). Canadian Aerosol
Module: A size segregated simulation of atmospheric aerosol processes for climate and air
quality models: Part 1. Module development. Journal of Geophysical Research, 108(D1), 4007.
doi:10.1029/2001JD002002.
Gong, W., Dastoor, A.P., Bouchet, V.S., Gong, S., Makar, P.A., et al. (2003b). Cloud processing of 
gases and aerosols in a regional air quality model (AURAMS) and its evaluation against 
precipitation-chemistry data. In Proceedings of the Fifth AMS Conference on Atmospheric
Chemistry, 2.3 (CD-ROM). February 9–13, 2003, Long Beach, CA. Boston: American
Meteorological Society.
Gong, H. Jr., Linn, W.S., Sioutas, C., Terrell, S.L., Clark, K.W., et al. (2003c). Controlled exposures 
of healthy and asthmatic volunteers to concentrated ambient fine particles in Los Angeles.
Inhalation Toxicology, 15(4), 305–325.
Gong, W., Dastoor, A.P., Bouchet, V.S., Gong, S.L., Makar, P.A., et al. (2006). Cloud processing 
of gases and aerosols in a regional air quality model (AURAMS). Atmospheric 
Research, 82(1–2), 248–275.
Gordon, C.J. (2003). Role of environmental stress in the physiological response to chemical toxicants.
Environmental Research, 92(1), 1–7.
Government of Canada. (2007). Canadian environmental sustainability indicators 2007: Highlights.
Retrieved January 25, 2008 from http://www.environmentandresources.gc.ca/
default.asp?lang=En&n=2102636F-1
Grell, G.A., Dudhia, J., and Stauffer, D. (1994). A description of the fifth-generation Penn State/NCAR
Mesoscale Model (MM5). In NCAR Technical Note, TN-398 + STR. Boulder, CO: 
National Centre for Atmospheric Research.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
164
Hajat, S., Haines, A., Goubet, S.A., Atkinson, R.W., and Anderson, H.R. (1999). Association of 
air pollution with daily GP consultations for asthma and other lower respiratory conditions 
in London. Thorax, 54(7), 597–605.
Hajat, S., Kovats, R.S., Atkinson, R.W., and Haines, A. (2002). Impact of hot temperatures on 
death in London: A time series approach. Journal of Epidemiology and Community 
Health, 56, 367–372.
Hart, L.E., Egier, B.P., Shimizu, A.G., Tandan, P.J., and Sutton, J.R. (1980). Exertional heat stroke: 
The runner’s nemesis. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 122(10), 1144–1150.
Hémon, D., and Jougla, E. (2003). Surmortalité liée à la canicule d’août 2003-Rapport d’étape
[Excess mortality linked to the heat wave of August 2003 – Interim report]. Paris: 
Inserm-Institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale.
Hogrefe, C., Lynn, B., Gaffin, S., Civerolo, K., Ku, J.-Y., et al. (2004). Simulating changes in regional 
air pollution over the eastern United States due to changes in global and regional climate 
and emissions. Journal of Geophysical Research, 109, D22301. doi:10.1029/2001JD004690.
Huang, Y.C., and Ghio, A.J. (2006). Vascular effects of ambient pollutant particles and metals.
Current Vascular Pharmacology, 4(3), 199–203.
Hughson, R.L., Green, H.J., Houston, M.E., Thomson, J.A., MacLean, D.R., et al. (1980). 
Heat injuries in Canadian mass participation runs. Canadian Medical Association 
Journal, 122(10), 1141–1142.
Hulme, M., and Jenkins, G. (1998). Climate change scenarios for the United Kingdom: Scientific
report. Norwich, U.K.: Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia.
Hyde, D.M., Hubbard, W.C., Wong, V., Wu, R., Pinkerton, K., et al. (1992). Ozone-induced acute 
tracheobronchial epithelial injury: Relationship to granulocyte emigration in the lung.
American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology, 6, 481–497.
Industrial Economics, Incorporated. (2006). Expanded expert judgment assessment of the concentration–
response relationship between PM2.5 exposure and mortality. Final report prepared for 
the Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Retrieved October 25, 2006, from http://www.epa.gov/ttn/ecas/regdata/Uncertainty/
pm_ee_report.pdf
Institut national de veille sanitaire (InVS) de France. (2004). Vague de chaleur de l’été 2003:
Relations entre températures, pollution atmosphérique et mortalité dans neuf villes françaises
[The heat wave of summer 2003 : Relationships between temperature, atmospheric pollution 
and mortality in nine French cities]. France: Institut national de veille sanitaire.
Integrated Global Observing Strategy (IGOS). (2004). IGOS atmospheric chemistry theme report:
Integrated Global Atmospheric Chemistry Observations (IGACO). Report prepared for the
11th IGOS Partners Meeting, May 27, 2004, Rome, Italy.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2001a). Technical summary. Climate change
2001: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Third Assessment Report (pp.19–73). Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2001b). Climate change 2001: The scientific basis. Working Group I contribution to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Third Assessment Report. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007a). Summary for policymakers. In S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,
et al. (Eds.). Climate change 2007: The physical science basis. Working Group I contribution
to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report (pp. 1–18).
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
165
—–. (2007b). Summary for policymakers. In M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der
Linden, and C.E. Hanson (Eds.). Climate change 2007: Climate change impacts, adaptation
and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change Fourth Assessment Report (pp. 7–22). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Ito, K., De Leon, S.F., and Lippman, M. (2005). Associations between ozone and daily mortality:
Analysis and meta-analysis. Epidemiology, 16(4), 446–457.
Jerrett, M., Burnett, R.T., Brook, J., Kanaroglou, P., Giovis, C., et al. (2004). Do socioeconomic 
characteristics modify the short term association between air pollution and mortality? 
Evidence from a zonal time series in Hamilton, Canada. Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health, 58(1), 31–40.
Jiang, W. (2003). Instantaneous secondary organic aerosol yields and their comparison with overall
aerosol yields for aromatic and biogenic hydrocarbons. Atmospheric Environment, 37, 5439–5444.
Johnson, H., Kovats, R.S., McGregor, G., Stedman, J., Gibbs, M., et al. (2005). The impact of the 2003
heat wave on daily mortality in England and Wales and the use of rapid weekly mortality 
estimates. Eurosurveillance Monthly Releases, 10(7), 168–171.
Jones-Lee, M.W., Hammerton, M., and Philips, P.R. (1985). The value of safety: Results of a national
sample survey. The Economic Journal, 95, 49–72.
Kalkstein, L.S. (1991). A new approach to evaluate the impact of climate on human mortality.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 96, 145–150.
Katsouyanni, K., Pantazopoulou, A., Touloumi, G., Tselepidaki, I., Moustris, K., et al. (1993). 
Evidence for interaction between air pollution and high temperature in the causation of excess
mortality. Archives of Environmental Health, 48(4), 235–242.
Katsouyanni, K., Touloumi, G., Samoli, E., Gryparis, A., Le Tertre, A., et al. (2001). Confounding 
and effect modification in the short-term effects of ambient particles on total mortality: 
Results from 29 European cities within the APHEA2 project. Epidemiology, 12(5), 521–531.
Keatinge, W.R., Donaldson, G.C., Cordioli, E., Martinelli, M., Kunst, A.E., et al. (2000). Health 
related mortality in warm and cold regions of Europe: Observational study. British Medical
Journal, 321(7262), 670–673.
Knowlton, K., Rosenthal, J.E., Hogrefe, C., Lynn, B., Gaffin, S., et al. (2004). Assessing ozone-related
health impacts under a changing climate. Environmental Health Perspectives, 112(15), 1557–1563.
Koppe, C., Kovats, R.S., Jendritzky, G., and Menne, B. (2004). Heat-waves: Risks and responses. 
In Health and Global Environmental Change. Series, No. 2. Copenhagen, Denmark: 
World Health Organization.
Koutsavlis, A.T., and Kosatsky, T. (2003). Environmental-temperature injury in a Canadian metropolis.
Journal of Environmental Health, 66, 40–45.
Kovats, R.S., Hajat, S., and Wilkinson, P. (2004). Contrasting patterns of mortality and hospital 
admissions during hot weather and heat waves in greater London, U.K. Occupational and
Environmental Medicine, 61(11), 893–898.
Krewski, D., Burnett, R.T., Goldberg, M.S., Hoover, K., Siemiatycki, J., et al. (2000). Reanalysis of the
Harvard Six Cities Study and the American Cancer Society study of particulate air pollution and
mortality. A special report of the Health Effects Institute’s Particle Epidemiology Reanalysis
Project. Retrieved January 29, 2008, from http://pubs.healtheffects.org/view.php?id=6.
Kreyling, W.G., Semmler-Behnke, M., and Moller, W. (2006). Ultrafine particle-lung interactions: 
Does size matter? Journal of Aerosol Medicine, 19(1), 74–83.
Krupnick, A.J., and Cropper, M.L. (1989). Valuing chronic morbidity damages: Medical costs, labor
market effects, and individual valuations. Final report to U.S. EPA, Office of Policy Analysis.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
166
—–. (1992). The effect of information on health risk valuations. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 29–48.
Krupnick, A.J., Harrington, W., and Ostro, B. (1990). Ambient ozone and acute health effects: 
Evidence from daily data. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 18(1), 1–18.
Krzyzanowski, M., Quackenboss, J.J., and Lebowitz, M.D. (1992). Relation of peak expiratory flow
rates and symptoms to ambient ozone. Archives of Environmental Health, 47, 107–115.
Künzli, N., Lurmann, F., Segal, M., Ngo, L., Balmes, J., et al. (1997). Association between lifetime
ambient ozone exposure and pulmonary function in college freshmen—Results of a pilot study.
Environmental Research, 72(1), 8–23.
Langner, J., Bergström, R., and Foltescu, V. (2005). Impact of climate change on surface ozone and
deposition of sulphur and nitrogen in Europe. Atmospheric Environment, 39, 1129–1141.
Laurila, T., Jonson, J.E., Langner, J., Sundet, J., Tuovinen, J.-P., et al. (2004a). Ozone exposure scenarios
in the Nordic countries during the 21st century. Oslo: Norwegian Meteorological Institute.
Laurila, T., Tuvinen, J.-P., Tarvainen, V., and Simpson, D. (2004b). Trends and scenarios of ground-level
ozone concentrations in Finland. Boreal Environment Research, 9, 167–184.
Ledrans, M., and Isnard, H. (Eds.). (2003). Impact sanitaire de la vague de chaleur d’août 2003 en
France [Public health impacts of the heat wave in France of August 2003]. Saint-Maurice,
France: Institut de veille sanitaire. Retrieved April 1, 2005, from http://www.invs.sante.fr/
publications/2003/chaleur_aout_2003/
Lee-Chiong Jr., T.L., and Stitt, J.T. (1995). Disorders of temperature regulation. Comprehensive
Therapy, 21, 697–704.
Leung, L.R., and Gustafson Jr., W.I. (2005). Potential regional climate change and implications 
to U.S. air quality. Geophysical Research Letters, 32(L13711). doi:10.1029/2005GL022911.
Li, Z., Carter, J.D., Dailey, L.A., and Huang, Y.C. (2005). Pollutant particles produce vasoconstriction
and enhance MAPK signaling via angiotensin type I receptor. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 113(8), 1009–1014.
Lippman, M. (2000a). Environmental toxicants: Human exposures and their health effects. 2nd ed. 
New York: Wiley-Interscience.
—–. (2000b). Ozone. In M. Lippman (Ed.), Environmental toxicants: Human exposures and their
health effects (pp. 665–723). New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Lipsett, M.J., Tsai, F.C., Roger, L., Woo, M., and Ostro, B.D. (2006). Coarse particles and heart 
rate variability among older adults with coronary artery disease in the Coachalla valley,
California. Environmental Health Perspectives, 114(8), 1215–1220.
Lloyd, S.A. (2001). The changing chemistry of earth’s atmosphere. In J.L. Aron, and J.A. Patz (Eds.),
Ecosystem change and public health. A global perspective (pp. 188232). Baltimore and
London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lurmann, F.W., Lloyd, A.C., and Atkinson, R. (1986). A chemical mechanism for use in 
long-range transport/acid deposition computer modeling. Journal of Geophysical 
Research, 91(D10), 10905–10936.
Makar, P.A., Bouchet, V.S., Gong, W., Moran, M.D., Gong, S., et al. (2004). AURAMS/Pacific 2001
measurement intensive comparison. Proceedings of the 27th NATO/CCMS International
Technical Meeting on Air Pollution Modeling and Its Application, Banff, Canada, 
October 25–29, 2004.
Makar, P.A., Bouchet, V.S., and Nenes, A. (2003). Inorganic chemistry calculations using HETV—
A vectorized solver for the SO4 2--NO3--NH4+ system based on the ISORROPIA algorithms.
Atmospheric Environment, 37(16), 2279–2294.
McConnell, R., Berhane, K., Gilliland, F., London, S.J., Vora, H., et al. (1999). Air pollution and 
bronchitic symptoms in southern California children with asthma. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 107(9), 757–760.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
167
McGeehin, M.A., and Mirabelli, M. (2001). The potential impacts of climate variability and change 
on temperature-related morbidity and mortality in the United States. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 109(Suppl. 2), 185–189.
McKeen, S., Wilczak, J., Grell, G., Djalalova, I., Peckham, S., et al. (2005). Assessment of an ensemble
of seven real-time ozone forecasts over eastern North America during the summer of 2004.
Geophysical Research, 110, D21307. doi:10.1029/2005JD005858.
Michelozzi, P., Forastiere, F., Fusco, D., Perucci, C.A., Ostro, B., et al. (1998). Air pollution and daily
mortality in Rome, Italy. Occupational Environmental Medicine, 55, 605–610.
Mickley, L.J., Jacob, D.J., and Field, B.D. (2004). Effects of future climate change on regional air 
pollution episodes in the United States. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(L24103).
doi:10.1029/2004GL021216.
Morris, R.E., Guthrie, P.D., and Knopes, C.A. (1995). Photochemical modeling analysis under global
warming conditions. In Proceedings of the 88th Air and Waste Management Association
(AWMA) annual meeting and exhibition, paper no. 95-WP-74B.02. Pittsburgh: Air and Waste
Management Association.
Mueller-Anneling, L., Avol, E., Peters, J.M., and Thorne, P.S. (2004). Ambient endotoxin concentrations
in PM10 from southern California. Environmental Health Perspectives, 112(5), 583–588.
Muggeo, V.M.R. (2004). A note on temperature effect estimate in mortality time series analysis.
International Journal of Epidemiology, 93, 1151–1153.
Naughton, M.P., Henderson, A., Mirabelli, M.C., Kaiser, R., Wilhelm, J.L., et al. (2002). Heat-related
mortality during a 1999 heat wave in Chicago. American Journal of Preventive Medicine,
22(4), 221–227.
Neas, L.M., Dockery, D.W., Burge, H., Koutrakis, P., and Speizer, F.E. (1996). Fungus spores, air 
pollutants, and other determinants of peak respiratory flow in children. American Journal 
of Epidemiology, 143(8), 797–807.
Newhouse, C.P., and Levetin, E. (2004). Correlation of environmental factors with asthma and rhinitis
symptoms in Tulsa, OK. Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, 92, 356–366.
Newson, R., Strachan, D., Archibald, E., Emberlin, J., Hardaker, P., et al. (1998). Acute asthma epidemics,
weather and pollen in England, 1987–1994. European Respiratory Journal, 11, 694–701.
O’Neill, M.S., Hajat, S., Zanobetti, A., Ramirez-Aguilar, M., and Schwartz, J. (2005a). Impact of 
control for air pollution and respiratory epidemics on the estimated associations of temperature
and daily mortality. International Journal of Biometeorology, 50, 121–129.
O’Neill, M.S., Zanobetti, A., and Schwartz, J. (2005b). Disparities by race in heat-related mortality in
four US cities: The role of air conditioning prevalence. Journal of Urban Health, 82, 191–197.
Ostro, B.D. (1987). Air pollution and morbidity revisited: A specification test. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 14, 87–98.
Ostro, B.D., Feng, W.-Y., Broadwin, R., Green, S., and Lipsett, M. (2006). The effects of components
of fine particulate air pollution on mortality in California: Results from CALFINE.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 115(1), 13–19.
Ostro, B.D., and Rothschild, S. (1989). Air pollution and acute respiratory morbidity: An observational
study of multiple pollutants. Environmental Research, 50(2), 238–247.
Park, S.K., O’Neill, M.S., Vokonas, P.S., Sparrow, D., and Schwartz, J. (2005). Effects of air 
pollution on heart rate variability: The VA normative aging study. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 113(3), 304–309.
Penn, A., Murphy, G., Barker, S., Henk, W., and Penn, L. (2005). Combustion-derived ultrafine particles
transport organic toxicants to target cells. Environmental Health Perspectives, 113(8), 956–963.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
168
Piver, W.T., Ando, M., Ye, F., and Portier, C.J. (1999). Temperature and air pollution as risk factors 
for heat stroke in Tokyo, July and August 1980–1995. Environmental Health Perspectives,
107(11), 911–916.
Pope, C.A. III., Burnett, R.T., Thun, M.J., Calle, E.E., Krewski, D., et al. (2002). Lung cancer, 
cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term exposure to fine particulate air pollution. 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 287(9), 1132–1141.
Pope, C.A. III., Burnett, R.T., Thurston, G.D., Thun, M.J., Calle, E.E., et al. (2004). Cardiovascular
mortality and long-term exposure to particulate air pollution: Epidemiological evidence 
of general pathophysiological pathways of disease. Circulation, 109(1), 71–77.
Pope, C.A. III., and Kalkstein, L.S. (1996). Synoptic weather modeling and estimates of the 
exposure-response relationship between daily mortality and particulate air pollution.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 104(4), 414–420.
Prather, M., Gauss, M., Bernsten, T., Isaksen, I., Sundet, J., et al. (2003). Fresh air in the 21st century?
Geophysical Research Letters, 30(2), 1100. doi:10.1029/2002GL016285.
Pudykiewicz, J.A., Kallaur, A., and Smolarkiewicz, P.K. (1997). Semi-Lagrangian modeling 
of tropospheric ozone. Tellus, 49B(3), 231–248.
Pun, B.K., Wu, S.-Y., and Seigneur, C. (2002). Contribution of biogenic emissions to the formation 
of ozone and particulate matter in the eastern United States. Environmental Science 
and Technology, 36(16), 3586–3596.
Rainham, D.G., and Smoyer-Tomic, K.E. (2003). The role of air pollution in the relationship between 
a heat stress index and human mortality in Toronto. Environmental Research, 96, 328–337.
Ren, C., Williams, G.M., and Tong, S. (2006). Does particulate matter modify the association 
between temperature and cardiorespiratory diseases? Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 114(11), 1690–1696.
Roberts, S. (2004). Interactions between particulate air pollution and temperature in air pollution 
mortality time series studies. Environmental Research, 96(3), 328–337.
Rowe, R.D., Lang, C.M., Chestnut, L.G., Latimer, D., Rae, D., et al. (1995). The New York 
electricity externality study. Dobbs Ferry, New York: Oceana Publications.
Rowell, L.B. (1983). Cardiovascular aspects of human thermoregulation. Circulation Research,
52(4), 367–379.
Royal Society of Canada. (2001). Report of an expert panel to review the socio-economic models and
related components supporting the development of Canada-Wide Standards for particulate
matter and ozone. Ottawa: Author.
Ruidavets, J.B., Cournot, M., Cassadou, S., Giroux, M., Meybeck, M., et al. (2005). Ozone air pollution
is associated with acute myocardial infarction. Circulation, 111(5), 563–569.
Russell, G.L., Miller, J.R., and Rind, D. (1995). A coupled atmosphere-ocean model for transient 
climate change studies. Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 33, 683–730.
Samet, J.M., Dominici, F., McDermott, A., and Zeger, S.L. (2003). New problems for an old design:
Time series analyses of air pollution and health [Commentaries]. Epidemiology, 14(1), 11–12.
Samet, J.M., Zeger, S., Kelsall, J., Xu, J., and Kalkstein, L. (1998). Does weather confound or modify
the association of particulate air pollution with mortality? An analysis of the Philadelphia 
data, 1973–1980. Environmental Research, 77, 9–19.
Sartor, F., Demuth, C., Snacken, R., and Walckiers, D. (1997). Mortality in the elderly and 
ambient ozone concentration during the hot summer, 1994, in Belgium. Environmental
Research, 72(2), 109–117.
Sartor, F., Snacken, R., Demuth, C., and Walckiers, D. (1995). Temperature, ambient ozone levels, 
and mortality during summer 1994, in Belgium. Environmental Research, 70(2), 105–113.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
169
Semenza, J.C., McCullough, J.E., Flanders, W.D., McGeehin, M.A., and Lumpkin, J.R. (1999). Excess
hospital admissions during the July 1995 heat wave in Chicago. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 16(4), 359–360.
Sheridan, S.C., and Kalkstein, L.S. (2004). Progress in heat watch-warning system technology. Bulletin
of the American Meteorological Society, 85(12), 1931–1941.
Sirois, A., Pudykiewicz, J.A., and Kallaur, A. (1999). A comparison between simulated and observed
ozone mixing ratios in eastern North America. Journal of Geophysical Research, 104,
21397–21423.
Smoyer, K.E., Kalkstein, L.S., Greene, J.S., and Ye, H.C. (2000). The impacts of weather and pollution
on human mortality in Birmingham, Alabama and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. International
Journal of Climatology, 20, 881–897.
Speizer, F.E. (2001). Environmental lung diseases. In E. Braunwald, S.L. Hauser, A.S. Fauci, D.L.
Longo, D.L. Kasper, et al. (Eds.), Harrison’s principles of internal medicine (pp. 1467–1475).
15th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical Publishing Division.
Stedman, J.R. (2004). The predicted number of air pollution related deaths in the U.K. during the
August 2003 heatwave. Atmospheric Environment, 38(8), 1087–1090.
Stieb, D.M., Beveridge, R.C., Brook, J.R., Smith-Doiron, M., Burnett, R.T., et al. (2000). Air pollution,
aeroallergens and cardiorespiratory emergency department visits in Saint John, Canada.
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology, 10(5), 461–477.
Stieb, D.M., De Civita, P., Johnson, F.R., Manary, M., Anis, A., et al. (2002). Economic evaluation 
of the benefits of reducing acute cardiorespiratory morbidity associated with air pollution.
Environmental Health, 1, 7.
Stock, T.H, Gehan, B.M., Buffler, P.A., Constant, C.F., Hsi, B.P., et al. (1988). The Houston area 
asthma study: A reanalysis. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Air Pollution 
Control Association, Dallas, Texas, June 19–24.
Stockwell, W.R., and Lurmann, F.W. (1989). Intercomparison of the ADOM and RADM gas-phase
chemical mechanisms. Electrical Power Research Institute (EPRI) Topical Report. 
Palo Alto, CA: EPRI.
Sunyer, J., Castellsague, J., Saez, M., Tobias, A., and Anto, J.M. (1996). Air pollution and mortality 
in Barcelona. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 50(Suppl. 1), S76–S80.
Toulemon, L., and Barbieri, M. (2004). La canicule d’août 2003. Combien de morts? Qui est mort? [The
heat wave of August 2003. How many deaths? Who died?] Population et sociétés, 399, 4–7.
Tuovinen, J.-P., Simpson, D., Mayerhofer, P., Lindfors, V., and Laurila, T. (2001). Surface ozone 
exposures in northern Europe in changing environmental conditions. Paper presented at 
the 8th European Symposium on the Physico-Chemical Behavior of Atmospheric Pollutants,
September 17–20, 2001, Torino, Italy.
U.K. Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). (2005). Air quality and 
climate change: A U.K. perspective. Draft report produced by Air Quality Expert 
Group (AQEG). Retrieved November 10, 2006, from http://www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/
consult/airqual-climatechange/index.htm
U.K. Met Office. (2006). Heat-health watch. Retrieved September 20, 2006, from 
http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/weather/uk/heathealth/index.html
Urch, B., Silverman, F., Corey, P., Brook, J.R., Lukic, K.Z., et al. (2005). Acute blood pressure 
responses in healthy adults during controlled air pollution exposures. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 113(8), 1052–1055.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA). (1989). The potential effects of global climate change
in the United States. Washington, D.C.: U.S. EPA Office of Policy, Planning and Evaluation.
Chapter 4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
170
—–. (2004). Air quality criteria for particulate matter. Volume II of II. Washington, D.C.: Author. 
—–. (2006a). Air quality criteria for ozone and related photochemical oxidants. Volume I of III.
Washington, D.C.: Author.
—–. (2006b). Biogenic emissions characterization. Retrieved October 12, 2006, from http://www.epa.gov/
appcdwww/apb/biogenic.htm
—–. (2006c). Biogenic Emissions Inventory System (BEIS) modeling. Retrieved October 12, 2006, 
from http://www.epa.gov/asmdnerl/biogen.html
Vedal, S., Brauer, M., White, R., and Petkau, J. (2003). Air pollution and daily mortality in a city 
with low levels of pollution. Environmental Health Perspectives, 111(1), 45–52.
Villeneuve, P.J., Burnett, R.T., Shi, Y., Krewski, D., Goldberg, M.S., et al. (2003). A time-series 
study of air pollution, socioeconomic status, and mortality in Vancouver, Canada. Journal 
of Exposure Analysis & Environmental Epidemiology, 13(6), 427–435.
Viscusi, W.K., Magat, W.A., and Huber, J. (1991). Pricing environmental health risks: Survey 
assessments of risk–risk and risk–dollar trade–offs for chronic bronchitis. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 21(1), 32–51.
Vittiglio, M. (2006). Toronto’s heat-health alert system. Canadian Climate Impacts and Adaptation
Research Network (CCIARN). Retrieved October 11, 2006, from http://www.c-ciarn.ca/
primer_website_html/page14_e.asp
Watson, R.T., Zinyowera, M., and Moss, R.H. (Eds.). (1998). The regional impacts of climate 
change: An assessment of vulnerability. A special report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change Working Group II. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Whittemore, A.S., and Korn, E.L. (1980). Asthma and air pollution in the Los Angeles area.
American Journal of Public Health, 70(7), 687–696.
Working Group on Air Quality Objectives and Guidelines (1999a). National Ambient Air Quality
Objectives for Particulate Matter. Part 1: Science Assessment Document. Report published
under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act. Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and
Government Services.
—–. (1999b). National Ambient Air Quality Objectives for Particulate Matter: Addendum to the Science
Assessment Document. Report published under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act.
Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and Government Services.
Yang, L., Zhang, W., He, H.Z., and Zhang, G.G. (1988). Experimental studies on combined effects of
high temperature and carbon monoxide. Journal of Tongji Medical University, 8(1), 60–65.
Yap, D., Reid, N., DeBrou, G., and Bloxam, R. (2005). Transboundary air pollution in Ontario.
Toronto: Ontario Ministry of the Environment.
Yeo, T.P. (2004). Heat stroke. A comprehensive review. AACN Clinical Issues: Advanced Practice 
in Acute & Critical Care, 15(2), 280–293.
Zhang, L., Gong, S.-L., Padro, J., and Barrie, L. (2001). A size-segregated particle dry deposition
scheme for an atmospheric aerosol module. Atmospheric Environment, 35, 549–560.
Zhang, L., Moran, M.D., Makar, P.A., Brook, J.R., and Gong, S. (2002). Modeling gaseous dry 
deposition in AURAMS-A Unified Regional Air-quality Modeling System. Atmospheric
Environment, 36, 537–560.
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
The Impacts of Climate Change
on Water-, Food-, Vector- 
and Rodent-Borne Diseases
Dominique Charron
Manon Fleury
L. Robbin Lindsay
Nicholas Ogden
Corinne J. Schuster
Contributor: 
David Noble
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
173
CONTENTS
5.1
Introduction .............................................................................................................. 174
5.1.1 Method and Approach ...................................................................................... 175
5.2
Food- and Water-Borne Diseases ............................................................................ 176
5.2.1 Food-Borne Diseases ........................................................................................ 176
5.2.2 Water-Borne Illnesses ...................................................................................... 178
5.3
Vector- and Rodent-Borne Diseases ........................................................................ 181
5.3.1 West Nile Virus and Other Mosquito-Borne Diseases .................................... 181
5.3.2 Lyme Disease and Other Tick-Borne Zoonoses .............................................. 185
5.3.3 Rodent-Borne Diseases .................................................................................... 188
5.3.4 The Importation of Exotic Diseases ................................................................ 190
5.3.5 Key Knowledge Gaps ...................................................................................... 191
5.4
Adapting to Climate Change: Risk Assessment, Surveillance,
Intervention and Adaptation .................................................................................... 193
5.4.1 Risk Assessment .............................................................................................. 193
5.4.2 Surveillance ...................................................................................................... 194
5.4.3 Intervention and Adaptation ............................................................................ 196
5.5
Conclusions ................................................................................................................ 198
5.6
References .................................................................................................................. 199
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
174
5.1
INTRODUCTION
This chapter examines the potential
effects of climate change on the 
risk in Canada from food-, water-,
vector- and rodent-borne diseases,
many of which are zoonoses. 
It concludes with a discussion 
of the future actions required 
to minimize the impact of these 
diseases on human health.
Characterizing changes in disease
patterns in Canada resulting 
from climate change is funda-
mental to reducing any potential
additional burden of illness. 
There has been a resurgence of infectious diseases in many parts of the world, and the 
incidence of food- and water-related contamination is also increasing (Becker et al., 2006).
This situation reflects an unprecedented convergence of a number of diverse and globally
important factors that include climate change, as well as population growth, density of settlement,
travel, trade, agricultural intensification, urbanization and the overuse of antibacterial agents 
and pesticides.
Vector-borne and zoonotic diseases
Diseases that must be transmitted by an invertebrate host (such as a mosquito or tick) 
are termed vector-borne diseases. Zoonoses are infections that occur in animals that 
can also infect humans. All rodent-borne and many food-, water- and vector-borne
infections are zoonotic.
Climate variability influences risks and patterns of disease and health. Many infectious 
diseases occur seasonally. For example, food- and vector-borne illnesses peak during warmer
months in temperate climates like Canada’s, whereas influenza and gastroenteric viruses 
predominate in winter (Grassley and Fraser, 2006). The effects of weather and climate 
on the majority of food-, water-, vector- and rodent-borne diseases are mediated through 
influences on pathogens, their transportation routes, their invertebrate vectors, their 
animal hosts, or on human behaviour. Furthermore, people perform different activities at 
different times of the year, thus resulting in “seasonality” in their risk of injury, infection 
or illness, depending on the activity. Therefore, relationships between climate and illness 
arising from food-, water-, vector- and rodent-borne sources are more complex than the 
direct effects of climate and weather on, for example, mortality from extreme heat or cold, 
or injuries from extreme weather.
Climate change is very likely to affect the normal patterns of disease across the country, 
and may result in the emergence of diseases that are currently thought rare or exotic 
to Canada. The increased average temperatures projected as a result of climate change 
could increase the survival or replication rates of vectors and some food- and water-borne
pathogens, but could hamper the survival of others. Longer and warmer summers could
increase pathogen survival in certain types of food, or in food improperly prepared or 
stored during summer months. More frequent and intense rainfall events may increase 
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
175
water contamination and lead to water-borne disease outbreaks. Milder winters followed 
by hotter and more humid summers could favour West Nile virus and Lyme disease, 
but drought or heavy rainfall may keep them in control.
Changes in the expected seasonal and geographic patterns of food-, water-, vector-borne 
and zoonotic infections have implications for public health. Many of these infections 
can be prevented through targeted health promotion messages that encourage people to 
modify their behaviour to reduce their risk. Because foreknowledge of increased risk 
in certain areas or at certain times may heighten clinical recognition and diagnosis, health
practitioners need to know when and what to expect. For example, some early symptoms 
of Lyme disease have a high diagnostic value (that is, they allow effective treatment if 
detected early), and practitioner awareness of these symptoms will allow early detection 
and treatment, which is key to reducing the impact of this disease. There is, however, 
much experience in managing disease risks in Canada to protect public health. Considerable
effort is expended in ensuring that foods are free from contamination from farm-to-fork, 
and that drinking water is free from contamination with infective or other agents that are
harmful to health. Thus, while effects of climate change may result in some completely 
new or increased health risks, existing infrastructure could protect against some risks being
realized as public health problems.
5.1.1
Method and Approach
This chapter is based on a review of key Canadian and international scientific literature, 
Internet sites and reports of Canadian and international public health organizations. For 
many reasons, including the uncertainties associated with climate change projections 
themselves, most current literature can suggest only possible futures under given climate
change scenarios, based on global climate model simulations. As such, this chapter 
reviews possible effects of climate change based on changes to climate expected for Canada,
according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2007a, 2007b), 
with the understanding that actual future conditions could be different. In particular, it 
should be recognized that the potential impacts of climate change on disease in Canada 
are at early stages of investigation, and that this review may not represent the complete 
range of potential risks.
The review covers current knowledge of the effects of climate and climate change on 
risks of diseases that are endemic to Canada, where these data exist. Where they do not, 
the review considers potential effects of climate and climate change on disease risks 
using current understanding of these relationships (actual or potential) based on studies 
elsewhere in the world. The potential for exotic diseases (i.e. those not currently present 
in Canada) to become established here as a consequence of climate change is also 
reviewed although, where possible, geographically close risks are differentiated from those 
that are much more distant.
The review scans across a wide range of disease risks from food-, water-, vector- and 
rodent-borne sources that may increase, decrease or emerge as a consequence of climate
change. Prioritization of particular risks for action in terms of adaptation efforts will 
require a more systematic risk assessment; the conclusions section (5.5) provides suggestions 
for the adaptation process, from risk assessment to surveillance and intervention. Until 
a more systematic risk assessment and prioritization is complete, the precautionary principle 
can be used to minimize impacts and provide general protection against emerging disease 
risks (Soskolne, 2004).
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
176
5.2
FOOD- AND WATER-BORNE DISEASES
5.2.1
Food-Borne Diseases
Food-borne illnesses are defined as diseases that are infectious, parasitic or toxic in nature, and
that are acquired through the ingestion of contaminated food. The symptoms resulting from
food-borne pathogens vary from gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal pain)
to neurological (e.g. Guillain-Barré
syndrome, which can be caused by
Campylobacter infection), acute
kidney failure and hemolytic uremic
syndrome caused by infection 
with Escherichia coli O157:H7, 
and congenital malformations due
to Toxoplasma gondii infection
(Centers for Disease Control (CDC),
2005b). The most common food-
borne pathogens in Canada are
Salmonella, Campylobacter and 
E. coli (Public Health Agency 
of Canada (PHAC), 2003).
Canadians rely on safe food. Many systems exist to ensure food safety, from the farm through
harvest and processing, to retail and consumption. Along the food production chain, there 
are links where these systems may be vulnerable to climatic influences. For example:
• Livestock stressed by temperature or other factors on-farm or during transport may 
be more likely to become ill or to shed greater amounts of harmful bacteria and viruses 
(Keen et al., 2003). Increased local risk of contamination would ensue, along with the
potential for enhanced survival or even replication of pathogens, leading to a greater 
risk of meat contamination during processing. Ill livestock may require antimicrobials, 
contributing to the development of antimicrobial resistance; this could make both animal 
and human infections more difficult to treat (Nicholls et al., 2001; Danish Integrated
Antimicrobial resistance Monitoring and Research Programme, 2002; World Health
Organization, 2002).
• Agriculture may be affected by climate change (McGinn et al., 1999). Environmental
changes as a result of increased drought, crop failure as a result of drought or ill-timed
heavy rainfall, and loss of soil fertility can result in decreased yields or total loss of 
production.
• Climate-related changes in wild bird and wild animal population health may bring about
new bio-security issues for Canadian farmers, potentially leading to the emergence of 
new food-borne pathogens.
• Heat waves and power outages related to high-energy demands or to extreme weather 
could cause refrigeration failure during food processing and storage, compromising 
food safety.
Food-borne infections may be linked to foods originating from infected animals, or from 
food that has been contaminated by fecal matter directly from an animal or person, or 
indirectly via contaminated water (Rose and Slifko, 1992; Chin, 2000; Rose et al., 2001; 
Hall et al., 2002). Reports of food-borne illness peak in the summer in Canada (Isaacs 
et al., 1998). Figure 5.1 shows the relationship between weekly case counts of Campylobacter
and average weekly air temperature. The survival rates of most enteric pathogens in the 
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
177
environment are, within limits, positively correlated with ambient temperature (Hall et al., 2002).
Indeed, many food-borne diseases show a strong seasonal pattern in most temperate developed
countries. Some of the increase is likely attributable to changes in certain social behaviours
associated with a higher risk of food-borne illness (e.g. barbeques, picnics, camping) and 
to increased risk of food spoilage. However, some of this seasonal increase is more directly
associated with increased temperature. A recent study in Canada found a link between ambient
temperature and the occurrence of Salmonella, Campylobacter and E. coli O157 infections, above
and beyond any seasonal trend. It was found that the relative risk of disease increased by 1.2 to
6.0% per degree Celsius above a statistical temperature threshold level (Fleury et al., 2006).
These findings were consistent with studies conducted in Australia and the U.K. (Bentham
and Langford, 1995, 2001; D’Souza et al., 2004; Kovats et al., 2004a, 2004b).
Climate change could affect the risks of food-borne diseases in two ways. Longer summers will
extend the period associated with higher risk behaviours, and hotter temperatures exceeding a
certain threshold will contribute to higher incidence of disease. As a result, the summer food-borne
disease incidence peak could include a greater number of cases over a longer period. With
increased temperatures due to climate change, home and restaurant food preparation practices
would likely need to change to adapt to the increased risk of spoilage and contamination 
during warmer months.
Figure 5.1 Seasonal pattern of mean temperature and weekly case counts of Campylobacter
in Alberta by week from the first week of January 1992 to the last week 
of December 2000
Chapter 5
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
Week
-2 0
1 0
0
5
1 0
Temperature
Campylobacter
The Canadian Arctic has already demonstrated ecological change as a result of a changing climate.
Seasonal shifts involving earlier spring onset and later ice formation and overall warmer 
temperatures have implications for traditional lifestyles, wild food availability, and food
preparation and storage. Some animal populations upon which Aboriginal people depend 
may disappear entirely because of habitat loss attributable to climate change (Weller and
Lange, 1999; Nuttall et al., 2005). Traditional food preparation and storage that rely on 
refrigeration in permafrost may no longer be possible. Higher ambient temperatures in the
Arctic may result in an increase in some temperature-sensitive food-borne diseases, such 
as gastroenteritis, paralytic shellfish poisoning and botulism (Parkinson and Butler, 2005).
Outbreaks of botulism poisoning in northern Canada have been linked to modifications of 
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
178
traditional food practices or practices implemented in inappropriate climates (Proulx et al., 1997;
Horn et al., 2001). Furthermore, there may be an increase in the range and type of animal
hosts of diseases transmissible to humans, including hydatid disease caused by the larvae 
of tapeworms that usually live in wild and domestic ruminants and canids. The larvae may
cause dangerous infections in people in northern Canada who hunt game and keep dogs
(Rausch, 2003; Parkinson and Butler, 2005).
Other risks to Canadians living in coastal areas are microalgae that form the basis of the marine
food chain, and toxin-producing species that may seriously disrupt the food web and lead 
to fish kills and human toxicity through the ingestion of contaminated fish (CDC, 2005d;
Peperzak, 2005). The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) monitors shellfish for the
toxins that cause several types of poisoning with neurological or gastrointestinal symptoms
(CFIA, 2003). Toxic freshwater and marine algae associated with eutrophication (the nutrient
enrichment of a body of water which leads to more productivity), are present in Canadian
waters and can become a danger to public health during the warm season (McCarthy et al.,
2001; Weise et al., 2001). Warmer temperatures will affect the geographic range and the 
magnitude of certain algal blooms, and may induce oceanic changes that favour potentially
harmful species (Zingone and Enevoldsen, 2000).
5.2.2
Water-Borne Illnesses
Water-borne illnesses result from exposure to pathogenic microorganisms or chemicals in drinking
water or recreational water. Contaminated water most often enters the body by ingestion, but
contaminants in water can also be inhaled or adsorbed, or enter the body through contact with
open sores or wounds. The majority of symptoms resulting from water-borne pathogens are
enteric (nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea and, in rare circumstances, colitis). However, other
symptoms can be neurological, cardiovascular, respiratory (Legionella), ocular (toxoplasmosis),
haematological (septicaemia from E. coli O157:H7) or dermatological (Payment and Pintar, 2006).
Not only do exposure sources vary, but so do exposure lengths, dose-responses, incubation
times and illness onset times, depending on the type of contamination (both general and specific).
For example, microbiological contamination generally has a small exposure time, faster onset 
of illness and a lower dose-response than chemical or radiological contamination.
Gastroenteric pathogens, such as Giardia, Cryptosporidium, Campylobacter, Shigella and
verotoxigenic E. coli are by far the most common endemic water-borne disease hazards in
Canada and are reported to the National Notifiable Disease Registry database (Charron et al.,
2004). In Canada, water-borne disease outbreaks have been associated with E. coli O157:H7,
Campylobacter, occasionally Shigella and other pathogens (Levy et al., 1998; Lee et al., 2002;
Oliver et al., 2003; Charron et al., 2004; Schuster et al., 2005) (Figure 5.2). Cholera has been
reported in Canada and other pathogens such as hepatitis A, leptospirosis and Legionnaire’s disease
can also be considered as water-borne illnesses (Health Canada, 2002; Charron et al., 2004).
Water-borne pathogens have a combination of human, wild and domesticated animal reservoirs
and are released into the environment through waste products that can be deposited directly 
on the ground, spread as a result of agricultural activity or leach from septic systems or sewage
pipes. Contamination of water with these pathogens can occur in several ways, but the most
common is from overland flow (or storm water runoff in urban environments) that flushes
contaminants into streams, rivers and lakes and that can transport contaminants into groundwater
under certain environmental conditions. Weather has been linked to a number of reported water-
borne disease outbreaks in Canada (Hrudey et al., 2003; Schuster et al., 2005). Sea water can
also be a source of infection, as demonstrated in the food-borne diseases section (5.2.1). In 1997,
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, a gastrointestinal pathogen that can also cause infection of open
wounds, was associated with an outbreak from raw and undercooked oysters in British Columbia
(Fyfe et al., 1997). It has also been associated with wound infections as a result of swimming 
in the ocean off the west coast of Canada (Todd, 1997).
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
179
Figure 5.2 Types of pathogens identified in outbreaks in Canada from 1974 to 2001 
(n = 150) (other bacteria include Aeromonas hydrophilia, Bacillus 
cereus, Enterobacter hafniae, pathogenic E. coli, Pseudomonas spp.,
Staphylococcus aureus)
Chapter 5
Campylobacter sp.
16%
Salmonella
(including S. typhi)
11%
Shigella
6%
Streptococcus
3%
Yersinia
2%
Other bacteria
4%
Toxoplasma
1%
Cryptosporidium
8%
Giardia
33%
Hepatitis A
7%
Norwalk (like)
or rotavirus
9%
Interventions are primarily geared to immediate, acute public health risks that occur through
exposure to microbiological contaminants. Risks of illness from water-borne chemical contami-
nants have been extensively investigated in Canada, particularly nitrates in groundwater (Arbuckle
et al., 1988; Levallois et al., 1998, 2000; VanLeeuwen et al., 1999; Thompson, 2001), metals
(Bernier et al., 1995; Mao et al., 1995; Baldwin et al., 1999; Eisler, 2004), persistent organic
pollutants (Chiu et al., 2004) and pharmaceuticals (Ternes et al., 1999; Metcalfe et al., 2003).
Water-borne radiological contamination can also occur, generally a result of natural background
radiation. Drinking water guidelines reflect the fact that the contribution of radiation and chemical
contamination from drinking water is a very small fraction of total exposure (Health Canada,
2004). To date no illnesses have been attributed to chemical contaminants in drinking water 
in Canada. Research is ongoing to further examine the potential health effects of chemical
contaminants and to assess the effectiveness of current drinking water and wastewater treatment
technologies. Findings continually inform the development of Water Quality Guidelines in
Canada led by the Federal-Provincial-Territorial Committee on Drinking Water, and support
the management of water quality in Canada.
Increased temperatures and greater variation in precipitation with climate change are likely 
to alter the risk of enteric water-borne disease through a number of mechanisms. Increases in
precipitation intensity and frequency are likely to enhance overland flow or flooding and increase
erosion, with the potential for surface and groundwater contamination by enteric pathogens
and decreased effectiveness of water treatment. Previous water-borne outbreaks in Canada
have been associated with heavy precipitation, spring melt, snowmelt and flooding (Bowie 
et al., 1997; Charron et al., 2004; Schuster et al., 2005; Thomas et al., 2006). In May 2001,
excess rainfall resulted in contamination of groundwater and contributed to the Walkerton 
outbreak of E. coli O157:H7 in which 2,300 people became sick and seven people died (Auld 
et al., 2004). Curriero et al. (2001) quantified links between precipitation and water-borne disease
outbreaks (enteric) in the U.S. The findings demonstrated that 51% of the 548 reported outbreaks
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
180
were preceded by monthly accumulated precipitation events greater than the 90th percentile
(P=0.002) and that 68% were preceded by events greater than the 80th percentile (P=0.001).
A study in Canada by Thomas et al. (2006) demonstrated that accumulated rainfall totals 
over the six weeks prior to an outbreak greater than the 93rd percentile doubled the risk of an
outbreak. Heavy rainfall resulting in flooding can cause chemical contamination. Threats of
chemical contamination after flooding have been reported, but the resulting health impacts 
are less well described (Wing et al., 2002; Euripidou and Murray, 2004).
Drought increases the demand for water when the supply is significantly reduced and vulnerable.
It concentrates pathogens and chemical and radiological contaminants in water, and has 
implications for hygiene practices in light of water use restrictions. Furthermore, heavy rain
following drought can lead to overland flow events and increased risk of water contamination
(Charron et al., 2004). Increased ambient temperatures are likely to be associated with increased
survival and abundance of microorganisms, and thus an enhanced water-borne infection risk.
Thomas et al. (2006) found that for every 1°C increase in the six-week maximum positive
degree-days total increased the relative odds of a water-borne disease outbreak by 1.007 times.
Although this odds ratio is small per degree day, the practical implications are important; 
for example, a 5°C increase in maximum daily temperature over a 42-day period would result
in a more than four-fold increase in risk.
Changes in contaminant transport are already being noted as a result of climate change, 
particularly in the Arctic due to permafrost thaw (Macdonald et al., 2005). Martin et al. (2005)
found that 30% of the Inuit population in Nunavik depend on untreated water for consumption,
such as rivers and lakes in the summer and melting snow or ice in the winter and spring. There is
an increased risk of water-borne diseases to this population given climate warming, and increased
rates of illness are already being seen compared to the rest of Quebec. There are additional
concerns that shoreline erosion and flooding as a result of sea level rise could lead to contamination
of aquifers with leakage from subterranean chemical dumps. The rise in sea level may displace
Canadians in coastal communities, resulting in temporary disruptions in water supply. Further,
saltwater intrusion can result in a need for alternate fresh water sources.
There is evidence that climate variables influence the risk of water-borne disease pathogens 
in Canada. How climate change will change conditions to favour the introduction of new 
disease to Canada or the re-establishment of diseases that have been eradicated is also of 
concern. Two emerging or potential water-borne diseases of concern for Canada are leptospirosis
and cholera. Peak occurrences of leptospirosis in animals have been associated with high 
precipitation levels and warm, wet late-summer and autumn conditions in eastern Canada
(Vinetz et al., 1996). In Canada, it is recognized as an uncommon disease but one that may 
be underestimated (Levesque et al., 1995). Warmer winters and increased temperature are
likely to allow leptospires to survive longer in standing water in many parts of Canada, 
possibly contributing to increased risk of exposure through bathing or swimming (Jansen 
et al., 2005). It is among a few diseases at risk of a global resurgence under conditions 
of climate change (Epstein et al., 1995; Koelle et al., 2005) with implications for Canadians 
at home and abroad. Cholera, or acute enteritis caused by the bacterium Vibrio cholerae,
is another example. It is extremely rare and not endemic to Canada, although it does occur in
Canadians who have travelled abroad to areas where the disease is endemic (PHAC, 2007a).
Cholera was common in Canada up to the late 19th century, but the likelihood of it becoming
endemic again is minimal because of modern sanitation and public health practices, even
though the causative organism is present along the east and gulf coasts of the U.S. in and 
on blue-green algae and copepods (“water fleas”) and perhaps also in shellfish (Huq et al.,
2001). A warming of the Canadian coastal waters in the Maritimes and Quebec might therefore
enable a northward spread of V. cholerae.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
181
5.3
VECTOR- AND RODENT-BORNE DISEASES
In 2001, Kovats et al. (2001) concluded that the literature to date contained no strong 
evidence that the change in climate observed in the previous few decades had affected 
vector-borne diseases. At that time, concerns that climate change could alter the risk from 
vector-borne disease rested on scarce and often speculative evidence (Githeko et al., 2000).
However, more recent studies provide more certainty that climate change is already affecting
some vector-borne disease risks, and that changing patterns could further affect human 
health in the future (McMichael et al., 2004; Purse et al., 2005).
5.3.1
West Nile Virus and Other Mosquito-Borne Diseases
In North America, mosquitoes and some ticks carry several zoonotic viral pathogens 
that can cause disease in humans. These viruses include West Nile virus, St. Louis 
encephalitis, western equine encephalitis and eastern equine encephalitis viruses. Most 
people infected with these pathogens may not show symptoms, although of the ones 
who do, the symptoms are often similar and start as mild flu-like symptoms, occasionally 
progressing to severe encephalitis (inflammation of the brain), at times resulting in death
(Pepperell et al., 2003).
Arthropods and arboviruses
Arthropods are members of the phylum Arthropoda, which includes such familiar forms as
spiders, insects, centipedes and millipedes as well as disease vectors such as mosquitoes
and ticks. Arboviruses (a contraction of “arthropod-borne viruses”) are viruses that can
develop within, and be transmitted by, arthropods.
West Nile virus is a mosquito-borne illness brought to Canada by migratory birds in 2001
(Pepperell et al., 2003), which has spread across Canada, with the exception of British
Columbia, Newfoundland and Labrador, Yukon, Nunavut and the Northwest Territories. 
Over 1,800 human cases have been reported in Canada from 2002 to 2005, with 46 of 
these resulting in death. The long-term effects of West Nile virus are not fully understood;
some people with serious symptoms recover fully whereas others experience prolonged 
neurological health problems (PHAC, 2006). Cases have been concentrated in a number 
of urban and semi-urban areas of southern Quebec and southern Ontario, and in rural 
populations in the Prairies (Pepperell et al., 2003; Gaulin et al., 2004; Manitoba Health, 
2007). The outbreaks correlate with the presence and abundance of the mosquito 
species primarily responsible for West Nile virus spread and transmission to people.
The ecology, development, behaviour and survival of arthropod vectors, and the transmission
dynamics of arboviruses are strongly influenced by climatic factors (Reiter, 2001). Temperature
determines the speed and success of the arthropod life cycle and adult survival, and determines
whether viruses replicate and spread from the mosquito
gut to the salivary glands fast enough for the vector 
to transmit infection before it dies—the “extrinsic 
incubation period” (Randolph, 1998). Many arboviruses
cause diseases in animals and can infect humans. 
The viruses are transmitted to humans by “bridge”
vectors, species that feed on both animal hosts 
and humans (CDC, 2003; Turell et al., 2003). 
Chapter 5
Photo Credits:
World Health Organization
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
182
Canada lies at what is currently the northern margin for efficient transmission of most
arboviruses, so disease outbreaks tend to be rare and have historically tended to occur 
in late summer.
The life cycles of mosquito and pathogen transmission are temperature dependent. 
Higher summer temperatures would speed up the life cycles of mosquitoes, which might
lengthen the overall transmission season (Patz and Reisen, 2001) and could expand the 
geographic range of mosquito vectors. All of these conditions would increase the likelihood 
of virus amplification and transmission to humans. Specifically, warm winters and heat 
waves may favour West Nile virus, while in some parts of the world droughts may enhance
transmission (Epstein, 2001a). Mild winters favour the overwintering survival of female 
Culex mosquitoes, and drought conditions may also force birds to congregate around 
shrinking water bodies, thus potentially enhancing local cycles of virus amplification 
(Epstein, 2001b; Epstein and Defilippo, 2001).
Like West Nile virus, St. Louis encephalitis virus cycles between wild birds and mosquitoes
(Culex spp.) that prefer birds, and is occasionally transmitted to humans by infected mosquitoes.
There are usually fewer than 50 cases of St. Louis encephalitis virus infection reported 
per year in the U.S.; however, periodically, large epidemics involving hundreds of infected
individuals occur, primarily in the midwest and southeast states (CDC, 2006a). The only
major outbreak of St. Louis encephalitis in Canada occurred in 1975 and 1976 in southern
Ontario, apparently an extension of the outbreak that occurred in the midwestern U.S. 
(Spence et al., 1977). Outbreaks of St. Louis encephalitis have occurred in the U.S. as 
recently as 2001 (Jones et al., 2002).
Climate change is expected to alter the distribution of St. Louis encephalitis in North 
America, possibly ceasing its endemic cycle in the southwestern U.S. due to unfavourably
warm temperatures projected for this area. A northward expansion of the virus into 
Canada is possible (Reeves et al., 1994).
Both western equine encephalitis and eastern equine encephalitis viruses can cause illness 
in humans. Sporadic equine epizootics (disease outbreaks among animal populations) of
eastern equine encephalitis occur in Ontario and Quebec, while western equine encephalitis 
has been reported across Canada from Lake Superior to the Rocky Mountains and in 
British Columbia (Artsob, 1986; Keane and Little, 1987; Carman et al., 1995; Duncan 
et al., 1998; Leighton, 2000). Outbreaks of western equine encephalitis (typically involving
horses) have occurred in Canada in each decade since 1930. Human infections of 
western equine encephalitis are now fortunately rare and only occasionally result in severe 
illness. Sporadic cases are reported, more often in early June or July (Leighton, 2000). 
In contrast, eastern equine encephalitis virus infections can cause severe illness in people,
with a case fatality rate near 33% and possible long-term debilitating sequelae in many 
survivors (Leighton, 2000; CDC, 2005c). Indigenous cases of eastern equine encephalitis
infection in humans have not been observed in Canada.
In most years, western equine encephalitis transmission occurs at a low level in the rural West.
The virus’ maintenance cycle principally involves birds and Cx. tarsalis and human and
equine infections that occur outside the maintenance cycle, resulting in small numbers of 
sporadically occurring cases (Hayes, 1981; Tsai and Monath, 1987). However, at intervals 
of 5 to 10 years and for reasons poorly understood, viral transmission in the maintenance
cycle is more intense, and humans and equines become infected at epidemic and epizootic 
levels. Outbreaks have often affected wide areas of the western U.S. and Canada. In 1941, more
than 3,400 cases among humans occurred in Canada with an attack rate of 167 per 100,000,
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
183
affecting populations in the northern plains states and in the provinces of Manitoba, 
Alberta and Saskatchewan (Leake, 1941). The most recent outbreak was in 1975 in the Red River
Valley with 277 reported cases among humans and 281 among equines (Potter et al., 1977;
Leech et al., 1981).
The principal vectors for western equine encephalitis and eastern equine encephalitis 
viruses are endemic in some parts of Canada. Current temperature conditions in Canada 
may be generally too cold for replication of eastern equine encephalitis viruses in these 
vectors such that transmission cycles can persist (Reeves et al., 1994), but to what extent 
eastern equine encephalitis is endemic to Canada (as opposed to only intermittently 
expanding its ranges into the country) is unclear. Increased temperatures with climate 
change may favour local amplification of the viruses, as is predicted for other arboviruses
(Patz et al., 1998). Outbreaks of eastern equine encephalitis have been associated with 
warm, wet summers along the east coast of the U.S. (Freier, 1993). Heavy rainfall may
increase vector abundance and precipitate mosquito-borne disease epidemics; indeed, 
the Red River Valley western equine encephalitis outbreak of 1975 followed severe flooding
(Nasci and Moore, 1998).
It is likely that public health systems in Canada are not yet prepared to respond specifically 
to any health risks from St. Louis encephalitis, or western and eastern equine encephalitides.
Because they are rare in Canada, they are currently unlikely to be considered as differential
diagnoses. However, serological diagnosis of clinical encephalitis cases in humans in 
Canada, for which West Nile virus is a suspected cause, is mostly performed at the National
Microbiology Laboratory, Winnipeg, where samples are routinely tested for St. Louis
encephalitis, western equine encephalitis and eastern equine encephalitis as well as for 
West Nile virus. Therefore, the presence of these viruses in Canada would be expected 
to be alerted by the occurrence of human cases. However, control of West Nile virus rests 
on surveillance for infection in sentinel animals and vector populations, which allows 
control, prior to the occurrence of human cases (PHAC, 2007b). At present, there is no 
such surveillance for St. Louis encephalitis, western equine encephalitis and eastern 
equine encephalitis.
Introduction of vector-borne diseases from more distant geographic locations internationally 
is possible, as demonstrated by the West Nile virus epidemic in North America (see the 
importation of exotic diseases, section 5.3.4). Some diseases, such as West Nile virus, 
could become endemic if a suitable community of animal reservoirs and arthropod vectors
existed in Canada. Of particular concern is the potential for vector-borne diseases of global
importance, such as dengue fever and malaria, to become established in Canada as the 
climate warms.
Dengue fever is an arboviral infection that is endemic in most of the world. Over 2.5 billion
people live in endemic regions and are at risk. The incidence of this disease is estimated 
at over 50 million infections per year (CDC, 2006a). The principal vector for dengue 
transmission to humans, Aedes aegypti, is exotic to Canada, but is present in the southern
U.S.. Another mosquito, Ae. albopictus, is capable of transmitting dengue and other 
arboviruses to humans; it was inadvertently introduced into the southern U.S. in the early
1980s (Reiter, 1998; O’Meara et al., 1995). It has spread throughout the southeastern 
U.S., as far north as Wisconsin. There is speculation that climate change could facilitate 
further range expansion of Ae. albopictus, and this may have implications for Canada. 
There have been conflicting assessments of climate change impacts on risks from dengue 
and malaria, at least in part because these are mostly transmitted from human to human 
by mosquitoes, rather than from wildlife as is the case for West Nile virus and St. Louis
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
184
encephalitis. For example, Patz et al. (1998) suggested that the risk of dengue fever was 
likely to increase markedly with climate change because of increased temperature suitability
for transmission cycles. However, Rogers and Randolph (2000) suggested that a number 
of factors may limit the effects of climate change. Furthermore, Reiter (2001) concluded 
that it was unreasonable to use climate to predict future patterns of dengue and malaria
because these are more profoundly affected by human factors that affect risk. For cases 
of human dengue to occur in Canada, some of the introduced Ae. albopictus would have 
to be infected with the virus and have optimal climatic conditions for transmission. At 
present, there is insufficient information to assess whether dengue could become established 
in Canada.
The World Health Organization estimates that malaria, which is caused by Plasmodium
spp. parasites, results in more than 300 million acute cases of disease worldwide and 
at least one million deaths annually. Malaria was endemic to certain regions of southwestern
Canada in the 17th to early 20th centuries. It is possible that persistently infected immigrant
workers introduced malaria, which was then maintained by vectors endemic to Canada. Malaria
has long since been eradicated (Zucker, 1996), probably due to appropriate treatment of cases,
destruction of breeding sites, use of window screens and reduction in malaria levels in Europe
over the 19th century (MacLean and Ward, 1999).
Global climate change is projected to alter the endemic range of both dengue and 
malaria (Rogers and Randolph, 2000; Sutherst, 2004), although to what extent and where 
range expansion will occur is very much debated (Rogers and Randolph, 2006). Climate 
change related alterations in the worldwide distribution and intensity of various vector-borne
diseases could significantly affect the health of Canadian travellers and the demand for 
specialized diagnostic and treat-
ment at home. Global increases
in endemic malaria, increased 
resistance to anti-malarial 
drug therapy, and a significant
increase in global travel 
have resulted in thousands 
of cases of malaria transported
into Europe and North
America annually, with a few
giving rise to transmission 
by indigenous mosquitoes
(Fayer, 2000). Travel between
Canada and endemic regions
also has potential for pathogen
introduction and localized
transmission in areas where
competent vectors are 
present and climate permits. 
This may create new health 
risks for Canadian travellers 
abroad who may be exposed 
to new endemic foci.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
185
5.3.2
Lyme Disease and Other Tick-Borne Zoonoses
Lyme disease (also called Lyme borreliosis) is a bacterial infection that causes a skin rash,
chronic arthritis, nervous system disorders and debilitation. It is caused by the bacterium
Borrelia burgdorferi. The ticks transmit infection when they attach to the skin in order to feed
on blood. Lyme disease is a zoonosis; ticks transmit B. burgdorferi from one wild animal 
host (rodents are particularly important) to another but, because the ticks are unselective in
their choice of hosts, they can feed on humans and infect them with the bacterium. Humans 
do not take part in cycles of transmission and are dead-end hosts for B. burgdorferi.
The blacklegged or deer tick, Ixodes scapularis, is the most common vector in North 
America, except on the West Coast where a related tick, I. pacificus, is the vector. Studies
have shown that the life cycle of I. scapularis is temperature dependent, and warmer 
temperatures will shorten the tick life cycle and increase its survival (Ogden et al., 2004,
2005a). I. pacificus is widespread in British Columbia and its distribution may not be 
as greatly affected by climate, although the tick may become more common in the Canadian
North and at higher altitudes, as seen with related ticks in Europe (Lindgren et al., 2000). 
I. scapularis is distributed widely across eastern and north central U.S. Tick densities and the
incidence of Lyme disease continue to increase, giving rise to more cases, particularly in the
northeastern and north central United States where the incidence rates and tick abundance are
highest (Steere et al., 2004). Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease in 
the U.S., with up to 20,000 cases reported each year (CDC, 2004).
Resident populations of I. scapularis occur in Canada. Up until 1991, only one population
was known to occur, at Long Point on the northern shore of Lake Erie (Lindsay et al., 1998).
Since then, the number of populations has increased to 13, including those in southeastern
Manitoba, southern Ontario and southeastern Nova Scotia (Barker and Lindsay, 2000; 
Ogden et al., 2005a; Lindsay, L.R., personal communication). Further suspected populations are
under investigation. Vector surveillance over the last 17 years has identified I. scapularis (nearly
all adults) in most populated areas of Canada from Saskatchewan east, far beyond the known
resident populations (Ogden et al., 2006a). It is believed that most of these ticks are dispersed
from resident populations in Canada and the U.S. by migratory birds (Ogden et al., 2006a).
Migratory birds probably facilitate the spread of ticks into southeastern Canada (Klich et al., 1996;
Smith et al., 1996; Morshed et al., 1999; Scott et al., 2001). Huge numbers of birds migrate
northward, from their southern wintering grounds, over southeastern Canada each year. Spring
migration coincides with the seasonal activity period of nymphal I. scapularis in “source 
locations” in the U.S. and Canada (Smith et al., 1996). Many bird species make feeding stops
in habitats that are densely populated with I. scapularis. Nymphal ticks can attach to the birds 
and be transported up to 800 km before dropping off their host (Scott et al., 2001; Marra et al.,
2005). Ticks can thus be dispersed over great distances in spite of formidable geographic 
barriers, such as the Great Lakes and intensively farmed land in southern Ontario and Quebec,
that would otherwise prevent dispersal on mammalian hosts.
Climate change may alter the risk of Lyme disease in Canada. Higher ambient temperatures
will shorten tick life cycles, create more favourable conditions for host-seeking activity and
increase tick survival (Ogden et al., 2004, 2005a). Such effects are likely to increase the probability
that new tick populations become established from ticks seeded into Canadian habitats by
migratory birds. Climate change is therefore likely to create additional endemic foci of tick-borne
zoonoses, such as Lyme disease, beyond the current northern limit of the tick’s range (Ogden 
et al., 2006b) (Figure 5.3).
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
186
Figure 5.3 Model simulation results suggest that Ixodes scapularis populations 
in Canada (red triangles) occur at the limit of temperature suitability for 
the tick. Temperature may be a significant factor limiting northward 
expansion of the geographic range of I. scapularis, but this is expected 
to change rapidly with projected climate change
Source: Ogden et al., 2006b.
There is a risk of Lyme borreliosis in British Columbia because I. pacificus, the tick 
vector of Lyme disease in western North America already has a wide geographic distribution
(British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, unpublished data). Despite widespread 
presence of the vector, efficiency of Lyme disease transmission is less than in eastern 
Canada. This is due to ecological differences among the ticks, such as their seasonality 
and their choice of hosts.
I. scapularis and I. pacificus are also vectors of Babesia microti (the pathogen causing 
human babesiosis), and Anaplasma phagocytophilum (the agent of human granulocytic
anaplasmosis). Because A. phagocytophilum, B. microti and B. burgdorferi share the 
same rodent reservoirs and tick vectors, human co-infection with human babesiosis 
and Lyme disease could occur in endemic areas. The severity of symptoms and duration 
of illness in patients with concurrent babesiosis and Lyme disease is reported to be 
greater than that of either infection alone (Krause et al., 1996).
Climate change may also affect the human health risk due to a number of other infections 
transmissible by I. scapularis and other tick species in North America (Table 5.1). 
These include rickettsial diseases such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Rickettsia 
rickettsii), human granulocytic anaplasmosis (A. phagocytophilum) and Q fever (Coxiella 
burnetii), and tick-borne viruses (e.g. Powassan encephalitis virus) that are already 
present in Canada (Calisher, 1994).
Chapter 5
0
1-46
47-90
91-159
160-266
267-433
434-694
695-1101
1102-1738
1739-2145
0
1-46
47-90
91-159
160-266
267-433
434-694
695-1101
1102-1738
1739-2145
Index of tick abundance 
at model equilibrium
Index of tick abundance 
at model equilibrium
1991-2000
Projection for the 2020s
0
1-46
47-90
91-159
160-266
267-433
434-694
695-1101
1102-1738
1739-2145
0
1-46
47-90
91-159
160-266
267-433
434-694
695-1101
1102-1738
1739-2145
Index of tick abundance 
at model equilibrium
Index of tick abundance 
at model equilibrium
1991-2000
Projection for the 2020s
0
1-46
47-90
91-159
160-266
267-433
434-694
695-1101
1102-1738
1739-2145
0
1-46
47-90
91-159
160-266
267-433
434-694
695-1101
1102-1738
1739-2145
0
1-46
47-90
91-159
160-266
267-433
434-694
695-1101
1102-1738
1739-2145
0
1-46
47-90
91-159
160-266
267-433
434-694
695-1101
1102-1738
1739-2145
Index of tick abundance 
at model equilibrium
Index of tick abundance 
at model equilibrium
1991-2000
Projection for the 2020s
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
187
Table 5.1
Diseases transmissible by Ixodes scapularis and other tick species 
in North America
Chapter 5
Skin rash, chronic arthritis,
nervous system disorders,
debilitation; has caused
paralysis in children
Moderate to high fever, 
local to widespread rash;
potentially fatal if not 
treated
Skin ulcers, lymphadenitis,
pneumonia; occasionally
fatal, but can cause mild
malaise and fever also
Mild febrile illness, but
increased susceptibility 
to secondary infections 
that can be fatal
About 50% of people 
infected show symptoms
ranging from mild 
flu-like syndrome to 
pneumonia and hepatitis;
occasionally fatal
Mild fever and flu-like 
symptoms to encephalitis;
occasionally fatal or 
causing long-term 
neurological problems
Symptoms
Blacklegged or deer tick
(Ixodes scapularis or 
I. pacificus)
Rocky Mountain wood tick
(Dermacentor andersoni)
and Amercian dog tick 
(D. variabilis)
American dog tick
(Dermacentor variabilis),
Rocky Mountain wood 
tick (D. andersoni), 
blacklegged tick (Ixodes
scapularis), other ticks
Blacklegged tick (Ixodes
scapularis)
Generally through exposure
to infected animal tissues 
or non-pasteurized milk;
cases from tick bites 
are rare
Rocky Mountain wood 
tick (Dermacentor 
andersoni), groundhog 
tick (Ixodes cookei)
(I. marxi and I. spinipalpus
may carry a variant Powassan
virus), blacklegged tick 
(I. scapularis)
Vector
Lyme disease
(Borrelia 
burgdorferi)
Rocky Mountain
spotted fever
(Rickettsia 
rickettsii)
Tularaemia
(Francisella 
tularensis)
Human granulocytic
anaplasmosis
(Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum)
Q fever (Coxiella
burnetii)
Powassan
encephalitis virus
Disease
Ont., N.S. and as far 
west as Sask. (I. pacificus
found in B.C.)
Human cases in B.C., 
Alta., Sask. and Ont.
Widespread, but much 
of human infection 
via other non-tick routes
Possibly in tick-endemic
localities across Canada
Widespread in livestock
Very sporadic geographic
and temporal occurrence;
geographically widespread 
in the northern hemisphere
with some human infections
in Ont., the Prairies and 
the United States
Canadian Distribution
Tick-borne pathogens known to be endemic to Canada
High fever, flu-like 
symptoms possibly with
jaundice; severe symptoms
(congestive heart failure,
renal failure, acute 
respiratory distress 
syndrome) and death mostly
in immunocompromised
people
Blacklegged tick (Ixodes
scapularis)
Human babesiosis
(Babesia microti)
Tick-borne pathogens known to be endemic in northeastern United States, but not known in Canada
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
188
Climate change is expected to increase the risk from diseases (e.g. Lyme disease) that 
are associated with the tick I. scapularis. To what extent climate change may alter the risk 
from other tick-borne diseases is unknown and uninvestigated; at present, there is no 
infrastructure to identify any changes before human disease cases occur. The impact 
of tick-borne pathogens can be amplified by infection of blood used for transfusions 
(Cable and Leiby, 2003), as has been the case for West Nile virus (Vamvakas et al., 2006).
5.3.3
Rodent-Borne Diseases
Rodents are among the most abundant of wild animal hosts of zoonoses (Gubler et al., 
2001). They are the main reservoirs of tick-borne zoonoses (as described in section 5.3.2) 
but are also hosts of diseases that are transmitted by close contact with humans, either 
by fleas or directly without the mediation of a tick or insect vector. The diseases they 
transmit are reviewed here because they constitute environmental health risks that may 
vary with climate and therefore possibly with climate change. For example, warmer 
winters and increased rainfall are likely to improve rodent survival, and thus the abundance 
of rodent reservoirs of disease may increase in some regions (Lewellen and Vessey, 1998).
Extreme weather events such as high rainfall accompanied by flooding may increase 
the likelihood of humans coming into contact with rodents, their fleas and their potentially
infective faeces and urine (Gubler et al., 2001; Karande et al., 2003). Other wild animal 
hosts may be important reservoirs of zoonoses, but their roles are poorly studied in general 
as well as in Canada. Rodent-borne diseases such as hantavirus, leptospirosis (which is 
also water-borne: see section 5.2.2), bartonellosis and plague are very probably common 
within many rodent populations in Canada. Plague and hantavirus are nationally reportable 
so it is known that these are rare infections in humans, presumably because contact between
rodents and humans is infrequent. Leptospirosis and bartonellosis are not reportable so 
their incidence in Canada is unknown, but possibly underestimated (Levesque et al., 1995;
Jardine et al., 2005). Furthermore, there are alternative domesticated and wild animal 
reservoirs for both diseases, and human disease cases may not be easily attributed to rodents
alone. Even if these diseases are rare in humans in Canada, they are still of concern 
because all can cause serious disease in humans and some can be fatal (Gubler et al., 2001;
Boulouis et al., 2005).
Hantaviruses cause infections of wild
rodent and insectivorous mammal 
populations and can cause hantavirus 
pulmonary syndrome, a fever followed 
by acute pulmonary edema and shock.
There is no specific treatment for 
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome; the 
case fatality rate is 38% in Canada
(Drebot et al., 2000). Humans become
infected by contact with infected 
rodents or their excretions, particularly
aerosolized urine or feces (Weir, 2005).
Thirty-six cases were reported in Canada
between 1989 and 2001, or two to eight
cases per year (Drebot et al., 2000). Cases seem to be confined to the western provinces (British
Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba) and one case has been reported in Quebec
(Weir, 2005). The presence of infected mice throughout Canada suggests that the potential for
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome exists across the country (Drebot et al., 2000). In Canada,
human cases tend to occur in spring and late fall (Figure 5.4), possibly a result of both human
and rodent behavioural factors that increase risk of exposure.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
189
Figure 5.4 Seasonal distribution of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome cases reported 
in Canada from 1989–99
Chapter 5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
J
F
M
A
M
Months
Number of cases
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
1
1
1
1
1
1
5
1
1
1
3
2
2
3
1
1
4
1
Manitoba
Alberta
Saskatchewan
British Columbia
Source: Drebot et al., 2000.
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome occurrence has been linked to an upsurge in rodent populations
related to climate and ecological conditions (Wenzel, 1994; Glass et al., 2000). Mild winters and
drought followed by heavy rain appears to significantly increase rodent populations and disease
risk (Mills and Childs, 1998; Hjelle and Glass, 2000). Like that of other rodent-related diseases
(e.g. plague, Lyme disease), the risk of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome may increase 
where climate change creates conditions favourable to rodent populations. Infected mice have
been found in all provinces and territories except Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and the
Yukon (Drebot et al., 2000).
Plague is caused by infection with the bacterium Yersinia pestis. It is maintained in rodents, and
transmitted among rodents by fleas. Humans become infected most often by the bite of an infected
flea. In humans, plague infections can manifest in three forms, bubonic, septicemic and pneumonic,
all of which have high case-fatality rates if left untreated. Y. pestis is maintained in wild rodent
populations in southern Alberta and Saskatchewan (Leighton et al., 2001) and in the western U.S.
(Cheney, 1998). Although human cases of plague have not been reported in Canada since 1924, the
World Health Organization reports 1,000 to 3,000 cases of plague worldwide every year. During
recent decades, about 10 to 15 people a year have been infected with plague in California and
elsewhere in the southwestern U.S. (CDC, 2005a). Changes in land-use patterns and in climate
(mostly linked to the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) ocean-current phenomenon) have
been associated with an increase in plague in the U.S. in the 1980s and 1990s (Parmenter et al.,
1999). Rapid urbanization in endemic areas has increased the likelihood of human-to-rodent contact
and transmission of infections (Duplantier et al., 2005). The ENSO-related heavy rains of 1993
were strongly associated with increased numbers of human cases of plague, possibly by increasing
available feed and winter survival of rodents, and hence their abundance (Parmenter et al., 1999).
Similar effects due to increased maximum daily summer temperature values, following heavy
winter rains one to two years prior, have also been suggested (Enscore et al., 2002).
The relationships between climate and rodent-borne diseases outlined here are examples, 
but the range of zoonoses maintained by wildlife, and potentially influenced by climate and
climate change, is much wider (Bengis et al., 2004).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
190
5.3.4
The Importation of Exotic Diseases
In the era of globalization, Canada must extend its consideration of the health impacts of 
climate change to an international, even global scale. The emergence of a global market 
place, hypermobility of goods, capital and people, and increasing access to worldwide 
travel and to instantaneous communication technologies have major implications for health 
in Canada and abroad (Labonté and Schrecker, 2006). Disease vectors can travel in boats, 
airplanes and suitcases, food-borne pathogens move with imported foods, and people can 
be carriers of pathogens. In all cases, a key issue is the speed with which exotic disease 
agents may move about the globe, eventually reaching Canada, as demonstrated by the 
West Nile virus epidemic in North America. It is thought that West Nile virus in North
America originated from the import of an infected mosquito into New York on an aeroplane
that came from the Middle East (Glaser, 2004). Within four years, it was endemic almost 
continent wide. At present, health and agricultural authorities monitor known health 
threats in travellers and in imported animals and foods. With climate change, expected 
patterns of animal and human disease may vary worldwide, resulting in a changed global
landscape of health risk (McMichael et al., 2003). Significant impacts of climate change 
on agriculture, markets and transportation are projected for Africa and parts of Asia, 
with grave consequences for health in those regions (United Kingdom Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2005; Field, 2005). Thousands of people could 
be displaced and Canadian trade partners could be affected, which in turn could affect 
conditions at home. Travelling Canadians returning with illnesses from endemic areas 
of the world are already a burden to local health care systems. The consequences of these
global changes in disease risk for Canadians’ health and health care sector are not yet 
well understood. Authorities responsible for disease surveillance, mitigation and treatment
already monitor the immediate changes that affect health risks in the Canadian population. 
What is less common is the integration of future risks arising from changing climatic conditions
in planning processes in order to determine future levels and responses needed, or what
actions can be taken.
Canada has a very diverse population,
and many people travel to visit 
family, vacation or conduct business
across the globe. This mass move-
ment, augmented by immigration 
and the deployment of military 
personnel, increases the potential 
for a person to become exposed 
to illnesses in one country and then 
to expose others to the infection 
in a location thousands of miles 
from the original source of infection.
For example, travellers are estimated
to run a 20-50% risk of contracting
food-borne disease depending on 
their destination (Käferstein et al.,
1997). Several hundred cases of
malaria are imported into Canada 
each year, with peaks in imported
cases mirroring epidemics elsewhere
(MacLean et al., 2004). In the U.S.,
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
191
61% of cholera cases are attributed to international travel (Käferstein et al., 1997; 
Steinberg et al., 2001), while in Canada almost all cases are imported (PHAC, 2005a). 
Public health authorities at all levels of government disseminate information to 
travellers on health risks abroad and advocate protective measures. The timing and 
content of these public service messages may need to change as the geographic 
patterns and seasonal occurrence of exotic diseases are altered by climate change 
(PHAC, 2000).
Exotic diseases may pose a diagnostic challenge to physicians unaccustomed to their 
presenting symptoms, or unaware of the patient’s travel history. The outbreak of severe 
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Ontario and British Columbia in 2003 highlighted 
the difficulties of dealing with a previously unknown and infectious agent. Lessons 
learned will enable Canada to deal with future public health crisis situations (PHAC, 
2005b). Since 2003, health care practitioners and public health practitioners have 
learned many lessons in dealing with highly infectious, imported diseases. Where 
possible, the best method of control is to inform travellers ahead of time of the potential 
exposure risks and recommend appropriate vaccinations or medication to prevent illness.
5.3.5
Key Knowledge Gaps
The following knowledge gaps have been identified in this review, as well as by 
previous studies.
Capacity
• interdisciplinary approaches are required to address the complex problems associated 
with research on food-, water-, vector- and rodent-borne diseases and climate change;
• researchers will need to be trained in interdisciplinary approaches;
• research networks linking this relatively small research community are vital to creating 
the critical mass needed to accomplish the research; and
• specialized technical expertise is needed to enhance response capacity.
Research
• the ecology of disease from the environmental source to the human case of the 
disease, including the ecology of hosts and vectors (this knowledge is required to 
identify where and how a change in climatic conditions might alter the hazards 
posed by these diseases);
• effects of climate and climate change in the hydrology of watersheds and other 
water sources (e.g. private wells, beaches, estuarine water) and on the contamination 
of water;
• effects of climate change on diseases, particularly vector-borne diseases, that are 
not yet in Canada but are geographically nearby, and on exotic vector-borne diseases 
where travel and unintentional vector importation are possible;
• effects of climate and climate change on transmission of pathogens in domesticated 
livestock and food processing, and on health risks associated with imported food 
and livestock;
• effects of climate change on the interaction of individual, population, ecosystem 
and infrastructure factors in vulnerability to infectious diseases;
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
192
• understanding the ecology of zoonoses in a wider range of wild animal hosts such 
as marine mammals and wild ungulates; and
• changing behaviour to reduce vulnerability to food-borne illness, particularly 
as it relates to cultural, social and societal preferences and food-handling 
and -processing norms.
Enumeration of current disease risks
More detailed quantification is needed of the infectious diseases that are affecting, 
or could affect, the human population in Canada. For example, the burden of illness 
from water-borne pathogens in Canada is not known, mostly because of source 
attribution problems; gastrointestinal infections can be transmitted person to person, 
in water and in food (Mead et al., 1999), and investigation of the source of endemic 
cases is not as routine. Perhaps only one out of 300 gastrointestinal infections are 
reported (Majowicz et al., 2004), which seriously limits burden of illness estimates. 
The geographic distribution of zoonoses in wildlife and of vectors is poorly understood, 
which limits the power to predict human populations at risk if effects of climate 
change on risk were to be identified.
Assessment of surveillance systems
There is a need to assess the adequacy of surveillance systems to detect significant 
changes in the incidence and geographic distribution of pathogens in humans and 
in important sentinel non-human species. At the 2006 Canadian National Consensus
Conference on Lyme disease, current surveillance case definitions, which rely 
on current knowledge of endemic areas, were identified as a potential obstacle to 
identifying the new endemic areas that are anticipated to arise as a consequence 
of climate change.
Development of warning systems
There is a need to improve the linkage between pathogen surveillance and meteorological 
information where climate is an indicator for a potential disease event. There is 
a pressing need to develop a better understanding of the impacts of extreme weather 
events on public health infrastructure and vulnerability to infectious disease 
outbreaks in order to develop warning systems. For example, heavy rainfall may 
contribute to water supply contamination as well as provide breeding areas for 
mosquitoes.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
193
5.4
ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE: RISK ASSESSMENT,
SURVEILLANCE, INTERVENTION AND ADAPTATION
Existing health and public health systems already 
protect Canadians from many disease risks by iden-
tifying risks and carrying out surveillance, interventions, 
and the diagnosis and treatment of infected and 
infectious individuals. Previous sections have
reviewed current knowledge on the potential effects 
of climate change on water-, food-, vector- and 
rodent-borne disease risks in Canada. However, 
the extent of climate change effects on health 
risks and the challenge they pose to existing health 
and public health systems still need to be fully 
investigated.
This analysis reflects the knowledge of the effectiveness
of current measures that help individuals reduce 
exposure to risks, mitigate and manage these risks 
and provide adequate, appropriate diagnosis and 
treatment. The next steps in minimizing the potential
increases in these risks are:
• determining baseline data on infectious disease occurrence and the associated burden of illness;
• a comprehensive risk assessment to prioritize public health threats for action; and
• a consultative approach to adaptation via:
– enhanced surveillance
– targeted intervention.
5.4.1
Risk Assessment
A risk assessment comprises four elements to estimate the likelihood and severity of risk: 
hazard identification; exposure assessment; dose-response assessment or hazard characterization;
and risk characterization (Coleman and Marks, 1999). Risk assessment methods are used 
to prioritize risks and hazards and to help with policy development (Gibson et al., 1998).
The broad review of potential health risks associated with climate change, presented here, is a
first step in a rational approach to preparing for these risks. However, a more far-reaching and
systematic risk assessment is required to identify priorities for action. One way of structuring the
many decisions involved, the capturing of the information on which to base those decisions and
the many answers often required, is through a multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA). It is used
increasingly to aid decision making in environmental health (Linkov et al., 2006). MCDA is 
a useful vehicle to capture the many decisions and many possible answers involved in risk
assessment across the country. MCDA sets out an explicit pathway for identifying the criteria 
for selection and ranking, for weighting these criteria according to the requirements and
objectives of different stakeholders, and then for analyzing and ranking on the basis of all 
criteria and weights. In the climate change context, there are likely many criteria in selecting 
and ranking disease risks, but examples include the following:
• Pathogenicity: More pathogenic or lethal pathogens may merit particular attention.
• Estimated case numbers and incidence rates: How common diseases are, or are likely 
to become, may affect their priority.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
194
• Probability that risks are realized: Confidence that climate change will cause a change 
in risk, or cause a new risk to emerge, may vary among different pathogens.
• Immediacy of risk: Some disease risks may be more immediate because they are 
geographically close to Canadian populations at risk or are likely to be affected first 
by climate change.
The need to understand climatic drivers for current disease patterns, so that effects of climate
change can be predicted to inform the risk assessment process, presents a key public health
challenge. The case has been made for the use of process-based simulation models that use
understanding of the ecology of vectors and pathogenic microparasites to predict their occurrence
in time and space (Kurtenbach et al., 2006). Such models have already been developed for some
vector-borne and enteric pathogens (Bigras-Poulin et al., 2004; Ogden et al., 2005a, 2007). Where
the detailed data on the ecology of vectors and microorganisms are not available, statistical
models that demonstrate associations between disease incidence and climate variables can be
used to predict or estimate climate change effects (Fleury et al., 2006; Thomas et al., 2006).
However, in either case researchers have just begun to scratch the surface in terms of gathering
the information required for comprehensive projections of the wide range of infectious disease
risks that may arise in Canada due to climate change.
Once key selection criteria have been identified, these need to be weighted according to the
importance allotted to each criterion by stakeholders that reflect the diversity of the Canadian
population. For example, in contrast to urban water supplies, water treatment in smaller systems 
or rural areas generally does not have the same resilience and redundancies, the tax base to support
large financial investments, or the same accompanying access to health care. As well as these
community risks, individuals at risk of food- and water-borne disease include the young, seniors
and immunocompromised individuals (Rosenberg et al., 1997). Some Canadians are more 
vulnerable than others to mosquito- or tick-borne diseases because of their age or health status,
outdoor occupation or activities, or because they live in areas with abundant tick or mosquito
populations. Risk groups include outdoor enthusiasts and members of Aboriginal communities,
particularly those pursuing traditional livelihoods. Arctic communities may face threats from
vector-borne diseases as the climate warms rapidly in the North (Berner et al., 2005).
5.4.2
Surveillance
Once key health risks have been identified and prioritized, the next process is to establish that
surveillance systems are (i) capable of identifying changing disease patterns and emerging
risks in a timely fashion, and (ii) able to trigger appropriate interventions to control disease risks,
again in a timely fashion.
In Canada, disease surveillance has moved from the traditional work of recording past events to a
more active, anticipatory approach designed to identify health threats as early as possible. To be
effective, such an approach requires a collaborative effort among health professionals and their
allies at all levels of government, as well as internationally (Figure 5.5). Surveillance needs to be
linked more tightly to action with a feedback loop at each scale for all surveillance programs.
For example, individuals and public health units may not report a disease unless they see a benefit
or the broader impacts on health. Local, provincial and federal health departments each maintain
registries of health data on certain diseases, infections, hospitalizations and injuries, while the
World Health Organization monitors similar data at a global level. These data, collected by
recording events as they occur, contribute to passive surveillance and may be enhanced by active
surveillance programs that obtain data on particular health problems (e.g. emerging infections)
(Pinner et al., 2003). The creation of the Public Health Agency of Canada was a major step toward
improving infectious disease surveillance and control, and the National Notifiable Diseases
On-Line and the Canadian Communicable Disease Report allow access to information on case
reports and surveillance results of infectious diseases.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
195
Figure 5.5 Effective surveillance framework
Chapter 5
Effective Surveillance
Effective surveillance requires the development
of active networks at many levels, defining
and linking networks, and coordinating response.
Note: P/T, provincial and territorial; WHO, World Health Organization; PAHO, 
Pan American Health Organization.
Source: Charron and Sockett, 2005.
As well as tracking individual human disease cases, a number of alternate surveillance 
activities can be useful in identifying disease risks and triggering interventions. These 
include monitoring zoonotic diseases (diseases transmissible between animals and people) 
in sentinel animal and vector populations. For example, Canadian public health authorities 
routinely monitor West Nile virus activity in birds and mosquitoes to measure the human
health risk (PHAC, 2006). A resurgence of leptospirosis in domestic dogs in Canada may
prove to be both a sentinel for increased human risk from wildlife sources of the disease 
and a potential source itself (Hrinivitch and Prescott, 1997; Carmichael, 1999; Kalin et al.,
1999; Prescott et al., 1999; Warshawsky et al., 2000; Prescott et al., 2002). Research is 
also underway to understand how trends in over-the-counter medication (e.g. antidiarrhoeal
remedies) may help detect water-borne illness in communities (Edge et al., 2004). 
Newspapers have also been useful in monitoring health problems related to extreme 
weather events (Soskolne et al., 2004). The importance of alternative systems of surveillance 
such as these is likely to increase due to global environmental change in times of 
competing demands on limited resources. Local communities may also contribute helpful
information often not captured by health surveillance activities alone. Sources such 
as these are especially important when studying the impacts of weather and climate on 
health. For example, First Nations elders may contribute pertinent observations on 
changes taking place in their communities and environments (MacKinnon, 2005). Farmers 
may understand the significance of weather patterns and can provide useful insights 
regarding health impacts. Similarly, hunters and fishers may observe changes in the health 
of wildlife that represent a human health risk (Sang et al., 2004).
Adapting surveillance systems to increased or altered health risks due to climate 
change will require imaginative development and intelligent use of both current and 
new surveillance methods. The process of surveillance method selection will be an 
MCDA that engages a wide variety of stakeholders. In the climate change context, 
surveillance systems must be dynamic and capable of responding to observed changes 
or to projections obtained from simulation or statistical models. In either case, 
increasing capacity to link these to geographic information systems technology provides
powerful tools to direct and rationalize surveillance activities once they have 
been developed.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
196
5.4.3
Intervention and Adaptation
The Canadian public health and health care infrastructures have evolved over many years, and 
in many ways, to reduce the health risks related to weather and climate. Provinces have vested
authority in Medical Officers of Health to issue boil water advisories under adverse water
quality situations; the federal government operates a centre for emergency preparedness and
response; and various non-government organizations have delivered public education and 
outreach on a range of related topics. As a result, Canadians are generally well protected 
from current weather- and climate-related health risks. For example, during floods or high-impact
rain events, the contamination of surface water and compromised wells is widely assumed,
and boil water advisories are issued. The most recent example in Canada was an advisory for
the Greater Vancouver Regional District in British Columbia in November 2006. A large
storm event caused extremely high turbidity in the systems reservoirs and a precautionary
advisory was issued and was in effect for 12 days (CBC News, 2006). A similar situation
occurred in the Red River Valley, southeastern Manitoba, as a result of the flood of 1997; 
the flood caused no direct loss of life, but resulted in property damage and the evacuation 
of 28,000 people from their homes (Burn and Goel, 2001).
Water- and food-borne diseases
The systems in place to help to manage existing water- and food-borne diseases provide 
the foundation for dealing with the new water- and food-borne health impacts related 
to climate change. In general, methods of control of water- and food-borne diseases are 
well established. Key aspects of
controlling microbial drinking water
contamination include a multiple
barrier approach, with emphasis
on source-water protection, and
site-specific water treatment 
technologies with built-in redun-
dancies (source-to-tap initiatives).
Existing water treatment and
food-processing regulations 
(e.g. Hazard Analysis and Critical
Control Point) may well be 
robust in the face of climate
change. Furthermore, many of the
measures already in place to
reduce weather-related health
risks (e.g. severe weather warnings, boil water advisories, monitoring and surveillance, emergency
preparedness) will continue to offer protection from the same risks under a changed climate.
However, these systems are by no means comprehensive. For example, it is still impossible to
calculate the burden of illness associated with water-borne disease under current data collection
and reporting formats. Food-borne disease outbreaks continue to be observed despite these systems,
such as the 2006 fresh spinach outbreak (CDC, 2006b). Furthermore, as the climate continues
to change, some of these systems may reach or exceed the limits of their effectiveness.
In assessing the capacity of drinking-water systems to respond to new challenges with climate
change, a number of criteria need to be examined, including design, redundancy, resilience
and maintenance issues. Infrastructure and processes are designed to a maximum threshold
based on historical climate records. As rainfall events intensify and become more frequent,
existing multiple safety barriers may fail more often or require greater maintenance (Watt et al.,
2003), increasing the risk for contamination and subsequent disease. For example, the 2001
Battlefords (Saskatchewan) Cryptosporidium outbreak occurred because the water treatment
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
197
was functioning at a sub-optimal level. The source water was contaminated through poor location
choice (downstream from the sewage discharge pipe), and weather impacts affected water
quality (Stirling et al., 2001). The encysted stages of Cryptosporidium and some strains of
Giardia are known to be resistant to simple chlorination water treatment. In general, Giardia
can be inactivated with chlorine, but the chemical concentrations and contact times required
make it an inefficient treatment method in most cases (Hibler et al., 1987; Korich et al., 1990). 
Canada’s aging and increasingly urban population puts more people at risk; aging and deteriorating
infrastructure may compromise the reliability of water treatment systems (Schuster et al., 2005);
and the robustness of such systems will influence how well they can respond to new health
risks. Individual contaminants have their own idiosyncrasies that must be taken into account
in planning. These demographic, geographic and contaminant-based variations in risk and
intervention requirements must be taken into account via stakeholder-driven weighting of criteria
for selection of intervention methods.
Vector- and rodent-borne diseases
Some of the pathogens responsible for vector- and rodent-borne diseases are endemic to 
Canada, but many risks associated with climate change involve emergence of pathogens new
to Canada. These are likely to require different interventions (i.e. the prevention of epidemics
and spread–and even eradication–of newly emerging pathogens versus minimizing risks from
endemic diseases). In both cases, the methods, intensity and point of use of interventions 
will be highly variable and pathogen specific. Again, criteria for interventions need to be
established and weighted according to pathogen, objective, location and populations at risk 
in a stakeholder-led process. For example, populations susceptible to Lyme disease include
people who spend time in woodlands and woodland-edge environments, outdoor workers, 
outdoor sports enthusiasts, dog owners, hunters and hikers, as well as rural and suburban
home owners and their families (Dister et al., 1997).
Available interventions are those generally borrowed from regions where vector- or rodent-
borne pathogens are currently a problem and endemic. In almost all cases, there are no 
vaccines available and none are likely to become available in the foreseeable future. Interventions
rest on vector control or public health messages, as exemplified by the response to the West 
Nile virus in recent years. In this outbreak, provincial and municipal health authorities made
considerable efforts to control mosquitoes by destroying larval mosquitoes with biological 
or chemical larvacides and by killing adult mosquitoes with residual (applied to surfaces) or
broadcast (in the air) adulticides (Nasci et al., 2001; Thier, 2001; Herrington, 2003; Shapiro and
Micucci, 2003). Public health messages were put in place to reduce mosquito larval development
sites, such as standing water, and reduce human biting. The latter included advice on using
mosquito repellents, wearing protective clothing, avoiding outdoor activities at dusk and dawn,
when mosquitoes are most active, and limiting activity in areas where mosquitoes are abundant
(Moore, 2003).
Tick-borne diseases can similarly be controlled by a variety of vector control methods and 
by the vaccination of wild host species (Schmidt and Ostfeld, 2001; Dolan et al., 2004; 
Rand et al., 2004; Tsao et al., 2004; Schulze et al., 2005). Experiences from other countries
suggest caution in the chemical control of ticks (Ogden et al., 2005b). Public health messaging
is again important because tick bites and tick-borne infections can be avoided by wearing 
suitably protective clothing, and by checking for ticks on clothing and the body after being 
in tick habitats (Health Canada, 2006). Public health messaging about vector-borne disease
symptoms may also limit the impact of these diseases. For example, early Lyme disease is 
often easily diagnosed by clinicians and usually readily cured with antibiotics. Later-stage
infections are more difficult to diagnose and treat, and cause considerable debilitation in
affected patients (Wormser, 2005).
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
198
5.5
CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has identified that the potential exists for climate change to affect public 
health in Canada, via effects on the risk from food-, water-, rodent- and vector-borne diseases.
It is essential to act upon these observations and to prepare for coming risks and challenges. 
A range of actions should be considered, including assessment of risks and risk-management
measures through the establishment of necessary surveillance systems linked to effective
intervention and control processes. As well, training of professionals and public education
aimed at the adoption of behaviours to minimize health risks is necessary. The Public 
Health Agency of Canada is strategically placed to take a lead role in this process in 
partnerships with federal organizations such as Health Canada, the Canadian Food Inspection
Agency, non-government organizations, research networks (e.g. Canadian Water Network,
ArcticNet) and public health organizations in provinces, territories and municipalities. A
wider engagement of stakeholders from different cultural, geographic and demographic
groups is essential to create the diversity of opinion needed to develop and implement 
inclusive and adaptive mechanisms to protect the Canadian public.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
199
5.6
REFERENCES
Arbuckle, T.E., Sherman, G.J., Corey, P.N., Walters, D., and Lo, B. (1988). Water nitrates 
and CNS birth defects: A population-based case-control study. Archives of Environmental
Health, 43(2), 162–167.
Artsob, H. (1986). Arbovirus activity in Canada 1985. Canada Disease Weekly Report, 12, 109–110.
Auld, H., MacIver, D., and Klaassen, J. (2004). Heavy rainfall and waterborne disease outbreaks: The
Walkerton example. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, 67(20–22), 1879–1887.
Baldwin, M., Mergler, D., Larribe, F., Belanger, S., Tardif, R., et al. (1999). Bioindicator and exposure
data for a population based study of manganese. Neurotoxicology, 20(2–3), 343–353.
Barker, I.K., and Lindsay, L.R. (2000). Lyme borreliosis in Ontario: Determining the risks. Canadian
Medical Association Journal, 162(11), 1573–1574.
Becker, K., Hu, Y., and Biller-Andorno, N. (2006). Infectious diseases – A global challenge. International
Journal of Medical Microbiology, 296(4–5), 179–185.
Bengis, R.G., Leighton, F.A., Fischer, J.R., Artois, M., Morner, T., et al. (2004). The role of wildlife 
in emerging and re-emerging zoonoses. Scientific and Technical Review, 23(2), 497–511.
Bentham, G., and Langford, I.H. (1995). Climate change and the incidence of food poisoning in England
and Wales. International Journal of Biometeorology, 39(2), 81–86.
—–. (2001). Environmental temperatures and the incidence of food poisoning in England and Wales.
International Journal of Biometeorology, 45(1), 22–26.
Berner, J., Furgal, C., Bjerregaard, P., Bradley, M., Curtis, T., et al. (2005). Human health. In Arctic Climate
Impact Assessment (ACIA) (pp. 863–906). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Bernier, J., Brousseau, P., Krzystyniak, K., Tryphonas, H., and Fournier, M. (1995). Immunotoxicity of
heavy metals in relation to Great Lakes. Environmental Health Perspectives, 103(Suppl. 9), 23–34.
Bigras-Poulin, M., Ravel, A., Bélanger, D., and Michel, P. (2004). Development of agroenvironmental
indicators to evaluate the hygienic pressure of livestock production on human health.
International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Vigour, 207(3), 279–295.
Boulouis, H.J., Chang, C.C., Henn, J.B., Kasten, R.W., and Chomel, B.B. (2005). Factors associated
with the rapid emergence of zoonotic Bartonella infections. Veterinary Research, 36(3), 383–410.
Bowie, W.R., King, A.S., Werker, D.H., Isaac-Renton, J.L., Bell, A., et al. (1997). Outbreak of 
toxoplasmosis associated with municipal drinking water. The Lancet, 350(9072), 173–177.
Burn, D.H., and Goel, N.K. (2001). Flood frequency analysis for the Red River at Winnipeg. Canadian
Journal of Civil Engineering, 28, 355–362.
Cable, R.G., and Leiby, D.A. (2003). Risk and prevention of transfusion-transmitted babesiosis and
other tick-borne diseases. Current Opinion in Hematology, 10(6), 405–411.
Calisher, C.H. (1994). Medically important arboviruses of the United States and Canada. Clinical
Microbiology Reviews, 7, 89–116.
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) News. (2006). Boil water warning lifted for 1 million in
Greater Vancouver. Retrieved June 13, 2007, from http://www.cbc.ca/canada/british-columbia/
story/2006/11/17/boil-water.html
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA). (2003). Food safety facts on bivalve shellfish in British
Columbia. Retrieved November 22, 2006, from http://www.inspection.gc.ca/english/fssa/
concen/specif/bivalvee.shtml
Carman, S., Artsob, H., and Emery, S. (1995). Eastern equine encephalitis in a horse from Southwestern
Ontario. Canadian Veterinary Journal, 36, 170–171.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
200
Carmichael, L.E. (1999). Canine viral vaccines at a turning point – A personal perspective. Advances 
in Veterinary Medicine, 41, 289–307.
Centers for Disease Control (CDC). (2003). Epidemic/enzootic West Nile virus in the United States:
Guidelines for surveillance, prevention, and control, 3rd revision. Fort Collins, CO. 
Retrieved November 22, 2006, from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/
resources/wnv-guidelines-aug-2003.pdf
—–. (2004). Lyme Disease – United States, 2001–2002. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 53(17), 365–369.
—–. (2005a). CDC Plague Home Page. Retrieved June 17, 2007, from http://www.cdc.gov/
ncidod/dvbid/plague/
—–. (2005b). Foodborne illness – Frequently asked questions. Atlanta: Coordinating Center for
Infectious Diseases, Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases. Retrieved March 10, 2007,
from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/diseaseinfo/foodborneinfections_g.htm#mostcommon
—–. (2005c). Information on arboviral encephalitides. Retrieved June 12, 2007, from http://www.cdc.gov/
ncidod/dvbid/arbor/arbdet.htm
—–. (2005d). Marine toxins. Atlanta: Coordinating Center for Infectious Diseases, Division of Bacterial
and Mycotic Diseases. Retrieved November 19, 2006, from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/
dbmd/diseaseinfo/marinetoxins_g.htm
—–. (2006a). Arboviral Encephalitis cases reported in humans, by type, United States, 1964–2004.
Fort Collins, Colo.: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved June 22, 2006, from
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/arbor/arbocase.htm
—–. (2006b). Ongoing multistate outbreak of Escherichia coli serotype O157:H7 infections associated
with consumption of fresh spinach – United States, September 2006. Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report, 55(38), 1045–1046.
Charron, D., and Sockett, P. (2005). Signs of change, signs of trouble: Finding the evidence. Health
Policy Research Bulletin, 11. Retrieved June 18, 2007, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/sr-sr/pubs/
hpr-rpms/bul/2005-climat/2005-climat-7_e.html
Charron, D.F., Thomas, M.K., Waltner-Toews, D.W., Aramini, J.J., Edge, T., et al. (2004). Vulnerability
of waterborne diseases to climate change in Canada: A review. Journal of Toxicology and
Environmental Health, 67(A), 1667–1677.
Cheney, P. (1998). Update on emerging infections from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:
Fatal human plague – Arizona and Colorado, 1996. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 31(3), 410–411.
Chin, J. (2000). Control of communicable diseases manual (17th ed.). Baltimore: American Public
Health Association.
Chiu, A., Beaubier, J., Chiu, J., Chan, L., and Gerstenberger, S. (2004). Epidemiologic studies 
of PCB congener profiles in North American fish consuming populations. Journal of
Environmental Science and Health. Part C, Environmental Carcinogenesis & Ecotoxicology
Reviews, 22(1), 13–36.
Coleman, M.E., and Marks, H.M. (1999). Qualitative and quantitative risk assessment. Food 
Control, 10, 289–297.
Curriero, F.C., Patz, J.A., Rose, J.B., and Lele, S. (2001). The association between extreme 
precipitation and waterborne disease outbreaks in the United States, 1948–1994. American
Journal of Public Health, 91, 1194–1199.
Danish Integrated Antimicrobial resistance Monitoring and Research Programme (DANMAP). (2002).
Use of antimicrobial agents and occurrence of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria from food
animals, foods and humans in Denmark. Copenhagen: Danish Veterinary Institute, Danish
Veterinary and Food Administration, Statens Serum Institute and Danish Medicines Agency.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
201
Dister, S.W., Fish, D., Bros, S.M., Frank, D.H., and Wood, B.L. (1997). Landscape characterization 
of peridomestic risk for Lyme disease using satellite imagery. American Journal of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene, 57(6), 687–692.
Dolan, M.C., Maupin, G.O., Schneider, B.S., Denatalem, C., and Hamon, N. (2004). Control of immature
Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) on rodent reservoirs of Borrelia burgdorferi in a residential
community of southeastern Connecticut. Journal of Medical Entomology, 41(6), 1043–1054.
Drebot, M.A., Artsob, H., and Werker, D. (2000). Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in Canada, 1989–1999.
Canada Communicable Disease Report, 26(8), 65–69.
D’Souza, R.M., Becher, N.G., Hall, G., and Moodie, K.B. (2004). Does ambient temperature affect
foodborne disease? Epidemiology, 15(1), 86–92.
Duncan, K.T., Guidotti, T., Cheng, W., Naidoo, K., Gibson, G., et al. (1998). Health sector. In G. Koshida,
and W. Avis (Eds.), The Canada Country Study – Climate Impacts and Adaptation (pp. 501–590).
Toronto: Environment Canada.
Duplantier, J.M., Duchemin, J.B., Chanteau, S., and Carniel, E. (2005). From the recent lessons 
of the Malagasy foci towards a global understanding of the factors involved in plague 
re-emergence. Veterinary Research, 36(3), 437–453.
Edge, V.L., Pollari, F., Lim, G., Aramini, J., Sockett, P., et al. (2004). Syndromic surveillance 
of gastrointestinal illness using pharmacy over-the-counter sales: A retrospective study 
of waterborne outbreaks in Saskatchewan and Ontario. Canadian Journal of Public 
Health, 95(6), 446–450.
Eisler, R. (2004). Mercury hazards from gold mining to humans, plants, and animals. Reviews 
of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 181, 139–198.
Enscore, R.E., Biggerstaff, B.J., Brown, T.L., Fulgham, R.E., Reynolds, P.J., et al. (2002). 
Modeling relationships between climate and the frequency of human plague cases in the 
southwestern United States, 1960–1997. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and 
Hygiene, 66(2), 186–196.
Epstein, P.R. (2001a). Climate change and emerging infectious diseases. Microbes and 
Infection, 3, 747–754.
—–. (2001b). West Nile virus and climate. Journal of Urban Health, 78, 367–371.
Epstein, P.R., Calix Pena, O., and Blanco Racedo, J. (1995). Climate and disease in Columbia. 
The Lancet, 346(8985), 1243–1244.
Epstein, P.R., and Defilippo, C. (2001). West Nile virus and drought. Global Change and Human
Health, 2, 2–4.
Euripidou, E., and Murray, V. (2004). Public health impacts of floods and chemical contamination.
Journal of Public Health, 26(4), 376–383.
Fayer, R. (2000). Presidential address. Global change and emerging infectious diseases. Journal 
of Parasitology, 86(6), 1174–1181.
Field, S. (2005). Continental Divide: Why Africa’s climate change burden is greater. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 113(8), A534–A537.
Fleury, M., Charron, D.F., Holt, J.D., Allen, O.B., and Maarouf, A.R. (2006). A time series analysis 
of the relationship of ambient temperature and common bacterial enteric infections in 
two Canadian provinces. International Journal of Biometeorology, 50(6), 385–391.
Freier, J.E. (1993). Eastern equine encephalomyelitis. The Lancet, 342(8882), 1281–1282.
Fyfe, M., Yeung, S.T., Daly, P., Schallie, K., Kelly, M.T., et al. (1997). Outbreak of Vibrio Parahaemolyticus
related to raw oysters in British Columbia. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 23, 145–148.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
202
Gaulin, C., Couillard, M., Pilon, P.A., Tremblay, M., Lambert, L., et al. (2004). Assessment of surveillance
of human West Nile virus infection in Québec, 2003. Canada Communicable Disease 
Report, 30, 97–104.
Gibson, C.J., Haas, C.N., and Rose, J.B. (1998). Risk assessment of waterborne protozoa: Current 
status and future trends. Parasitology, 117, S205–S212.
Githeko, A.K., Lindsay, S.W., Confalonieri, U.E., and Patz, J.A. (2000). Climate change and vector-borne
diseases: A regional analysis. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 78(9), 1136–1147.
Glaser, A. (2004). West Nile virus and North America: An unfolding story. Scientific and Technical
Review, 23(2), 557–568.
Glass, G.E., Cheek, J.E., Patz, J.A., Shields, T.M., Doyle, T.J., et al. (2000). Using remotely sensed 
data to identify areas at risk for hantavirus pulmonary syndrome. Emerging Infectious
Diseases, 6(3), 238–247.
Grassley, N.C., and Fraser, C. (2006). Seasonal infectious disease epidemiology. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London, Biological Sciences, 273, 2541–2550.
Gubler, D.J., Reiter, P., Ebi, K.L., Yap, W., Nasci, R., et al. (2001). Climate variability and change 
in the United States: Potential impacts on vector- and rodent-borne diseases. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 109(Suppl. 2), 223–233.
Hall, G.V., D’Souza, R.M., and Kirk, M.D. (2002). Foodborne disease in the new millennium: 
Out of the frying pan and into the fire? The Medical Journal of Australia, 177(11/12), 614–618.
Hayes, R.O. (1981). Eastern and western encephalitis. In J.H. Steele (Ed.), CRC handbook series 
in zoonoses (pp. 29–57). Vol I. Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC Press.
Health Canada. (2002). Notifiable diseases summary (preliminary). Canada Communicable Disease
Report, 28, 94–95.
—–. (2004). Radiological characteristics. Retrieved June 17, 2007, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/
ewh-semt/pubs/water-eau/doc_sup-appui/radiological_characteristics/index_e.html#Natural
—–. (2006). Lyme Disease. Retrieved January 9, 2008, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/iyh-vsv/
diseases-maladies/lyme_e.html
Herrington, J.E. (2003). Pre-West Nile virus outbreak: Perceptions and practices to prevent mosquito
bites and viral encephalitis in the United States. Vector-borne and Zoonotic Diseases, 3, 157–173.
Hibler, C.P., Hancock, C.M., Perger, L.M., Wegrzyn, J.C., and Swabby, K.D. (1987). Inactivation of
Giardia cysts with chlorine at 0.5º C to 5.0º C. Denver: American Water Works Association
and American Water Works Association Research Foundation.
Hjelle, B., and Glass, G.E. (2000). Outbreak of hantavirus infections in the four corners region 
of the United States in the wake of the 1997–1998 El Niño-southern oscillation.
The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 181, 1569–1573.
Horn, A., Stamper, K., Dahlberg, D., McCabe, J., Beller, M., et al. (2001). Botulism outbreak 
associated with eating fermented food – Alaska, 2001. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 50, 680–682.
Hrinivitch, K., and Prescott, J.F. (1997). Leptospirosis in 2 unrelated dogs. The Canadian Veterinary
Journal, 38(8), 509–510.
Hrudey, S.E., Payment, P., Huck, P.M., Gillham, R.W., and Hrudey, E.J. (2003). A fatal waterborne 
disease epidemic in Walkerton, Ontario: Comparison with other waterborne outbreaks 
in the developed world. Water Science and Technology, 47, 7–14.
Huq, A., Sack, R., and Colwell, R.R. (2001). Cholera and global ecosystems. In J. Aron, and 
J. Patz (Eds.), Ecosystem change and public health: A global perspective (pp. 327–347).
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
203
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2007a). Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.F. Palutikof, 
P.J. van der Linden, and C.E. Hanson (Eds.). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007b). Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to 
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. S. Solomon,
D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, et al. (Eds.). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
Isaacs, S., LeBer, C., and Michel, P. (1998). The distribution of foodborne disease by risk setting – Ontario.
Canada Communicable Disease Report, 24(8), 61–64.
Jansen, A., Schoneberg, I., Frank, C., Alpers, K., Schneider, T., et al. (2005). Leptospirosis in Germany
1962–2003. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 11(7), 1048–1054.
Jardine, C., Appleyard, G., Kosoy, M.Y., McColl, D., Chirino-Trejo, M., et al. (2005). Rodent-associated
Bartonella in Saskatchewan, Canada. Vector Borne and Zoonotic Diseases, 5(4), 402–409.
Jones, S.C., Morris, J., Hill, G., Alderman, M., and Ratard, R.C. (2002). St. Louis encephalitis outbreak
in Louisiana in 2001. The Journal of the Louisiana State Medical Society, 154(6), 303–306.
Käferstein, F.K., Motargemi, Y., and Bettcher, D.W. (1997). Foodborne disease control: A transitional
challenge. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 3(4), 503–510.
Kalin, M., Devaux, C., DiFruscia, R., Lemay, S., and Higgins, R. (1999). Three cases of canine leptospirosis
in Québec. The Canadian Veterinary Journal, 40(3), 187–191.
Karande, S., Bhatt, M., Kelkar, A., Kulkarni, M., De, A., and Varaiya, A. (2003). An observational study to
detect leptospirosis in Mumbai, India, 2000. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 88(12), 1070–1075.
Keane, D., and Little, P. (1987). Equine viral encephalomyelitis in Canada: A review of known and
potential causes. Canadian Veterinary Journal, 28, 497–503.
Keen, J.E., Laegreid, W.W., Chitko Mckown, C.G., Bono, J.L., Fox, J.M., et al. (2003). Effect of
exogenous glucocorticoids and dietary change on winter and summer STEC O157 fecal 
shedding in naturally-infected beef cattle. Research Workers in Animal Diseases Conference
Proceedings. Abstract Number 83.
Klich, M., Lankester, M.W., and Wu, K.W. (1996). Spring migratory birds (Aves) extend the northern
occurrence of blacklegged tick (Acari: Ixodidae). Journal of Medical Entomology, 33(4), 581–585.
Koelle, K., Pascual, M., and Yunus, M. (2005). Pathogen adaptation to seasonal forcing and climate
change. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Biological Sciences, 272(1566), 971–977.
Korich, D.G., Mead, J.R., Madore, M.S., Sinclair, N.A., and Sterling, C.R. (1990). Effects of ozone,
chlorine dioxide, chlorine, and monochlorine on Cryptosporidium parvum oocyst viability.
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 56(5), 1423–1428.
Kovats, R.S., Campbell-Lendrum, D.H., McMichael, A.J., Woodward, A., and Cox, J.S. (2001). 
Early effect of climate change: Do they include changes in vector-borne disease? Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 356(1411),
1057–1068.
Kovats, R.S., Edwards, S.J., Charron, D., Cowden, J., D’Souza, R.M., et al. (2004a). Climate variability
and campylobacter infection: An international study. International Journal of Biometeorology,
49(4), 207–214.
Kovats, R.S., Edwards, S.J., Hajat, S., Armstrong, B.G., Ebi, K.L., et al. (2004b). The effect of 
temperature on food poisoning: A time-series analysis of salmonellosis in ten European 
countries. Epidemiology and Infection, 132(3), 443–453.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
204
Krause, P.J., Telford, S.R. 3rd, Spielman, A., Sikand, V., Christianson, D., et al. (1996). Concurrent
Lyme disease and babesiosis: Evidence for increased severity and duration of illness. 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 275, 1657–1660.
Kurtenbach, K., Hanincova, K., Tsao, J.I., Margos, G., Fish, D., et al. (2006). Fundamental processes 
in the evolutionary ecology of Lyme borreliosis. Nature Reviews, Microbiology, 4, 660–669.
Labonté, R., and Schrecker, T. (2006). Globalization and social determinants of health: Analytic 
and strategic review paper. Discussion paper commissioned by WHO Commission on Social
Determinants of Health. Ottawa: University of Ottawa, Institute of Population Health.
Retrieved November 14, 2006, from http://www.who.int/social_determinants/resources/
globalization.pdf
Leake, J.P. (1941). Epidemic of infectious encephalitis. Public Health Report, 56, 1902–1905.
Lee, S.H., Levy, D.A., Craun, G.F., Beach, M.J., and Calderon, R.L. (2002). Surveillance for 
waterborne disease outbreaks – United States, 1999–2000. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report, 51, 1–47.
Leech, R.W., Harris, J.C., and Johnson, R.M. (1981). 1975 encephalitis epidemic in North Dakota 
and western Minnesota: An epidemiologic, clinical, and neuropathologic study. Minnesota
Medicine, 64, 545–548.
Leighton, F.A. (2000). Arboviruses – Introduction and general information. Canadian Cooperative
Wildlife Health Centre, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada. Retrieved June 17, 2006, from
http://wildlife1.usask.ca/wildlife_health_topics/arbovirus/arboeee.php
Leighton, F.A., Artsob, H.A., Chu, M.C., and Olson, J.G. (2001). A serological survey of rural 
dogs and cats on the southwestern Canadian prairie for zoonotic pathogens. Canadian 
Journal of Public Health, 92(1), 67–71.
Levallois, P., Theriault, M., Rouffignat, J., Tessier, S., Landry, R., et al. (1998). Groundwater 
contamination by nitrates associated with intensive potato culture in Québec. The Science 
of the Total Environment, 217(1–2), 91–101.
Levallois, P., Ayotte, P., Van Maanen, J.M., Desrosiers, T., Gingras, S., et al. (2000). Excretion of
volatile nitrosamines in a rural population in relation to food and drinking water consumption.
Food and Chemical Toxicology, 38(11), 1013–1019.
Levesque, B., De Serres, G., Higgins, R., D’Halewyn, M.A., Artsob, H., et al. (1995). Seroepidemiologic
study of three zoonoses (leptospirosis, Q fever, and tularemia) among trappers in Quebec,
Canada. Clinical and Diagnostic Laboratory Immunology, 2(4), 496–498.
Levy, D.A., Bens, M.S., Craun, G.F., Calderon, R.L., and Herwaldt, B.L. (1998). Surveillance 
for waterborne disease outbreaks – United States, 1995–1996. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report, 47, 1–34.
Lewellen, R.H., and Vessey, S.H. (1998). The effect of density dependence and weather on population
size of a polyvoltine species. Ecological Monographs, 68, 571–594.
Lindgren, E., Talleklint, L., and Polfeldt, T. (2000). Impact of climatic change on the northern latitude
limit and population density of the disease-transmitting European tick Ixodes ricinus,
Environmental Health Perspectives, 108(2),119–123.
Lindsay, L.R., Artsob, H., and Barker, I. (1998). Distribution of Ixodes pacificus and Ixodes 
scapularis re concurrent Babesiosis and Lyme disease. Canada Communicable Disease 
Report, 24(15), 121–122.
Linkov, I., Satterstrom, F.K., Kiker, G., Batchelor, C., Bridges, T., et al. (2006). From comparative 
risk assessment to multi-criteria decision analysis and adaptive management: Recent 
developments and applications. Environment International, 32(8), 1072–1093.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
205
Macdonald, R.W., Harner, T., and Fyfe, J. (2005). Recent climate change in the Arctic and its impact 
on contaminant pathways and interpretation of temporal trend data. Science of the Total
Environment, 342(1–3), 5–86.
MacKinnon, M. (2005). A First Nations voice in the present creates healing in the future. Canadian
Journal of Public Health, 96(Suppl. 1), S13–S16.
MacLean, J.D., Demers, A., Ndao, M., Kokoskin, E., Ward, B.J., et al. (2004). Malaria epidemics 
and surveillance systems in Canada. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 10(7), 1195–1201.
MacLean, J.D., and Ward, B.J. (1999). The return of swamp fever: Malaria in Canadians. Canadian
Medical Association Journal, 160(2), 211–212. 
Majowicz, S.E., Dore, K., Flint, J.A., Edge, V.L., Read, S., et al. (2004). Magnitude and distribution 
of acute, self-reported gastrointestinal illness in a Canadian community, Epidemiology 
and Infection, 132, 607–617.
Manitoba Health. (2007). West Nile Virus. Retrieved January 9, 2008, from http://www.gov.mb.ca/
health/wnv/stats.html
Mao, Y., Desmeules, M., Schaubel, D., Berube, D., Dyck, R., et al. (1995). Inorganic components 
of drinking water and microalbuminuria. Environmental Research, 71(2), 135–140.
Marra, P.P., Francis, C.M., Mulvihill, R.S., and Moore, F.R. (2005). The influence of climate 
on the timing and rate of spring bird migration. Oecologia, 142, 307–315.
Martin, D., Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., Brazeau, J., Furgal, C., et al. (2005). Climate change,
drinking water and human health in Nunavik : Adaptation strategies. Retrieved 
January 9, 2008, from http://www.itk.ca/environment/water-nunavik-report.pdf
McGinn, S.M., Toure, A., Akinremi, O.O., Major, D.J., and Barr, A.G. (1999). Agroclimate and 
crop response to climate change in Alberta, Canada. Outlook on Agriculture, 28(1), 19–28.
McMichael, A.J., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Corvalán, C., Ebi, K.L., Githeko, A., et al. (2003). Climate
change and human health – Risks and responses. Geneva: World Health Organization.
McMichael, A.J., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Kovats, S., Edwards, S., Wilkinson, P., et al. (2004). Global
climate change. In Comparative quantification of health risks: Global and regional burden 
of diseases due to selected major risk factors. Geneva: World Health Organization. Retrieved
December 14, 2006, from http://www.who.int/publications/cra/chapters/volume2/
part2/en/index.html
Mead, P.S., Slutsker, L., Dietz, V., McCaig, L.F., Bresee, J.S., et al. (1999). Food-related illness 
and death in the United States. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 5(5), 607–625.
Metcalfe, C.D., Koenig, B.G., Bennie, D.T., Servos, M., Ternes, T.A., et al. (2003). Occurrence 
of neutral and acidic drugs in the effluents of Canadian sewage treatment plants.
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 22(12), 2872–2880.
Mills, J.N., and Childs, J.E. (1998). Ecologic studies of rodent reservoirs: Their relevance for human
health. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 4, 529–537.
Moore, D. (2003). West Nile virus – Mosquitoes no longer just an annoyance. Canadian Journal 
of Infectious Diseases, 14, 150–153.
Morshed, M.G., Scott, J.D., Banerjee, S.N., Banerjee, M., Fitzgerald, T., et al. (1999). First 
isolation of Lyme disease spirochete, Borrelia burgdorferi, from blacklegged tick, Ixodes
scapularis, removed from a bird in Nova Scotia, Canada. Canada Communicable Disease
Report, 25(18), 153–155.
Nasci, R.S., and Moore, C.G. (1998). Vector-borne disease surveillance and natural disasters. 
Emerging Infectious Diseases, 4(2), 333–334.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
206
Nasci, R.S., Newton, N.H., Terrillion, G.F., Parsons, R.E., Dame, D.A., et al. (2001). Interventions:
Vector control and public education, Panel discussion. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences, 951, 235–254.
Nicholls, T., Acar, J., Anthony, F., Franklin, A., Gupta, R., et al. (2001). Antimicrobial resistance:
Monitoring the quantities of antimicrobials used in animal husbandry. Revue Scientifique 
et Technique, 20(3), 841–847.
Nutall, M., Berkes, F., Forbes, B., Kofinas, G., Vlassova, T., et al. (2005). Hunting, herding, fishing,
and gathering: Indigenous peoples and renewable resource use in the Arctic. In Arctic Climate
Impact Assessment (ACIA) (pp. 649–690). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Ogden, N.H., Lindsay, L.R., Beauchamp, G., Charron, D., Maarouf, A., et al. (2004). Investigation 
of relationships between temperature and developmental rates of tick Ixodes scapularis 
(Acari: Ixodidae) in the laboratory and field. Journal of Medical Entomology, 41(4), 622–633.
Ogden, N.H., Bigras-Poulin, M., O’Callaghan, C.J., Barker, I.K., Lindsay, L.R., et al. (2005a). A dynamic
population model to investigate effects of climate on geographic range and seasonality 
of the tick Ixodes scapularis. International Journal for Parasitology, 35, 375–389.
Ogden, N.H., Swai, E., Beauchamp, G., Karimuribo, E., Fitzpatrick, J.L., et al. (2005b). Risk 
factors for tick attachment to small-holder dairy cattle in Tanzania. Preventive Veterinary
Medicine, 67, 157–170.
Ogden, N.H., Trudel, L., Artsob, H., Barker, I.K., Beauchamp, G., et al. (2006a). Ixodes scapularis 
ticks collected by passive surveillance in Canada: Analysis of geographic distribution 
and infection with Lyme borreliosis agent Borrelia burgdorferi. Journal of Medical
Entomology, 43, 600–609.
Ogden, N.H., Maarouf, A., Barker, I.K., Bigras-Poulin, M., Lindsay, L.R., et al. (2006b). Climate
change and the potential for range expansion of the Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis
in Canada. International Journal for Parasitology, 36, 63–70.
Ogden, N.H., Bigras-Poulin, M., O’Callaghan, C.J., Barker, I.K., Kurtenbach, K., et al. (2007). 
Vector seasonality, host infection dynamics and fitness of pathogens transmitted by 
the tick Ixodes scapularis. Parasitology, 134(2), 209–227.
Oliver, S.L., Dastjerdi, A.M., Wong, S., El-Attar, L., Gallimore, C., et al. (2003). Molecular 
characterization of bovine enteric caliciviruses: A distinct third genogroup of Noroviruses
(Norwalk-like viruses) unlikely to be of risk to humans. Journal of Virology, 77, 2789–2798.
O’Meara, G.F., Evans, L.F. Jr, Gettman, A.D., and Cuda, J.P. (1995). Spread of Aedes albopictus and
decline of Ae. Aegypti (Diptera: Culcidae) in Florida. Journal of Medical Entomology, 32, 554–562.
Parkinson, A.J., and Butler, J.C. (2005). Potential impacts of climate change on infectious diseases 
in the Arctic. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 64(5), 478–486.
Parmenter, R.R., Yadav, E.P., Parmenter, C.A., Ettestad, P., and Gage, K.L. (1999). Incidence of 
plague associated with increased winter–spring precipitation in New Mexico. American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 61(5), 814–821.
Patz, J.A., Martens, W.J., Focks, D.A., and Jetten, T.H. (1998). Dengue fever epidemic potential 
as projected by general circulation models of global climate change. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 106(3), 147–153.
Patz, J.A., and Reisen, W.K. (2001). Immunology, climate change and vector-borne diseases. Trends 
in Immunology, 22, 171–172.
Payment, P., and Pintar, K. (2006). Waterborne pathogens: A critical assessment of methods, results 
and data analysis. Revue des Sciences de l’Eau, 19(3), 233–245.
Peperzak, L. (2005). Future increase in harmful algal blooms in the North Sea due to climate change.
Water Science and Technology, 51(5), 31–36.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
207
Pepperell, C., Rau, N., Krajden, S., Kern, R., Humar, A., et al. (2003). West Nile virus infection in
2002: Morbidity and mortality among patients admitted to hospital in southcentral Ontario.
Canadian Medical Association Journal, 168(11), 1399–1405.
Pinner, R.W., Rebmann, C.A., Schuchat, A., and Hughes, J.M. (2003). Disease surveillance 
and the academic, clinical, and public health communities. Emerging Infectious 
Diseases, 9(7), 781–787.
Potter, M.E., Currier, R.W. II, Pearson, J.E., Harris, J.C., and Parker, R.L. (1977). Western equine
encephalomyelitis in horses in the northern Red River Valley, 1975. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 170, 1396–1399.
Prescott, J.F., Key, D., and Osuch, M. (1999). Leptospirosis in dogs. The Canadian Veterinary 
Journal, 40(6), 430–431.
Prescott, J.F., McEwen, B., Taylor, J., Woods, J.P., Abrams-Ogg, A., et al. (2002). Resurgence 
of leptospirosis in dogs in Ontario: Recent findings. The Canadian Veterinary 
Journal, 43(12), 955–961.
Proulx, J-F., Milor-Roy, V., and Austin, J. (1997). Four outbreaks of botulism in Ungava Bay, 
Nunavik, Québec. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 23, 30–32.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2000). Yellow fever. Retrieved June 23, 2007, from
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/tmp-pmv/info/yf_fj_e.html
—–. (2003). Canadian integrated surveillance report. Salmonella, Campylobacter, pathogenic 
E. coli and Shigella, from 1996–1999. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 29S1.
Retrieved January 9, 2008, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/ccdr-rmtc/
03vol29/29s1/index.html
—–. (2005a). Notifiable diseases online. Retrieved June 21, 2007, from http://dsol-smed.phac-aspc.gc.ca/
dsol-smed/ndis/index_e.html 
—–. (2005b). SARS information. Retrieved June 21, 2007, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/
sars-sras-gen/index.html
—–. (2006). West Nile virus: Symptoms, diagnosis and treatment. Retrieved January 9, 2008, from
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/wn-no/surveillance_e.html
—–. (2007a). Vaccine-preventable diseases: Cholera. Retrieved June 17, 2007, from http://
www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/im/vpd-mev/cholera_e.html
—–. (2007b). West Nile virus national surveillance reports. Retrieved June 17, 2007, from
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/wnv-vwn/nsr-rns_e.html
Purse, B.V., Mellor, P.S., Rogers, D.J., Samuel, A.R., Mertens, P.P., et al. (2005). Climate change and 
the recent emergence of bluetongue in Europe. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 3(2), 171–181.
Rand, P.W., Lubelczyk, C., Holman, M.S., Lacombe, E.H., and Smith, R.P. Jr. (2004). Abundance 
of Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) after the complete removal of deer from an isolated 
offshore island, endemic for Lyme Disease. Journal of Medical Entomology, 41, 779–784.
Randolph, S.E. (1998). Ticks are not insects: Consequences of contrasting vector biology for transmission
potential. Parasitology Today, 14(5), 186–192.
Rausch, R. (2003). Cystic echinococcosis in the Arctic and Sub Arctic. Parasitology, 127, S73–S85.
Reeves, W.C., Hardy, J.L., Reisen, W.K., and Milby, M.M. (1994). Potential effect of global 
warming on mosquito-borne arboviruses. Journal of Medical Entomology, 31(3), 323–332.
Reiter, P. (1998). Global-warming and vector-borne disease in temperate regions and at high 
altitudes. The Lancet, 351(9105), 839–840.
—–. (2001). Climate change and mosquito-borne disease. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(S1),
141–161.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
208
Rogers, D.J., and Randolph, S.E. (2000). The global spread of malaria in a future, warmer world.
Science, 289(5485), 1763–1766.
—–. (2006). Climate change and vector-borne diseases. Advances in Parasitology, 62, 345–381.
Rose, J., and Slifko, T. (1992). Giardia, Cryptosporidium, and Cyclospora and their impact 
on foods: A review. Journal for Food Protection, 62, 1059–1070.
Rose, J.B., Epstein, P.R., Lipp, E.K., Sherman, B.H., Bernard, S.M., et al. (2001). Climate variability 
and change in the United States: Potential impacts on water and foodborne diseases 
caused by microbiologic agents. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(Suppl. 2), 211–221.
Rosenberg, T., Kendall, O., Blanchard, J., Martel, S., Wakelin, C., et al. (1997). Shigellosis on Indian
reserves in Manitoba, Canada: Its relationship to crowded housing, lack of running water, 
and inadequate sewage disposal. American Journal of Public Health, 87(9), 1547–1551.
Sang, S., Booth, C., and Balch, G. (2004). Documentation of Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit (local 
knowledge) in Pangnirtung, Coral Harbour and Arviat, Nunavut: Nunavut Wildlife Health
Assessment Project. World Wildlife Fund Canada and Trent University, Canada. 
Retrieved November 22, 2006, from http://wwf.ca/Documents/Arctic/nwha_eng_sp.pdf
Schmidt, K.A., and Ostfeld, R.S. (2001). Biodiversity and the dilution effect in disease ecology.
Ecology, 82, 609–619.
Schulze, T.L., Jordan, R.A., and Krivenko, A.J. (2005). Effects of barrier application of granular
deltamethrin on subadult Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) and nontarget forest floor 
arthropods. Journal of Economic Entomology, 98, 976–981.
Schuster, C.J., Ellis, A.G., Robertson, W.J., Charron, D.F., Aramini, J.J., et al. (2005). Infectious 
disease outbreaks related to drinking water in Canada, 1974–2001. Canadian Journal 
of Public Health, 96(4), 254–258.
Scott, J.D., Fernando, K., Banerjee, S.N., Durden, L.A., Byrne, S.K., et al. (2001). Birds disperse 
ixodid (Acari: Ixodidae) and Borrelia burgdorferi-infected ticks in Canada. Journal 
of Medical Entomology, 38(4), 493–500.
Shapiro, H., and Micucci, S. (2003). Pesticide use for West Nile virus. Canadian Medical Association
Journal, 168, 1427–1430.
Smith, R.P. Jr., Rand, P.W., Lacombe, E.H., Morris, S.R., Holmes, D.W., et al. (1996). Role of bird
migration in the long-distance dispersal of Ixodes dammini, the vector of Lyme disease.
Journal of Infectious Disease, 174, 221–224.
Soskolne, C.L. (2004). On the even greater need for precaution under global change. International
Journal of Occupational Medicine and Environmental Health, 17(1), 69–76.
Soskolne, C.L., Smoyer-Tomic, K.E., Spady, D.W., McDonald, K., Rothe, J.P., et al. (2004). 
Final report: Climate change, extreme weather events and health effects in Alberta.
Ottawa: Health Canada. HPRP File No. 6795-15-2001/4400013.
Spence, L., Artsob, H., Grant, L., and TH’NG C. (1977). St. Louis encephalitis in southern Ontario:
Laboratory studies for arboviruses. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 116(1), 35–37.
Steere, A.C., Coburn, J., and Glickstein, L. (2004). The emergence of Lyme disease. Journal 
of Clinical Investigation, 113(8), 1093–1101. 
Steinberg, E.B., Greene, K.D., Bopp, C.A., Cameron, D.N., Wells, J.G., et al. (2001). Cholera 
in the United States, 1995–2000: Trends at the end of the twentieth century. Journal of
Infectious Diseases, 184, 799–802.
Stirling, R., Aramini, J., Ellis, A., Lim, G., Meyers, R., et al. (2001). Waterborne cryptosporidiosis 
outbreak, North Battleford, Saskatchewan, Spring 2001. Canada Communicable 
Disease Report, 27(22), 185–192.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
209
Sutherst, R. (2004). Global change and human vulnerability to vector-borne diseases. Clinical
Microbiology Reviews, 17(1), 136–173.
Ternes, T.A., Stumpf, M., Mueller, J., Haberer, K., Wilken, R-D., et al. (1999). Behavior and 
occurrence of estrogens in municipal sewage treatment plants – I. Investigations in Germany,
Canada and Brazil. Science of the Total Environment, 225, 81–90.
Thier, A. (2001). Balancing the risks: Vector control and pesticide use in response to emerging 
illness. Journal of Urban Health, 78, 372–381.
Thomas, M.K., Charron, D.F., Waltner-Toews, D., Schuster, C.J., Maarouf, A.R., et al. (2006). 
A role of high impact weather events in waterborne disease outbreaks in Canada, 1975–2001.
International Journal of Environmental Health Research, 16(3), 167–180.
Thompson, T.S. (2001). Nitrate concentrations in private rural drinking water supplies in Saskatchewan,
Canada. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 66(1), 64–70.
Todd, E.C. (1997). Seafood-associated diseases and control in Canada. Revue Scientifique et 
Technique, 16(2), 661–672.
Tsai, T.F., and Monath, T.P. (1987). Viral diseases in North America transmitted by arthropods 
or from vertebrate reservoirs. In R.D. Feigin, and J.D. Cherry (Eds.), Textbook of pediatric
infectious diseases (pp. 1417–1456). Vol. II, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Tsao, J.I., Wootton, J.T., Bunikis, J., Luna, M.G., Fish, D., et al. (2004). An ecological approach 
to preventing human infection: Vaccinating wild mouse reservoirs intervenes in the 
Lyme disease cycle. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 101(52), 18159–18164.
Turell, M.J., Sardelis, M.R., O’Guinn, M.L., and Dohm, D.J. (2003). Potential vectors of West Nile
virus in North America. In J. Mackenzie, A. Barrett, and V. Duebel (Eds.), Japanese 
encephalitis and West Nile viruses: Current topics in microbiology and immunology,
(pp. 241–252). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
United Kingdom Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). (2005). Impacts 
of climate change on India – Impacts of climate change on human health in India Key 
Sheet. Joint UK–India project, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs United
Kingdom. Retrieved November 22, 2006, from http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/
climatechange/internat/devcountry/india2.htm
Vamvakas, E.C., Kleinman, S., Hume, H., and Sher, G.D. (2006). The development of West Nile 
virus safety policies by Canadian blood services: Guiding principles and a comparison
between Canada and the United States. Transfusion Medicine Reviews, 20(2), 97–109.
VanLeeuwen, J.A., Waltner-Toews, D., Abernathy, T., Smit, B., and Shoukri, M. (1999). Associations
between stomach cancer incidence and drinking water contamination with atrazine 
and nitrate in Ontario (Canada) agroecosystems, 1987–1991. International Journal of
Epidemiology, 28(5), 836–840.
Vinetz, J.M., Glass, G.E., Flexner, C.E., Mueller, P., and Kaslow, D.C. (1996). Sporadic urban 
leptospirosis. Annals of Internal Medicine, 125(10), 794–798.
Warshawsky, B., Lindsay, L.R., and Artsob, H. (2000). Leptospira infections in trappers from 
Ontario. The Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases, 11(1), 47–51.
Watt, W.E., Waters, D., and McLean, R. (2003). Climate variability and urban stormwater 
infrastructure in Canada: Context and case studies. Toronto-Niagara Region Study 
Report and Working Paper Series, Report 2003–1. Waterloo, Ont.: Meteorological 
Service of Canada.
Weir, E. (2005). Hantavirus: ‘Tis the season. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 173(2), 147.
Chapter 5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
210
Weise, A.M., Levasseur, M., Saucier, F.J., Senneville, S., Vézina, A., et al. (2001). The role 
of rainfall, river run-off and wind on toxic A. tamarense bloom dynamics in the Gulf 
of St. Lawrence (eastern Canada): Analysis of historical data. Report prepared 
for the Climate Change Action Fund, Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa.
Weller, G., and Lange, M. (1999). Impacts of global climate change in the Arctic regions: 
Reports from a workshop on the impacts of global change. Fairbanks: International 
Arctic Science Committee and University of Alaska Fairbanks.
Wenzel, R.P. (1994). A new hantavirus infection in North America. New England Journal 
of Medicine, 330(14), 1004–1005.
Wing, S., Freedman, S., and Band, L. (2002). Potential impact of flooding on confined animal feeding
operations in eastern North Carolina. Environmental Health Perspectives, 110(4), 387–391.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2002). Monitoring antimicrobial usage in food animals 
for the protection of human health. Report of a WHO consultation, Oslo, Norway, 
September 10–13, 2001. Oslo, Norway: Author.
Wormser, G.P. (2005). Prevention of Lyme borreliosis. Wien Klin Wochenschr, 117(11–12), 385–391.
Zingone, A., and Enevoldsen, H.O. (2000). The diversity of harmful algal blooms: A challenge 
for science and management. Ocean and Coastal Management, 43, 725–748.
Zucker, J.R. (1996). Changing patterns of autochthonous malaria transmission in the United States: 
A review of recent outbreaks. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2(1), 37–43.
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Health Impacts of
Climate Change in Quebec
Pierre Gosselin
Diane Bélanger
Bernard Doyon
Contributors:
Mélissa Giguère
Marie-Andrée Lévesque
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
213
CONTENTS
6.1
Introduction .............................................................................................................. 215
6.2
A Brief Look at Quebec ............................................................................................ 216
6.2.1 Geography ........................................................................................................ 216
6.2.2 Basic Socio-Economic Data ............................................................................ 217
6.2.2.1 Population and demography ................................................................ 217
6.2.2.2 Economy .............................................................................................. 218
6.2.3 Health Administration Organization ................................................................ 218
6.2.4 Public Health Goals and Programs of Interest ................................................ 220
6.2.5 Other Provincial and Municipal Policies ........................................................ 220
6.2.6 Status of Surveillance and Monitoring ............................................................ 221
6.2.7 Ouranos Consortium and Public Health .......................................................... 221
6.3
Status of Climate Change Adaptation Initiatives, 2004–07 .................................. 222
6.3.1 Context .............................................................................................................. 222
6.3.2 Methodology .................................................................................................... 222
6.3.3 Heat Waves and Urban Heat Islands ................................................................ 222
6.3.3.1 Context ................................................................................................ 222
6.3.3.2 Current adaptations .............................................................................. 224
6.3.3.3 Required adaptations .......................................................................... 225
6.3.3.4 Synthesis .............................................................................................. 225
6.3.4 Emergency and Extreme Climate Event Preparedness .................................... 226
6.3.4.1 Context ................................................................................................ 226
6.3.4.2 Current adaptations .............................................................................. 227
6.3.4.3 Required adaptations .......................................................................... 227
6.3.4.4 Synthesis .............................................................................................. 228
6.3.5 Water ................................................................................................................ 228
6.3.5.1 Context ................................................................................................ 228
6.3.5.2 Current adaptations .............................................................................. 229
6.3.5.3 Required adaptations .......................................................................... 229
6.3.5.4 Synthesis .............................................................................................. 229
6.3.6 Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases .............................................................. 230
6.3.6.1 Context ................................................................................................ 230
6.3.6.2 Current adaptations .............................................................................. 230
6.3.6.3 Required adaptations .......................................................................... 231
6.3.6.4 Synthesis .............................................................................................. 231
6.3.7 Other Subjects .................................................................................................. 232
6.3.7.1 Ultraviolet rays .................................................................................... 232
6.3.7.2 Air quality ............................................................................................ 232
6.3.7.3 Strategic communication and research tools ...................................... 233
6.3.8 Synthesis .......................................................................................................... 233
6.4
Historical and Simulated Modelling of Mortality for 2020, 2050 and 2080 ........ 236
6.4.1 Introduction ...................................................................................................... 236
6.4.2 Methodology .................................................................................................... 236
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
214
6.4.3 Results .............................................................................................................. 239
6.4.3.1 Historical modelling ............................................................................ 239
6.4.3.2 Estimating mortality for simulated future climates ............................ 240
6.4.3.3 Models and projections by age group ................................................ 243
6.4.4 Discussion ........................................................................................................ 243
6.4.5 Next Steps ........................................................................................................ 246
6.5
Heat Waves and Cold Snaps, and Current and Future Adaptations ....................247
6.5.1 Introduction ...................................................................................................... 247
6.5.2 Methodology .................................................................................................... 247
6.5.2.1 Research population ............................................................................ 247
6.5.2.2 Sample ................................................................................................ 248
6.5.2.3 Data collection .................................................................................... 248
6.5.2.4 Questionnaire development ................................................................ 248
6.5.2.5 Information collected .......................................................................... 249
6.5.2.6 Analysis .............................................................................................. 249
6.5.3 Heat Waves ...................................................................................................... 249
6.5.3.1 Current adaptations .............................................................................. 249
6.5.3.2 Suggestions for future adaptations ...................................................... 254
6.5.4 Cold Snaps ........................................................................................................ 258
6.5.4.1 Current adaptations .............................................................................. 258
6.5.4.2 Suggestions for future adaptations ...................................................... 261
6.5.5 Current Perceptions of Climate Change and Future Adaptations .................... 264
6.5.5.1 Current perceptions ............................................................................ 264
6.5.5.2 Suggestions for future adaptations ...................................................... 267
6.5.6 Conclusion ........................................................................................................ 269
6.5.7 Synthesis .......................................................................................................... 270
6.6
Perceptions of Municipal and Public Health Managers ........................................ 271
6.6.1 Introduction ...................................................................................................... 271
6.6.2 Methodology .................................................................................................... 273
6.6.3 Results .............................................................................................................. 274
6.6.4 Discussion ........................................................................................................ 276
6.6.4.1 Rising average temperature in winter ................................................ 276
6.6.4.2 Increased extreme climate events in summer and winter .................. 276
6.6.4.3 Contribution of human-made causes to climate change .................... 276
6.6.4.4 Certainty about the reality of climate change .................................... 277
6.6.4.5 Concerns about climate change .......................................................... 277
6.6.4.6 Regional impacts of climate change .................................................. 278
6.6.4.7 Need to implement regional programs specific
to climate change ................................................................................ 278
6.6.4.8 Comments on the validity and reliability of results ............................ 281
6.6.5 Synthesis .......................................................................................................... 282
6.7
Conclusion .................................................................................................................. 283
6.8
References .................................................................................................................. 286
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
215
6.1
INTRODUCTION
When Health Canada decided to launch Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian
Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity in 2003, several factors contributed
to the development of a more detailed regional component that addressed Quebec.
Research projects on the health impacts of climate change have been underway since 1999.
They have addressed several themes (northern environments, airborne organic particulates
such as pollen, crime, the effects of heat waves), with the support of the Canadian
Climate Impacts and Adaptation Research Network (C-CIARN), Health Canada, the
Ministère de la Santé et des Services sociaux (Quebec department of health and social
services) (MSSS) and the Ouranos Consortium (Ouranos).1 In addition, these partners discussed
other initiatives—in particular, adaptation to climate change by the public and related
public services, and modelling of climate change on a finer scale than global climate models
to predict future health impacts, along with several other projects. This research was
intended to foster a better understanding of public health adaptation measures in the near
future and to facilitate their implementation.
The severe European heat wave in summer 2003 was
a pivotal incentive to further action by these partners,
and prompted a more detailed look at Quebec. This
extreme climate event (ECE) joined others that had
deeply affected Canadians in the past decade: the
1996 floods in Saguenay and the 1998 Ice Storm that
primarily affected the region south of Montreal.
These events cost taxpayers and organizations several
billion dollars, and there were other non-monetary
costs that perhaps were longer lasting. The number of
Quebeckers (currently 90%) in favour of international
commitments to greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction
(Centre de recherche sur l’opinion publique (CROP),
2002) was also a determining factor in going ahead
with this research on adaptation to the health-related
effects of climate change in Quebec.
In fall 2003, MSSS formed a five-year partnership
with Ouranos. In the beginning of 2004, the
ministry formally asked eight regional public health
departments to implement, no later than 2007,
emergency intervention plans in case of severe heat waves. At the same time, the Institut
national de santé publique du Québec (Quebec national institute of public health) (INSPQ)
was asked to conduct several research projects on impacts and adaptations in cooperation
with Ouranos, and to coordinate the related research with the public health network,
universities and Health Canada.
It was possible to launch such an assessment for Quebec because of the well-developed
governance for public health interventions already active on climate change. The presence
of Ouranos, and its multi- and interdisciplinary approach linking the climate sciences and
research on adaptations, enabled the mobilization of resources and competencies in this area.
Chapter 6
1
Ouranos is a research consortium created in 2001; it studies regional climatology and adaptation to climate change,
focusing primarily on Quebec, but it is also active nationally and internationally (Ouranos, 2004)
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
216
In addition, recent Quebec reforms in health surveillance and emergency management,
as well as an existing public health network active at the sub-regional level on climate change
issues, are all underlying reasons for this more detailed regional approach.
There are seven sections in this chapter, including the introduction. Section 6.2 presents
contextual data to describe some of the province’s basic geographic, socio-economic,
administrative and health characteristics to provide some background for the sections
that follow. The next sections address research that was conducted for this chapter.
Section 6.3 is an overview of the useful public health adaptation activities that already exist.
Section 6.4 reports some of the results of a modelling of historic mortality for the period
from 1981 to 2001, with future simulations for 2020, 2050 and 2080, using two climatic
scenarios. Section 6.5 refers to investigations into climate change-related perceptions
and adaptations among Quebeckers, and Section 6.6 to those among municipal and health
managers. Section 6.7 presents a synthesis of the current situation, a summary of the key
findings, and recommendations or suggestions for future steps for public health adaptation
to climate change.
Note that northern Quebec (located above the 50th parallel), which includes the vast
James Bay, Hudson Bay and Ungava regions (Figure 6.1), is not discussed in this
chapter because the impact assessment for northern Quebec appears in Chapter 7, Health
Impacts of Climate Change in Canada’s North.
6.2
A BRIEF LOOK AT QUEBEC
6.2.1
Geography
Quebec is one of 10 Canadian provinces. It is 1,667,441 km2 in size, and is located between
45° and 62° latitude north and between 57° and 79° longitude west. More than 99% of
Quebeckers live south of the 50th parallel (Government of Quebec, 2006d). The province
is bounded by the Arctic Ocean to the north, the United States (U.S.) and the province
of New Brunswick to the south, James and Hudson Bays and Ontario to the west, and by
the Atlantic Ocean and Labrador to the east. The topography is rather flat and there is a very
well-developed highway network. The area includes 3% of the earth’s freshwater reserves
(Ministère du Développement durable, de l’Environnement et des Parcs (MDDEP), 2002b).
The 3,058-km-long St. Lawrence River is the most important waterway in Quebec. More than
80% of the population lives along its shores or those of its tributaries, and more than 50% of
Quebeckers draw their drinking water from this river.
Quebec has a diverse climate with four distinct seasons. Depending on the latitude, average
temperatures in summer vary between 5 and 20°C and in winter from -25 to -10°C. Total
annual precipitation (rain and snow) also varies depending on the region, with accumulation
from 500 to 1,200 mm. There are four main types of climate in Quebec: a temperate humid
continental climate south of the 50th parallel, a sub-arctic climate characterized by colder
temperatures and less precipitation in the North, an arctic climate in the far North and a maritime
climate in the Gulf of St. Lawrence region.
The diverse climate supports several types of vegetation, from deciduous forest in the
south and, progressing northward, a mixed forest zone, a boreal forest zone, taiga forest and
then tundra in the far North. Forests cover more than half the province; the population is
concentrated in the deciduous and mixed forest zones.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
217
Figure 6.1 Quebec
Note: The 50th parallel is located between Sept-Iles and Matagami.
6.2.2
Basic Socio-Economic Data
6.2.2.1 Population and demography
In 2006, the population of Quebec was 7.6 million, 3.6 million of whom live in the Greater
Montreal area. This region has an area of approximately 4,000 km2 and its municipalities
are distributed over five administrative regions (Ville de Montréal, 2005; Institut de la
statistique du Québec (ISQ), 2006f). Overall demographic density is very low, with 5.8 inhabitants
per km2, but the density is 36 inhabitants per km2 for permanently inhabited areas. In addition
to a Francophone majority (82%), there is an Anglophone community of approximately
590,000 people, close to 600,000 recently arrived allophones and approximately 80,000 Aboriginal
people (Amerindian and Inuit).The Aboriginal population generally lives on reserves or in
settlements administered by a band council. Inuit people inhabit the far North and live in villages
directed by a mayor and councillors. Ethnic communities, other than French or English,
represent approximately 18% of the Quebec population (ISQ, 2003b). Quebec receives some
40,000 immigrants annually; in 2001, these were mainly European (40.3%), Asian (26.9%),
African (11.5%) and American (11.2%).
The territory is divided into 17 administrative regions, 103 regional county municipalities,
1,264 municipalities and 78 Amerindian territories. Nine municipalities (Montreal, Quebec,
Longueuil, Laval, Gatineau, Sherbrooke, Saguenay, Lévis and Trois-Rivières) have more
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
218
than 100,000 inhabitants. Migration to the Montreal region and its bordering regions and the
Outaouais has begun and is expected to continue for the next 20 years. The Montreal Census
Metropolitan Area has the greatest linguistic and ethnic diversity, with 67% speaking French as
their first language and 12% speaking English (ISQ, 2006e). The non-official languages most
frequently spoken in Quebec are Spanish (3.2%), Italian (2.7%) and Arabic (1.6%) (Canadian
Heritage, 2006).
As in most industrialized countries, Quebec’s population is aging, with an average age of
39.3 years in 2004. Demographic trends (fertility, mortality, migration) indicate that the population
will become one of the oldest in the world in approximately 40 years. In 1986, there were
seven people between the ages of 15 and 64 for each person 65 years and older; projections
for 2031 indicate there will be only 2.2 (ISQ, 2003a; Government of Quebec, 2006c).
6.2.2.2 Economy
Quebec had a gross domestic product (GDP) of more than C$250 billion in chained (2002)
dollars in December 2005, or approximately 20% of the total Canadian GDP (ISQ, 2006b).
Almost three quarters of this comes from the service sector. Quebec’s GDP ranks it alongside
the 20 most industrialized member countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD). The Quebec per-person GDP may be compared with that of England and
Japan; it is almost 5% greater than that of the 20 most industrialized OECD countries. However,
disposable income2 per person is still about 8 to 10% lower than the Canadian average, based
on historic data. It was estimated at C$23,240 per person in 2006 (ISQ, 2006a).
Each of Quebec’s administrative regions has strong economies in the science and technology
sector (aerospace, information technology, biotechnology, ground transportation materials, forest
products, pharmaceuticals) and in tourism; 27.5 million tourists visit Quebec annually and close
to 130,000 people work in some 30,000 tourism-related businesses. Natural resources (forestry
and mining) and energy resources are also at the heart of the Quebec economy. Hydroelectricity
accounts for 96% of electricity production. This high percentage occurs only rarely elsewhere in
the world (Manitoba, 99%; Norway, more than 99%) (Energy Information Administration, 2002;
Manitoba Energy, Science and Technology, 2003). Peak demand is in winter, and a great many
homes use electric heat. Quebec mineral resources rank it among the world’s 10 major mining
producers. There is currently an increase in exports as a result of international trade agreements
and the North American Free Trade Agreement, which have increased Quebec’s ability to compete
on the international market. The U.S. is Quebec’s principal economic partner (88% of exports).
Total exports from Quebec in 2006 were valued at C$150 billion, or approximately 54% of its
GDP (Ministère du Développement économique, de l’Innovation et de l’Exportation, 2007).
6.2.3
Health Administration Organization
Health and social services are combined under one administration, the MSSS, and are divided
into central, regional and local levels (Figure 6.2). Quebec has 18 socio-health regions governed
by the Agences de la santé et des services sociaux (health and social services agencies), within
which are the Directions de santé publique (public health branches). These regions are the same
as the governmental administrative regions, with the exception of Mauricie and Centre du
Québec, which form one socio-health region, and the northern Quebec administrative region,
which is divided into three parts (Nunavik, Terres-Cries-de-la-Baie-James and Nord-du-Québec)
mainly because of the size of the territory and the ethnocultural characteristics of the population.
Chapter 6
2
Disposable income is defined as the balance of personal income after direct individual income tax and various other fees,
licences and permits, including hospital and health insurance premiums, and excluding indirect taxes. Disposable income
is more discretionary than personal income (Eco-Santé, 2005b).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
219
Figure 6.2 Public health within the Quebec health and social services system
Source: MSSS, 2005.
At the provincial level, MSSS establishes the general direction and allocates budget resources. At
the regional level, the Agences de la santé et des services sociaux are responsible for regional
planning and resource management, as well as budget allocations to institutions. At the local level,
the 95 Centres de santé et de services sociaux (CSSSs) (health and social services centres) and
other stakeholders share responsibility for the local population through a clinical and organizational
project. A regional public health branch within each agency coordinates regional public health
program activities, in cooperation with the CSSSs and other partners outside the health network.
The regional director of public health is directly appointed by the minister on the recommendation
of the regional agency, and has a great deal of professional latitude within the legislative framework.
The public health network also relies on INSPQ and its mandate to improve the population’s health
and well-being (INSPQ, 2006c). INSPQ has more than 500 employees and provides MSSS and
the regional agencies with support in the form of expertise, research, laboratories, training and
international affairs. For 20 some years, roundtables on public health, occupational health,
environmental health, infectious diseases, health surveillance and health promotion have helped
to coordinate the various public health sector stakeholders. A permanent secretariat periodically
assembles representatives from the 18 regions, from INSPQ and MSSS, as well as several guests,
depending on the files, for the roundtables. These meetings help to coordinate, plan, transfer
knowledge and share resources.
In December 2005, the Quebec health and social services network included 315 institutions, 199 of
which were public. These include health and social services centres (acute hospital services,
home care, social services), university hospitals, youth centres, rehabilitation centres, long-term
hospitalization centres and nursing homes. The remaining 116 institutions are privately owned
and are almost exclusively long-term care facilities. There are also approximately 1,500 private
medical clinics and 4,000 community organizations active in health and community services.
Almost 7% of the Quebec labour force (approximately 250,000 people) work in health and social
services. Each of the 18 socio-health regions includes one or more CSSS, hospitals, rehabilitation
centres, and child and youth protection centres.
Chapter 6
(
)
18 health and social services agencies
Regional institutions
RAMQ: Régie de l’Assurance-maladie du Québec (Quebec health insurance board)
OPHQ: Office des personnes handicapées du Québec (Quebec office for the disabled)
CHQ: Corporation d’hébergement du Québec (Quebec accommodations corporation)
CM: Conseil du medicament (medication board)
Administrative or consultative agencies
RAMQ, OPHQ, CHQ, CM, Héma Québec
Minister of Health
and Social Services
Institut national de
santé publique du Québec
Ministry of Health and Social Services/
Public Health Branch
Local health and social
services centres
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
220
6.2.4
Public Health Goals and Programs of Interest
The Loi sur la santé publique (Quebec public health act), which came into effect in
December 2001, is intended to protect and maintain public health through a provincial
health program, regional action plans and increased health surveillance. In 2003, the
Programme national de santé publique (2003–2012) (provincial public health program)
was launched. Its general objective is to improve determinants of health and well-being
by reducing health and psychosocial problems and trauma. In the context of climate change,
the maintenance of air quality, surveillance of infectious diseases and reduction of poverty
are very relevant. These issues are addressed specifically through research and innovation
as well as through environmental health intervention (MSSS, 2003b). INSPQ is involved
in research, which includes working on climate change, training researchers and publishing
their work (INSPQ, 2006a).
6.2.5
Other Provincial and Municipal Policies
Various governmental policies on social housing, emergency preparedness, water management
and sustainable development complement the above-mentioned public health programs in being
able to implement steps that are needed to address climate change. The Société d’habitation du
Québec (SHQ) (Quebec housing corporation) administers several programs to improve the
supply and quality of social housing in Quebec (SHQ, 2006). Since 2001, the Civil Protection
Act has defined areas of organization and action for organizations and agencies responsible for
civil protection, as well as their responsibilities, such as those of municipalities in implementing
their emergency plans (Ministère de la Sécurité publique (MSP), 2005). Section 16 of the Act
obliges municipalities to define their objectives for reducing vulnerability to risks associated
with major disasters, and to identify actions required to achieve these objectives. This change
focuses on prevention versus reaction (i.e. reacting to disasters).
In 2002, the Ministère du
Développement durable
de l’Environnement et des
Parcs (MDDEP) adopted
the water policy (Politique
nationale de l’eau), which
is a comprehensive synthesis
of water issues in Quebec
(MDDEP, 2002c). As a result
of this policy, changes were
made to regulations on the
quality of drinking water to
ensure that small distribution
networks provided quality
drinking water and that water
treatment plant employees
were appropriately trained (MDDEP, 2005b). An international agreement on sustainable
water resources in the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin was signed by two Canadian
provinces (one of which was Quebec) and eight U.S. states (MDDEP, 2005c). The purpose
of the recent Loi sur le développement durable (sustainable development act) is to guide
sustainable development in Quebec; it is a first step toward a sustainable development policy
(MDDEP, 2006a). The most recent Policy on Health and Well-Being dates back to 1992 and
does not include measures to address climate change (MSSS, 1992). However, public health
measures are outlined in the Government of Quebec Climate Change Action Plan 2006–2012,
announced at the end of June 2006 (Government of Quebec, 2006e), and are discussed in the
following two sections.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
221
Certain municipal initiatives should also be recognized. Because of their responsibilities
in land use and urban planning, municipalities are responsible for zoning. Many are currently
revising urban boundaries within which future construction of all types will be permitted.
The use of new flood-risk area maps will also be considered more frequently over the
next few years. The Union des municipalités du Québec (UMQ) (association of Quebec
municipalities) has also adopted a number of policies and programs on climate change.
The GES-Énergie municipalités (GHG-municipal energy) program aims to reduce municipal
GHG emissions. More than 200 municipalities already participate in the program
(UMQ, 2006). For example, in 2004, Quebec City adopted a plan to reduce GHG
emissions by 22% by 2010 (Ville de Québec, 2004). This plan has already begun to yield
results (Ville de Québec, 2006). The key roles that municipalities play in developing
and implementing recycling, transportation and environmental policies, as well as in the
leadership of emergency preparedness plans, make them key players in adapting to
climate change.
6.2.6
Status of Surveillance and Monitoring
The provincial public health program includes a surveillance program to learn about and
share information on the status of population health, including the acquisition, production
and distribution of data (MSSS, 2003b). The current surveillance program tracks more than
150 indicators (mortality, morbidity, health determinants, services, etc.), and will develop
several dozen more over the next five years. The program could be adapted for the surveillance
of health issues related to climate change because of its flexibility in analyzing priority
or emerging issues, and its capability for prospective analyses (simulations) targeting certain
health issues.
In 2004, INSPQ’s Infocentre de santé publique (public health information centre)
centralized data acquisition and implemented provincial surveillance tools—an essential
step to understanding health problems on a large scale. All large databanks are now,
or will be, hosted by INSPQ (or accessible under agreements with INSPQ), including
data on meteorology, climate simulations, environmental pollution, etc.. The current
plan provides for the development of indicators related to climate change within the
Infocentre de santé publique. These will include a component that incorporates spatial
and temporal analyses related to climate for some notifiable diseases, the implementation
of a system for the surveillance of physical and mental health during ECEs, and improvements
to the alert system for heat waves for a coordinated, real-time follow-up. INSPQ is also
participating in the development of an Internet atlas of public health vulnerability to
climate change (Gosselin, 2005). All these recent initiatives will be implemented between
2006 and 2012.
6.2.7
Ouranos Consortium and Public Health
The Ouranos Consortium is a multidisciplinary research and development (R&D)
organization that studies climate change and adaptation; it includes some 250 scientists
from 10 provincial ministries, one federal department, a Crown corporation (Hydro-Québec)
and four universities. MSSS became a formal member in 2004, although it had been involved
in joint health projects since 2002. Research activities include 10 programs and approximately
60 projects, 10 of which are part of the 2006–2009 health plan adopted in March 2006.
MSSS has mandated INSPQ to coordinate and conduct part of the research on the health
effects of climate change and required adaptations, in cooperation with regions, Ouranos
partners and Health Canada.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
222
6.3
STATUS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION
INITIATIVES, 2004–07
6.3.1
Context
Climate change will have diverse effects. According to international authorities (World
Health Organization (WHO), 2003; United Nations, 2007a, 2007b) and several multinational
corporations (Earth Institute, 2007), proactive solutions to create measures to adapt to and
mitigate the impacts must be implemented immediately. National and international health
authorities have targeted six areas essential to human health: heat waves and urban heat islands;
preparation for extreme climatic events (ECEs); water and food; vector-borne and zoonotic diseases
(WHO, 2003; Warren et al., 2004; Menne and Ebi, 2006); exposure to ultraviolet (UV) rays;
and air quality. MSSS, INSPQ and Ouranos are addressing these areas on a regional scale in
Quebec. This section provides an overview of the efforts that are starting or underway to
prevent or mitigate the negative health effects associated with climate change.
6.3.2
Methodology
Literature review and semi-structured telephone interviews provided the information on current
adaptation initiatives in each of the six targeted areas. The literature review (of scientific and
government documents) was conducted using general (Google) and specialized (e.g. Medline,
Web of Science) search engines, and from sources published either in French or English
between 1995 and 2005 that were applicable to Quebec. Semi-structured telephone interviews,
averaging approximately 15 minutes each, were conducted with key informants from public
and private institutions (e.g. health care, occupational health and safety, air quality protection,
urban climates, land management and environmental measures, air conditioning technology,
environmental law and public safety). These key informants were from the 15 administrative
regions in southern Quebec; the northern regions are addressed in Chapter 7, Health Impacts
of Climate Change in Canada’s North.
The initiatives identified for the period 2004–07 were assessed by comparing them with
Canadian, American or international recommendations from various organizations such as
the Government of France, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), U.S. Centers for
Disease Control, the World Meteorological Organization, the World Health Organization and
Health Canada. Emphasis was on the following subjects: heat waves and urban heat islands;
preparation for ECEs; water and food; and vector-borne and zoonotic diseases. National and
international health recommendations were compared with current adaptation initiatives in
Quebec to address issues related to the various themes studied, and a synthesis of the required
adaptations was prepared. The results of these overviews were recently published (Giguère
and Gosselin, 2006a, 2006b, 2006c, 2006d). Two other areas, UV rays and air pollution, have
not yet been investigated in depth because of limited available resources. The relationship
between air quality and climate change in Canada is reviewed in Chapter 4, Air Quality, Climate
Change and Health.
6.3.3
Heat Waves and Urban Heat Islands
6.3.3.1 Context
In southern Quebec, global climate models predict that by the end of the century, average
temperatures will increase by an additional 2 to 3°C in the summer (Ouranos, 2004).
This would likely be accompanied by an increase in the frequency and intensity of heat
waves (Warren et al., 2004). The definition of a heat wave varies a great deal from one
location to another (Institut de veille sanitaire (InVS), 2003b). For Quebec, a heat wave
warning is currently issued when the Environment Canada forecast for a period indicates
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
223
no less than three consecutive days during which
daytime outdoor air temperatures are greater than
33°C and the minimum nighttime temperatures
are 20°C or greater, or two nights during which the
temperature remains at 25°C or more (Direction
de santé publique (DSP) de Montréal, 2004, 2006).
The urban heat island effect (UHIE) is generated by
asphalt surfaces and various infrastructure materials
that absorb heat, thereby increasing the outdoor air
temperature by 0.5 to 5.6°C (Oke, 1982) (Figure 6.3).
This phenomenon affects a significant proportion
of the population, especially socio-economically
disadvantaged individuals living in urban areas
and people with chronic illnesses or cardio-
respiratory diseases (including children and seniors)
(Patz et al., 2000; Michelozzi et al., 2005; Haines
et al., 2006).
A general provincial plan is not in place for adaptation measures to address heat waves and UHIEs.
However, MSSS has stipulated that, for 2007, public health units in the seven socio-health
regions in southern Quebec are to include specific intervention strategies for periods of extreme
heat in their emergency measures plans (MSSS, 2006a). Initiatives also include various brochures
and training programs related to the risk of heat waves to the general population and certain
vulnerable groups, such as seniors or certain groups of workers (Commision de la santé et de la
sécurité du travail (CSST), 2004; MSSS, 2004).
Figure 6.3 Example of heat islands in the Montreal region, summer 2001
Chapter 6
Source: Courtesy of F. Guay, Ouranos Consortium.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
224
6.3.3.2 Current adaptations
In 2004–05, heat wave warning systems were prepared for nine cities with more than
100,000 inhabitants. As yet, none of the cities has had to deal with a long-lasting heat
wave. However, some of the initial steps before a full alert have been successfully
implemented in real-life situations. A simulation in Montreal (Health Canada, 2005) also
identified some improvements that could be made to existing plans. In addition,
Ouranos is currently planning or conducting research projects on heat waves and
UHIEs (Table 6.1).
Table 6.1
Projects under the Ouranos health program, 2006–09
Various initiatives (using pamphlets and other communication tools to address the risks
associated with extreme heat) have been put in place to inform the general public and some
of the more vulnerable clients, such as seniors and their families, and certain groups
of workers. A similar awareness-raising initiative was undertaken with health institutions
and other groups (e.g. CSST, Réseau public québécois de la santé au travail (Quebec
public occupational health network) and organizations (e.g. medical clinics, pharmacies,
Fédération des locataires d’habitations à loyer modique (federation of low-cost housing
tenants). A recent exploratory study in the Estrie region on medication use during
periods of oppressive heat illustrates the importance of cautions by pharmacists (Albert
et al., 2006). A significant percentage (30.2%) of people aged 65 and over take a type
Chapter 6
Title
1.
Additional historical analyses of hospital morbidity, emergency room visits and
general mortality as a function of historic temperatures and simulated analyses
for the 2020, 2050 and 2080 horizons.
2.
Implementation of roundtables to assess the measures required for adaptation
to climate change: institutional and clinical components.
3.
Identification of sectors vulnerable to intense heat in a Canadian metropolis
for intervention and research on public health.
4.
Feasibility study for the development of real- and non-real time tools for
surveillance of the health effects of extreme climate events.
5.
Estimation of future smog levels with the Unified Regional Air-quality Modelling
System (AURAMS) and the Canadian Regional Climate Model (CRCM).
6.
Fine spatial variations in mortality and hospitalization with extreme climate
events in urban environments.
7.
Feasibility study of water management projects using current Ouranos
water projects.
8.
Incidence and distribution of gastrointestinal illnesses among populations
at risk and the risk factors associated with climate and agricultural practices.
9.
Development of an interactive atlas on health vulnerabilities associated
with climatic change.
10. Integration, dissemination and transfer of knowledge and support for Ouranos
activities by the Quebec MSSS and its networks, Health Canada and the
World Health Organization.
Heat Waves and
Climate Warming
Other Extreme
Climate Events
Air Quality
Water Quality
Integration, Communication
and Strategic Support
Theme
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
225
of prescription medication whose absorption can be affected by dehydration, or that can
impede caloric loss or alter kidney function. Nearly 5% of seniors were taking three
or more medications of this type at the same time.
Several municipalities (e.g. Quebec, Gatineau, Montreal, Laval, Saint-Eustache) are increasing
tree plantings along streets, improving tree maintenance and making their replacement
mandatory. Province-wide standardization of fines for cutting down trees should contribute
to their conservation (Government of Quebec, 2005a). The increasing interest in green
roof systems and high-albedo roofs3 that lower the absorption of solar energy, and increasing
use and availability of public transportation in some regions help to reduce the UHIE
(Ducas, 2004; Ville de Montréal, 2005).
6.3.3.3 Required adaptations
In light of literature reviews and semi-structured telephone interviews (Giguère and
Gosselin, 2006d), the following could be developed in Quebec to decrease the negative
effects of heat waves and urban heat islands, according to the authors:
• increased training for health professionals;
• popular education pilot projects on personal protection during heat waves and on helping
to combat the UHIE;
• economic measures to encourage the implementation of various initiatives to mitigate
the effects of heat waves, specifically measures related to better residential insulation;
• improvement of knowledge related to aeration, ventilation and air conditioning for health
and long-term care centres;
• new guidelines for the management of health care centres during heat waves; and
• ongoing reinforcement of initiatives that have already been implemented, specifically
those addressing real-time monitoring of the effects of heat waves.
A record of existing air conditioning in hospitals and long-term care centres is suggested to
ensure knowledge of the resources, target where improvements can be made, and complete the
information being collected for current extreme-heat research projects. MSSS is currently
implementing such a system. Regulations on energy efficiency in buildings date back to 1983,
and are currently being re-evaluated by the government.
6.3.3.4 Synthesis
Current heat wave adaptation efforts appear fragmented. However, although certain key
preventative measures are lacking, ongoing and completed research projects (Table 6.2),
legislation, heat wave-related emergency plans and surveillance measures represent a very
good start for the implementation of adaptation measures. Preventative measures, notably
to combat the effects of urban heat islands and to improve the energy efficiency of homes
and institutions, in addition to the commitment to increasing air conditioning in care
facilities (Government of Quebec, 2006e), are to be implemented, likely in the coming
years. To date, the initiatives represent a balanced portfolio of short-term measures as
well as long-term preventative ones.
Chapter 6
3
High-albedo roofs reflect most of the solar energy away from their surface before it is absorbed and converted into heat energy.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
226
Table 6.2
Other ongoing or completed (C) health projects in Quebec
except for northern regions (2002–2008)
6.3.4
Emergency and Extreme Climate Event Preparedness
6.3.4.1 Context
In Quebec, as elsewhere in the
world, climate scenarios predict
an increased frequency and
intensity of certain ECEs including
hurricanes, heat waves and heavy
rainfall causing floods (Ouranos,
2004). The ice storm that hit
the Montreal region in 1998 was
a turning point in Quebec’s
awareness of civil protection;
in 2001, the Civil Protection
Act reorganized the civil
protection system (MSP, 2005).
The consequences of ECEs include damage to physical structures and individuals (both the
people who are affected and those who work with them) who experience short- and long-term
physical and psychological effects (Maltais et al., 2001a, 2001b; Auger et al., 2003). Displacement
of affected populations, the gravity of health effects, insurance coverage and material losses
may all lead to psychological sequelae.
Chapter 6
Title
1.
Awareness of risks encountered by outpatients suffering from chronic pulmonary
disease and measures to be taken during periods of intense heat (2008)
2.
Historic variability analysis of general mortality (in relation to temperature) and
simulations for 2020, 2050 and 2080 with downscaling (C)
3.
Survey of personal and family perceptions, vulnerabilities and adaptations (C)
4.
Increase in concentrations of organic particulate (pollen) caused by climate
change and potential consequence for respiratory disease and vulnerable
populations in urban environments (Climate Change Action Fund ) (C)
5.
Geosimulation of the progression of West Nile virus infection as a function
of climate in Quebec (2007)
6.
Survey of health and municipal managers on perceptions, vulnerabilities
and adaptations (includes extreme climatic events) (C)
7.
Post mortem on adaptations to disasters and catastrophes (including extreme
climatic events), for the period between 2004 and 2007 (C)
8.
Post mortem on adaptations to vector-borne diseases in Quebec, for the period
between 2004 and 2007 (C)
9.
Post mortem on adaptations to heat waves and urban heat islands in Quebec,
for the period between 2004 and 2007 (C)
Heat Waves and
Climate Warming
Air Quality
Vector-Borne and
Zoonotic Diseases
Climate Change
and Adaptations
Theme
Note: (C) indicates completed projects.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
227
6.3.4.2 Current adaptations
Recent changes to provincial legislation have improved civil protection (MSP, 2005) and
the linkages among stakeholders appear to have improved. Most of the adaptation initiatives
have their roots in the surveillance and monitoring, training and education, and regulation
and policy sectors. A storm and flood detection system and real-time surveillance of dams and
rivers is in place for the entire province. A new, standardized approach to risk analysis
and management in municipalities for 19 risks is being implemented, and is complete for
two risks: forest fires (natural) and fires (human-induced) (Table 6.3). The involvement
of public health branches, MSSS and INSPQ is planned as part of the implementation
of emergency plans and measures. Land use plans for cities and regions intend to include
climate change considerations that are consistent with provincial regulations (flood
plain management) and advice from public health branches, and MSSS will provide
feedback on development plans and urban planning. Ouranos will be undertaking
a research project on the ECEs (Table 6.1) that involves assessing the feasibility of
developing real- and non-real-time surveillance tools for the health effects of these events.
Table 6.3
Types of natural or human-induced risks that will be included
in risk analysis in Quebec municipalities
Source: MSP, 2004.
6.3.4.3 Required adaptations
Based on the summary of the adaptations recommended by the various agencies that were
consulted, the authors of this study concluded that Quebec should further develop prevention
programs or invest in programs to address ECEs (Giguère and Gosselin, 2006b). Investments
have increased over the past 10 years, but they have recently declined. The following initiatives
for adaptation to ECEs in the context of climate change are encouraged:
• improvement of planning and preventative investment for ECEs, such as the protection
of buildings and critical infrastructure (e.g. power supplies, specifically for heating and food
storage), and water treatment facilities;
• measurement, modelling and the communication of risks for the various types of ECEs over
the short-, medium- and long-term to develop appropriate initiatives;
Chapter 6
Human-induced
Avalanches
Meteor showers
Epidemics, pandemics, infestations
Forest fires
Floods
Landslides
Storm surges
Extreme weather phenomena
Earthquakes
Natural
Risks
Social disruption
Buildings and structures collapse
Major fires and conflagrations
Failure, shortages and contamination of goods and services
Industrial risk
Nuclear and radioactive risks
Dam failure
Terrorism
Hazardous material transportation accident
Accident when transporting people and merchandise
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
228
• research on the short- and long-term effects of ECEs on health and the improvement
of emergency health measures; and
• implementation of a system for the surveillance and epidemiological follow-up of health
effects (deaths, injuries, infectious diseases, psychosocial effects) of ECEs.
6.3.4.4 Synthesis
Quebec has one of the most advanced health surveillance and environmental monitoring
systems in Canada, as well as a good emergency response system according to the study
led by Giguère and Gosselin (2006b). However, none of these health surveillance systems
specifically addresses ECEs, a gap the authors recommend to correct. Disaster and ECE
adaptation initiatives should be developed by adding a component relating to the effects
of climate change, as well as a significant component relating to the prevention of impacts
on health. The risk analysis approach used by civil protection stakeholders (implementation
is beginning) will play an important role in achieving this. These suggestions have been
integrated into the 2006–2012 action plan of the Quebec government (Government of
Quebec, 2006e).
6.3.5
Water
6.3.5.1 Context
The current abundance of water resources is reflected in the 326-litre average per capita
daily water consumption (Center for Research and Information on Canada (CRIC), n.d.)
and the many private swimming pools in Quebec (50% of pools for 23% of the population).
The projected effects of climate change include the drop in levels, flow and quality
of watercourses; changes in the rainfall regime; and an increase in the salinity of the
St. Lawrence River (Environment Canada, 2005b). These changes will have a significant
impact because surface water is the source of drinking water for more than 70% of
Quebeckers (MDDEP, 2002a). The quality and quantity of current abundant water
resources could be compromised. The possible impacts are substantial and briefly
described here.
Water-borne diseases can occur when pathogenic microorganisms migrate to underground
or surface water sources (Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME),
2004, 2005). Phosphorus, nitrogen, sunlight and heat are the primary factors associated
with the formation of cyanobacterial water blooms (Magnuson et al., 1997; Giani
et al., 2005; Rolland et al., 2005). In Quebec, this phenomenon was reported in 84 lakes
and streams between 1999 and 2003 (INSPQ, 2006c), and led to bans on consuming
and bathing in the water from these sources, although no cases of human disease have
been reported to date. The cyanotoxins produced by cyanobacteria can cause skin
irritation, as well as severe liver and nerve damage when contaminated water comes
into contact with skin or is ingested (American Water Works Association, 1999;
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 2003). Young children, seniors and people with
chronic diseases are at higher risk of developing severe symptoms from contaminated
water. People who are engaged in water sports are also particularly vulnerable to
natural biotoxin contamination (Agence de développement de réseaux locaux de
services de santé et de services sociaux, 2003; MDDEP, 2005a). The larger population
could be affected both physically and psychologically by water shortages, and
families at risk could experience a higher degree of food insecurity if they were
required to purchase their water (DSP de la Montérégie, 2004).
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
229
6.3.5.2 Current adaptations
Water quality surveillance is generally well organized by MDDEP and the St. Lawrence
Centre. Training for regional public health branches on water issues is excellent, and
abundant information is available to the public and professionals. Several environmental
initiatives to decrease contaminants are underway in cities and industry, including the
forestry and agricultural sectors. The recent changes made to water quality (MDDEP, 2005b)
and pesticide legislation should have a beneficial effect on water quality by decreasing
surface runoff waste.
Surveillance of illness outbreaks associated with water and food is not well developed
among the general population but is better established in institutional and commercial settings.
Ouranos is planning public health research projects on water quality (Table 6.1).
6.3.5.3 Required adaptations
Comparison of existing adaptations with those recommended (Giguère and Gosselin,
2006a) indicates the following should be developed or more widely applied throughout
the province:
• accelerated implementation of various methods for maintaining optimal water quantities
to ensure the safety of persons (fire, basic hygiene, food requirements) and quality
drinking water (pressure, dilution). These include specifically:
– optimization and standardization of leak detection for water supply systems
– education of individuals and businesses about the importance of and methods for
conserving drinking water
– inclusion of low water use techniques in the Building Code;
• strict control of water quality surveillance in small drinking water supply systems;
• financial support to implement watershed management, to accelerate implementation
and preserve multiple uses;
• development of management policies for cases of conflict over supply; and
• improved epidemiological surveillance of health impacts related to drinking water
and recreational water to ensure faster and more sensitive detection of outbreaks by public
health authorities.
6.3.5.4 Synthesis
Climate change will likely have a major negative impact on the quality and quantity of
water resources in Quebec due to more frequent and severe low-flow and drought periods,
as well as diminished flow from Lake Ontario (into the St. Lawrence) and the Ottawa
River (Environment Canada, 2002; Croley, 2003; Fagherazzi et al., 2005). Because these
sources provide drinking water for the Greater Montreal area, major difficulties in water
use management are expected (Vescovi, 2003). Water quality also seems to be affected
by climate change, and abundant rainfalls have been associated with increased rates
of gastroenteritis in recent studies from the U.S. (Curriero et al., 2001) and Canada
(Thomas et al., 2006). The legislative frameworks for drinking water quality, watershed
management, and pesticide management are basic tools for adapting to climate change,
and have recently been updated significantly. Their implementation has begun, and
water resource management practices and water treatment infrastructures should be
better coordinated because currently several controversial files affect land management
and public health.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
230
6.3.6
Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases
6.3.6.1 Context
In Quebec, the trend toward warmer temperatures (which has been observed and predicted
by climatic scenarios) could encourage the appearance of vector-borne and zoonotic
diseases that do not normally occur here, or could increase the range for some diseases
currently present. According to models, Lyme disease is expected to appear in southern
Quebec within 10 to 20 years (Ogden et al., 2006) (Figure 6.4). Climate influences several
aspects of infectious disease cycles, such as the reproduction of animals, insects and
ticks; the ease with which insect vectors can transmit the disease; and human behaviour
leading to exposure to various vectors (Ontario Forest Research Institute, 2003). Other
than the West Nile virus, there are currently no other significant cases of vector-borne
diseases; only one isolated case of hantavirus has been reported to this point (Giguère
and Gosselin, 2006c).
Figure 6.4 Simulation of changes in the range for Lyme disease, toward 2050
Chapter 6
Source: Ogden et al., 2006.
6.3.6.2 Current adaptations
Surveillance of zoonotic and vector-borne diseases is well organized by the various
departments involved, in part because the public system subsidizes a portion of the research.
Certain diseases require mandatory reporting; this measure helps to limit outbreaks.
The Public Health Agency of Canada and MSSS make information about infectious
diseases available to the public and professionals. Public health branches distribute
pamphlets and provide information on Internet sites to keep the public informed about
current infectious diseases. The Laboratoire de santé publique (public health laboratory)
is very well organized and provides excellent support for any analyses that are required.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
231
West Nile virus was the most closely monitored disease until recently (Gosselin et al., 2005),
as sampling campaigns and larvicide control measures ended in 2006. Several research
projects have been completed or are underway (Table 6.2). A decision-support tool is being
designed for West Nile virus, based on the geosimulation approach and including the
climate change context (Bouden et al., 2005). Several very effective zoonotic surveillance
networks have been established by the Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Pêcheries et de
l’Alimentation (MAPAQ) (department of agriculture, fisheries and food) (MAPAQ, 2006)
and the Institut national de santé animale (national animal health institute). Since 1997,
they have regularly collaborated with MSSS and the public health branches on epidemiological
research. MAPAQ has also invested heavily in research and laboratories over the last few
years (MAPAQ, 2006).
6.3.6.3 Required adaptations
Experts consulted in the Giguère and Gosselin study (2006c) outlined several important
steps for improved adaptation to the emergence and increase of zoonotic and vector-borne
diseases related to the effects of climate change in Quebec:
• maintain, encourage and implement integrated surveillance systems for zoonotic and
vector-borne diseases that may present new risks with climate change;
• include indicators related to the effects of climate change—such as consideration of
the epidemiological and ecological changes related to these diseases—in surveillance
systems for zoonotic and vector-borne diseases;
• heighten awareness and education initiatives for individuals, farmers, and human
and animal health professionals to address emergence, intensification, detection and
protection issues as they relate to zoonotic and vector-borne diseases in the context
of climate change; and
• continue research into methods for the control of zoonotic and vector-borne diseases;
specifically, the implementation of preventative technologies to prevent natural and
artificial aquifers from becoming suitable mosquito breeding areas and the inclusion
of these technologies in infrastructure construction standards.
6.3.6.4 Synthesis
Considering the several climate change adaptation initiatives underway in this area
of public health, it is the area that offers the most extensive coverage of the population.
However, Giguère and Gosselin (2006c) note that Quebec has been spared to a great
extent from vector-borne health risks until now. In the future, climate change will likely
increase the importance of vector-borne diseases in the province. Legislative reform
with a view to better control of vector-borne and zoonotic diseases has led to significant
investment in monitoring and laboratory testing in the agricultural sector. The importance
of food safety in a context of commercial agricultural production has helped to stimulate
various adaptation initiatives that are also related to reducing risks associated with
vector-borne and zoonotic diseases; the significance accorded to these initiatives by
the health sector has increased. However, difficulties exist, such as how to effectively
reach the thousands of farmers scattered across the province and how to deal with
millions of potential mosquito breeding grounds. Existing vector-borne and zoonotic
surveillance systems have not yet been tested in a large scale event in such a
way as to demonstrate their capacity to handle a major epidemiological situation
affecting humans.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
232
6.3.7
Other Subjects
6.3.7.1 Ultraviolet rays (UV)
With climate change, it is expected that the warm
season will be extended, and public exposure
to UV rays will increase (Hill et al., 1992).
The incidence of health problems associated with
over-exposure to UV rays, particularly sunburns
and skin cancer, could continue to increase at
a greater rate than in previous decades. An increase
in the number of cataracts can be expected, as
well as an immunosuppressant effect that could,
for example, have a negative effect on vaccine
effectiveness and foster the development
of epidemics (WHO, 2003). Despite this fact,
there has been very little research into climate
change and public exposure to UV rays in Quebec.
Furthermore, UV protection is rarely considered
in proposed climate change adaptation measures
in Quebec despite its priority nationally (Warren
et al., 2004). The effects on public health are
serious, with more than 80,000 new cases of skin
cancer in Canada each year. This is the most
common type of cancer (Canadian Cancer Society, 2005). The health effects associated with
UV rays are preventable with modified personal protection behaviours and with the creation
of shade. Moreover, UV risk-awareness programs are cost effective. For example, in Australia,
the prevention of the negative effects of UV rays costs an average of eight cents (US)
per capita whereas cancer treatment costs $5.70 (US) per capita (WHO, 2003).
Tools currently available include the UV index issued by Environment Canada, which
is widely available to the public. In addition, the National Sun Safety Committee brings
together scientists from every Canadian province to encourage cooperation and intersectoral
action in reducing the incidence of UV-caused skin cancer (Canadian Strategy for Cancer
Control, 2001). Required adaptation measures include increased educational programs about
the dangers of UV exposure, research projects to measure the effects of climate change
on population behaviour in terms of UV exposure, and measuring the effectiveness of the
various adaptation measures designed to decrease UV exposure. Preventative measures
for shade creation will also be useful.
6.3.7.2 Air quality
In addition to producing carbon dioxide (CO2), the burning of fossil fuels affects air quality.
Various pollutants and tropospheric ozone precursors, as well as the fine particulates involved
in the production of urban smog, have been proven responsible for harmful health effects.
More than 80.4% of Quebeckers live in urban areas, and 25% of them live in the Montreal
area (ISQ, 2006e, 2006f), which is already greatly affected by poor air quality (ISQ, 2006e,
2006f; INSPQ, 2006c). Climate change will also increase the time periods conducive to smog
formation (Warren et al., 2004). Further, climatic warming will have an additional negative
impact on air quality because there will be longer growing seasons, causing an increase in
concentrations of airborne pollens (Warren et al., 2004; House and Brovkin, 2005).
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
233
Climate models predict an increase in the frequency of ECEs, including droughts, wildfires
and storms (increased pollen dispersion is among the associated effects), all of which have
a negative impact on air quality (Warren et al., 2004; U.K. Department for Environment,
Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), 2005). In Montreal, links have been established between
climate and pollen concentrations, as well as among pollen concentration, visits to the
doctor and socio-economic status (Garneau et al., 2005). Poor air quality is responsible
for premature deaths among vulnerable populations, such as individuals with respiratory
disease, allergies or cardiac disease, in particular children and seniors. The effects of
pollen can compound this and are significant in terms of health effects and costs, given
the existing high rate of allergies. It is estimated that 10% of the population suffers
from respiratory diseases and allergies (Agence de la santé et des services sociaux de
la Montérégie (ASSSM), 2002); in Quebec in 1992, the annual direct cost of hay fever
amounted to $49 million.
This area of concern is the subject of current research projects (Table 6.1) as well as one
recently completed project (Table 6.2). Existing adaptations in place include air quality
indices (e.g. InfoSmog) available throughout the year (Environment Canada, 2006b), but their
usefulness appears minimal according to recent studies (Bélanger et al., 2006a; Tardif
et al., 2006) and they will likely need to be enhanced. The required adaptations include
preventative measures to encourage decreased activities during periods of high air pollution,
and the promotion of measures to improve air quality, such as using public transportation,
travel by bicycle or on foot, and the purchase of smaller vehicles that consume less energy
and raw materials to manufacture and operate. Further information and data on the
relation between air quality and health should be considered a priority, given the burden
that poor air quality imposes on health.
6.3.7.3 Strategic communication and research tools
Climate change adaptation efforts should be conducted in a concerted manner, based on reliable
and accessible data, to respond effectively to new demands and to involve all stakeholders.
Current initiatives include an atlas of health vulnerabilities, and projects under the Ouranos
health program (Table 6.1) and the INSPQ Infocentre (INSPQ, 2006b). However, a permanent
knowledge-based distribution and transfer program to address climate change adaptations has
yet to be developed and implemented. This program would be intersectoral, given the wide
range of adaptations and the various stakeholders involved. This activity is included under the
Ouranos health program outlined in Table 6.1.
6.3.8
Synthesis
Currently, several climate change adaptation initiatives are being implemented—a positive
indication for the province. These include an integrated and planned research and surveillance
effort that addresses the connection between health status and climate; and certain products
are being distributed to managers in various provincial departments and the regions and
used for policy formulation and program development. The recent implementation of
several significant legislative and regulatory tools to protect public health and to implement
preventative measures is also a positive element in the context of adaptation to climate
change. The excellent history of interministerial and intersectoral cooperation in Quebec
will be a considerable asset in the highly complex domain of adaptation. But as yet,
there is no integrated public health program that could launch a coordinated charge on
the priorities in this area and address the gaps that have been identified (Bélanger
et al., 2006a).
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
234
In light of the research conducted and experts who were consulted (Giguère and
Gosselin, 2006a, 2006b, 2006c, 2006d), the following initiatives in the areas listed here
should be developed.
For extreme heat:
• training for health professionals;
• implementation of popular
education pilot projects on
personal protection during heat
waves and on contributing
to controlling the UHIE;
• addition of economic measures
to encourage the implementation
of initiatives to mitigate extreme
heat phenomena, specifically
measures related to better
housing insulation;
• improvement of knowledge about aeration, ventilation and air conditioning for health
care centres and nursing homes;
• new guidelines for the management of health care centres; and
• ongoing reinforcement of initiatives that have already been implemented, particularly
with respect to real-time surveillance of the effects of heat waves.
For adapting to ECEs in the context of climate change:
• promotion of a culture of preventative planning for ECEs, such as building protection,
critical infrastructure (e.g. transportation, power supply, water treatment plants);
• measurement, modelling and communication of risks of the various types of ECEs
in Quebec over the short, medium, and long terms to develop the appropriate initiatives;
• research on the effects of ECEs on health over the short and long terms, in addition
to the improvement of emergency health measures; and
• implementation of a surveillance and follow-up system on health effects of ECEs as
a function of the climate.
For water resources:
• accelerated implementation of the various methods for the maintenance of optimal
water quality to ensure human safety (fire, basic hygiene, food needs) and drinking water
quality (pressure, dilution). These include:
– optimizing and standardizing leak detection in water supply systems
– educating individuals and businesses on the importance and means of conserving
drinking water
– integrating low-water use techniques into the Building Code;
• strict control of water quality surveillance in small drinking water supply networks;
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
235
• financial support for watershed management and infrastructure to accelerate its implementation
and preserve the multiple uses of the watershed;
• development of management policies for conflicts over supply; and
• improvement of surveillance of health effects related to drinking and recreational water.
For zoonotic and vector-borne diseases:
• implementation and maintenance of integrated surveillance systems for zoonotic and
vector-borne diseases that may present new risks with climate change;
• inclusion of indicators related to the effects of climate change—such as consideration
of the epidemiological and ecological changes related to these diseases—in surveillance
systems for zoonotic and vector-borne diseases;
• intensified awareness and education initiatives for individuals and human and
animal health professionals that address emergence, intensification, detection and
protection issues as they relate to zoonotic and vector-borne diseases in the context
of climate change; and
• continuation of research into methods for the control of zoonotic and vector-borne
diseases, specifically the implementation of preventative technologies to prevent
natural and artificial aquifers from becoming suitable breeding areas for mosquitoes,
and on the inclusion of these technologies in infrastructure construction standards.
For protection against increased
exposure to UV rays:
• increase in the visibility of
educational programs on the
dangers of UV exposure and on
effective prevention measures;
• research projects to measure the
effects of climate change on
population habits in terms of UV
exposure and measurement of
the effectiveness of the various
adaptation measures designed
to decrease UV exposure; and
• creation of more shade in urban
environments.
For air quality:
• assessment of the usefulness of air quality indices for behavioural changes related
to preventative and protective measures;
• implementation of measures to improve air quality, such as the promotion of public
transportation, travel by bicycle or on foot, and purchase of smaller, cleaner vehicles; and
• maintenance and development of available knowledge and new data on air quality
and health.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
236
6.4
HISTORICAL AND SIMULATED MODELLING OF MORTALITY
FOR 2020, 2050 AND 2080
6.4.1
Introduction
In Canada, as in many other countries, climatic warming means an increase in average
temperatures and a rise in sea level, as well as a greater probability of ECEs (e.g. periods
of intense heat, freezing rain, floods) (Natural Resources Canada (NRCan), 2002).
This situation is recognized as a public health concern (WHO, 2000, 2002; Donaldson
et al., 2001) because of the effects of climate change on increased mortality and
morbidity related to heat stroke, skin cancers, cardiovascular and respiratory diseases
(e.g. asthma), vector-borne and zoonotic diseases, kidney disease, liver disease,
neurological disease (e.g. epilepsy) and mood disorders (e.g. depression) (McGeehin
and Mirabelli, 2001).
Some of the research undertaken for this chapter was to identify and simulate certain
future climate-related health effects in Quebec. The first goal was to quantify the
relationships among mortality, some morbidities and climate. The second goal was to
project future rates of mortality and hospitalization for a given future Quebec climate.
Analyses were carried out using mortality (1981–1999) and morbidity data (number
of hospitalizations, individuals hospitalized or emergency room visits between 1981 and
2002) in tandem with chronological series on several climatic parameters (e.g. temperature,
diurnal range, Humidex) to create statistical models. These models were then paired
with regional projections for climatic variables generated by Ouranos to identify variations
in mortality and morbidity for simulated future periods.
The first part of the results is presented here; this includes selected statistical mortality
models for several cities and regions in Quebec, as well as projections associated
with these models for three future periods (2020, 2050 and 2080 horizons). The other
analyses on hospital morbidity and emergency room visits are underway and will
become available in 2008. The main data sources used in this project are presented
(under section 6.4.2 Methodology) along with a few details on data processing, as
well as the creation of the database. The project methodology and results are then
presented and discussed.
6.4.2
Methodology
Health data (deaths, hospitalizations, emergency room visits) are all from MSSS. Only
non-traumatic deaths were included (codes 1 to 799 in the International Classification
of Diseases (ICD-9)). Deaths for the period between 1981 and 1999 were used for the
following two reasons:
• Beginning in 1981, death data were more reliable (before 1981 data were not exhaustive
or not collected by area) and the format was easier to use; and
• Until 1999, cause of death was classified according to the ninth revision of the ICD
(ICD-9) whereas beginning in 2000 the tenth revision (ICD-10) was used, making
comparison more difficult.
Meteorological data were taken in part from Environment Canada airport weather stations.
These stations collect by far the most complete data and include a large number of
meteorological parameters. The airport station data sets were complemented by data from
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
237
other Environment Canada stations (Environment Canada, 2005a). While the latter are
numerous, they produce only temperature and precipitation data. Each truncated postal
code was associated with the closest meteorological station. Thus, mortality and morbidity
models could be created as a function of the climate for quite a variety of areas. The
climate average for a given geographic area was obtained by using all stations associated
with the postal codes in this area.
Ouranos provided climate data for future periods. These included daily maximum,
minimum and average temperatures for the 2020, 2050 and 2080 horizons. The data are
from a specific general circulation model known as the HadCM (Hadley Centre coupled
model) (Gordon et al., 2000) paired with scale-reduction techniques (or statistical scaling)
(Nguyen et al., 2005). General circulation models are developed on a planetary scale
and simulate, among other things, the effects of increases in GHGs for future periods.
For this research, two specific emissions scenarios were considered: A2 and B2
(Nakicenovic et al., 2000). These scenarios were established by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), and correspond to various worldwide changes in
social, demographic, economic, technological and other domains. It should be noted
that the A2 scenario is based on a higher concentration of GHGs (approximately
twice the current levels in 2080) than the B2 scenario (IPCC, 2007). Scale-reduction
methods make it possible to scale down the simulation results from global models
to more local proportions (e.g. town, region). Historic data from weather stations are
used to make this change in scale. In the present study, the percentage of explained
variance for each predictor-predictand pair is equal to the same order of magnitude
(between 65% and 90%) found in the study by Gachon et al. (2005). The predictands
considered here are minimum, maximum and average daily temperatures. The various
sensitivity analyses carried out to verify the accuracy of the climate models used have
shown a high level of reliability—with the exception of the 2020 horizon period,
which could be problematic because of the weakness of the expected changes and
the lack of statistically significant climate signals (Gachon and Dibike, 2006).
Projections of mortality variations were assessed for certain cities and administrative
regions in the province. All cities considered have a weather station close by; this
makes it possible to reduce the scale. However, the size of the administrative regions
may have reduced the accuracy of projections for these areas. Finally, there are several
general circulation models, each of which produces a different version of future
climates. The model used here (HadCM3) generates projections close to the average
of the other models with the possible exception of winter, where temperature increase
projections are below the average (Chaumont, 2005).
Identifying the effect of climate on mortality relies mainly on methods initially developed
by Schwartz et al. (1996) for research on the effects of air pollution on health. Use
of the Poisson regression made it possible to obtain a statistical relationship between
the number of deaths per day and the various meteorological parameters available.
More formally, this is a general linear model with specific link functions (McCullagh
and Nelder, 1989). A parametric cubic spline function was chosen by the authors
of this study (Doyon et al., 2006) to represent the link between deaths and a given
climatic parameter. To obtain this relationship, one must control for confounding
factors (effects of the day of the week, seasons, long-term mortality trends). As an
example, Figure 6.5 presents the relationship between temperature and mortality
for three cities in Quebec with and without controlling for confounding factors.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
238
Figure 6.5 Relationship between mortality and average daily temperature
for Montreal and Quebec City and the Saguenay Region
Chapter 6
Note: Graphs (a), (b) and (c) are taken from the model in which confounding
factors are disregarded. Graphs (e), (f) and (g) illustrate those taken
from the model in which confounding factors are taken into consideration.
Graphs (d) and (h) are overlays of (a), (b), (c) and (e), (f), (g), respectively.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
239
Several meteorological parameters may be included in the mortality model. A first
scan was conducted by adding the climatic variables available to the model, one by one.
Preliminary analyses were conducted for several cities (Montreal, Quebec, Gatineau,
Sherbrooke, Saguenay) for deaths due to all causes, and certain more specific classifications
(death due to diseases of the circulatory or respiratory systems). Models have been
built that consider various combinations of maximum, minimum and average temperatures
and the Humidex. These analyses have made it possible to select only average temperature
as the temperature indicator in the model. This variable stood out above others from a
statistical point of view. The Akaike (1973) information criterion was used as a performance
indicator. The addition of the diurnal range had practically no effect on the model.
Nor did dew point, humidity or atmospheric pressure improve residual deviation from
the model. Various groupings for time variables were then considered. Once again, the
various groupings for time variables were added one by one. For example, the average
temperature one to three days prior to death was added to the average temperature model.
Another scan was then conducted on all climatic variables in addition to trying various
time groupings on each scan. The final model that was selected contained groupings
of average temperature up to 14 days prior to death.
This model was then paired with long-term climate simulations to estimate variations
in future mortality. The results presented here do not include demographic forecasts;
therefore, it is assumed that the size or population of a city or region will not change in the
future. This is common practice for these types of simulations, and allows for comparison
with the current situation. A detailed discussion of the methodology, sensitivity analyses
and a presentation of the selected equations and terms, by city and region is found in
Doyon et al., 2006.
6.4.3
Results
6.4.3.1 Historical modelling
One of the project goals was to provide a provincially scaled description of current and
future climate effects on the population. First, daily mortality was assessed for several
cities in southern Quebec. Statistics by administrative region were added to complement the
numbers for cities for which modelling could be problematic; the methodology described
in the preceding text may be problematic when death rates are low (<2 deaths/day). The low
numbers also prevented modelling age and cause of disease for all cities and regions.
For an in-depth portrait of climate effects on the population, a relationship was established
between climate and deaths from all non-traumatic causes for the cities and regions for
which the models were significant. Only Montreal was selected for comparison of the
effects of heat on causes of death. The causes chosen were deaths due to diseases of the
circulatory system (ICD-9, codes 390–459), the respiratory system (ICD-9, codes 460–519)
and tumours (ICD-9, codes 140–239).
Figures 6.5 and 6.6 demonstrate the relationship between mortality and average daily
temperature for some cities and regions in Quebec. Note that the curves represent relative
mortality as a function of temperature. For a specific temperature, the curves compare
mortality to the average mortality for all other temperatures, taking into account the seasons,
long-term trends and days of the week. (For example, 130% mortality at a given temperature
indicates that there were 30% more deaths at this temperature than the average.)
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
240
Figure 6.6 Relationship between mortality and average daily temperature
for some regions in Quebec
Chapter 6
Figure 6.6 makes it possible, on a qualitative basis, to compare the effects of temperature on
mortality for each region. The relationship with daily temperature was used because the latter
is the climatic variable with the greatest effect on mortality. Generally, for all cities and regions,
there seems to be a point beyond which the number of deaths increases almost linearly with
temperature. In addition, the slope of the linear portion seems practically identical from one
city or region to another. As for the effects of cold, no similar trends could be identified; the
effects of cold seem to be more directly related to relative mortality as a function of temperatures
in the weeks preceding death.4
Despite the size of the administrative regions and the different microclimates of those regions,
the same quasi-linear relationship between mortality and temperature can be identified (for
the “warm” part of the graph). For the Abitibi-Témiscamingue, North Shore, Lanaudière,
Centre-du-Québec, Gaspésie-Îles-de-la Madeleine and Nord du Québec regions, no significant
link between the temperature and the number of deaths seems apparent; consequently, these
results are not presented. With the exception of Lanaudière and Centre-du-Québec, these
regions are sparsely populated and are located in the northern and eastern parts of the province.
6.4.3.2 Estimating mortality for simulated future climates
The HadCM model with scenarios A2 and B2 was used for selected cities and regions to project
the variation in mortality due to climate change for different periods. Figures 6.7 and 6.8 show
projections for summer and annual mortality, respectively, for several cities. Figures 6.9 and 6.10
illustrate these projections for several administrative regions. Variations in mortality are expressed
as a percentage of historic mortality (between 1981 and 1999) and presented for the future periods
of 2020, 2050 and 2080. Projections for the summer seasons are presented because variations are
most significant during this period. In general, there is a small drop in mortality in winter and
a slight increase in spring and fall. Annual variations in mortality are also presented to provide
information on a complete year. Because variations in summer mortality are much greater
than in other seasons, there is an increase in annual mortality in a warmer future climate.
4
For example, see Figure 7 in Doyon et al. (2006).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
241
Figure 6.7 Variations in summer mortality for several cities in southern Quebec
Chapter 6
Figure 6.8 Variations in annual mortality for several cities in southern Quebec
Note: This figure presents expected
variations in summer mortality
in several cities in Quebec for
scenarios A2 and B2. Variations
are expressed as a percentage
of historic mortality for the
period from 1981 to 1999.
Black error bars indicate the
95% confidence interval.
Note: This figure presents
expected variations in annual
mortality in several cities in
Quebec for scenarios A2 and B2.
Variations are expressed as a
percentage of historic mortality
for the period from 1981 to 1999.
Black error bars indicate the 95%
confidence interval.
(%)
(%)
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
242
Chapter 6
Figure 6.9
Variations in summer mortality for several regions in southern Quebec
Figure 6.10
Variations in annual mortality for several regions in southern Quebec
Note: This figure presents
expected variations in summer
mortality in several of
Quebec’s administrative
regions for scenarios A2
and B2. Variations are
expressed as a percentage
of historic mortality for
the period from 1981 to 1999.
Black error bars indicate
the 95% confidence interval.
Note: This figure presents
expected variations in annual
mortality in several of
Quebec’s administrative
regions for scenarios A2
and B2. Variations are
expressed as a percentage
of historic mortality for
the period from 1981 to 1999.
Black error bars indicate
the 95% confidence interval.
(%)
(%)
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
243
The differences in the projections for cities are not significant, but those for the regions are.
Regional projections were obtained using the average of monthly forecast temperature anomalies
for stations located in or near the region; this crude approximation may explain some of
the differences. Also, climatic variability within a single region may have some effect on the
statistically established relationship between mortality and temperature. Nevertheless, projections
for the Estrie, Outaouais and Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean regions are similar to those of a major city
located within each region (Sherbrooke, Gatineau and Saguenay, respectively).
6.4.3.3 Models and projections by age group
For Montreal and Quebec, models were created by age group. Only two groups were considered:
15 to 64 years of age, and 65 years and over.5 The 15 to 64 age group seems less vulnerable to
heat (the slope is less oblique for temperatures greater than 15°C), but seems more vulnerable
to cold, especially in Quebec City, where there is a negative slope for temperatures below 10°C.
For the summer period, variations in mortality are approximately two to three times more
significant for the 65 and over group than for the 15 to 64 age group.
The main results for the simulations are as follows:
• For the A2 scenario, there was an increase in summer mortality of approximately 2%
for 2020, 6% for 2050 and 10% for 2080, as well as an increase in annual mortality of
approximately 0.5% for 2020, 1.5% for 2050 and 3% for 2080. In terms of the absolute
number of deaths per year6 for southern Quebec, this would be an increase on the order
of 150 deaths annually in 2020, 550 annual deaths in 2050 and 1,400 in 2080. However,
the 95% confidence interval for these figures demonstrates a wide range of possible
values that also vary with the climatic scenarios used. On the other hand, these data
do not reflect the predictable aging of the population, which will likely tend to increase
the number of deaths related to warming.
• This increase affects most regions in Quebec (with the exception of Côte-Nord and Gaspésie)
and increases in intensity from east to west.
• There does not seem to be any significant difference among the major cities in Quebec
with respect to the vulnerability of their populations to climate change.
• Increase in mortality for the population aged 65 and over is approximately two to three times
more significant than that for the group between 15 and 64 years of age.
• The effect of temperature on the 15 to 64 age group seems to change over time. This age group
is more vulnerable to temperature increases during the 1991 to 1999 period than during
the 1981 to 1989 period.7
6.4.4
Discussion
Statistical models were developed to establish the relationship between mortality and climate and
then predict effects for two scenarios of future climates for Quebec. Projections of mortality
were presented for several cities and administrative regions. Projections for the administrative
regions had several weaknesses. The development of models required that average temperatures
be established for relatively large geographical areas which sometimes included microclimates
(such as the Laurentian mountains). In addition, for these large administrative regions, projections
for future periods were derived using data from relatively distant stations. Such approximations
were not used for cities; therefore, the results for cities were not similarly affected.
Chapter 6
5
Not presented here. See Figure 17 in Doyon et al. (2006).
6
See Tables 3, 4, 5 and 6 in Doyon et al. (2006), for a detailed presentation.
7
Not presented here. See Figure 21 in Doyon et al. (2006).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
244
There is no significant difference among the projections for the various cities. The population
density limited the models to regions along the St. Lawrence River, in the Outaouais and in
Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean. Projected variations in future climates for this area are very similar and
do not show any significant differences in future mortality for the cities considered (Figure 6.11).
Figure 6.11
Current and simulated annual average number of hot days
Note: Hot days are those with maximum temperature >30°C.
Source: Based on the Canadian Regional Climate
Model (CRCM v3.6.1) and the IPCC IS92a emissions
scenario and conducted by the Ouranos Consortium
in 2005.
In the literature, several publications present projections for variations in mortality for future
periods. For example, Donaldson et al. (2001) published projections for the U.K. and several
of its large cities predicting annual decreases in mortality. Doyon et al. (2006) obtained the
opposite result—an increase in total mortality—for all the cities analyzed. Several factors may
explain this difference, such as the ability to adapt to cold and some of the methodology.
As reported by Wilkinson et al. (2001), the excess winter mortality in England between 1986
and 1996 was attributed, among other things, to the absence of central heating and to the high
cost of heating. Eventual temperature warming could therefore contribute to decreased winter
mortality in this region of Europe. In Quebec, however, the situation is different. In fact, it is
unlikely that warming, on average, will affect winter mortality. Over the years, Quebeckers
have developed various strategies to adapt to the cold. The Loi sur l’économie de l’énergie
dans le bâtiment (An act respecting energy efficiency in buildings) (1983), which is intended
to ensure minimum performance for heat insulation in walls and ceilings, is an example
of an adaptive strategy (Régie du bâtiment du Québec, 2006). Furthermore, natural resource
endowments in Quebec contribute to the availability of heat at a relatively low cost—one of
the lowest of several industrialized countries, including the U.K. (Filion and Lauzier, 2002).
Some methodological differences between the research in this report and that of Donaldson
et al. (2001) cannot be ignored. For example, their study did not control for the effect of
the seasons. As discussed earlier, controlling for seasons mainly affects the results for the cold
portion of the model (Figure 6.6). A model that does not control for this effect will predict
fewer winter deaths for future climates. In controlling for the seasonal effect, the increase
in summer mortality is not offset by a decrease for the other seasons.8 The control of seasonal
Chapter 6
8
If there is no control for the seasons, the relationship between deaths and cold temperatures seems more significant: the slope
of the graph is more significant for cold temperatures when there is no control. If these models are used to predict the variations
in winter mortality for future climates (which will be warmer), a significant drop in deaths in the winter is predicted. Inversely,
if the seasonal effect is controlled for, the relationship between cold temperatures and mortality decreases, and estimated
variations in winter mortality are less significant.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
245
effects is necessary according to Doyon et al. (2006), so that mortality due to climate is not
confounded with mortality resulting from seasonal factors (e.g. epidemics). Some other
methodological differences also exist in Donaldson et al. (2001). Analyses of Doyon et al. (2006)
demonstrate that projections of mortality variations almost double in summer using monthly
rather than annual anomalies to derive future temperatures.
A different approach employs air masses in the synoptic scale to establish a relationship
between mortality and climate (Kalkstein and Greene, 1997). Using this approach, other
researchers have estimated that the number of deaths due to hot days would be approximately
three times greater than the decrease in deaths for cold days for several cities in the U.S.
This estimate is in line with conclusions by Doyon et al. (2006). It is difficult to compare
these results with unpublished work by Kalkstein and Smoyer (1993) cited in Last and
Chiotti (2001), who present figures of between 240 to 1,140 additional deaths per year
in Montreal; the details of this research (specifically the period for which the projections
were made) were not available. Nevertheless, the variations observed for Montreal are
within the lower range of those projected for 2050 and in the middle of the range for 2080.9
More recently, research that was conducted to establish future projections for a few cities
in south-central Canada, including climate warming and air pollution levels (Cheng et al., 2005),
found the same range of mortality impacts.
With the aging population in Quebec, the percentage of people over 65 will continue to
increase. This group grew from 9.7% in 1986 to 12% in 1996 (Pageau et al., 2001) and
will reach approximately 28% in 2040 (ISQ, 2000, 2003b). The projections discussed
in the preceding text and presented in the related figures were derived for the total population;
therefore, these mortality projections can probably be considered as a lower limit that
will continue to approach the predictions for a population of 65 years and over, which
are two to three times more susceptible to heat-related mortality.
The stability of the model over time is another important methodological issue. It is difficult
to anticipate how the population will adapt to climate change. Certain standards may
be applied for household air conditioning. Awareness campaigns may have an effect on the
vulnerability of individuals most at risk. This issue was addressed briefly, using two models:
the first was created with data from the 1981 to 1989 period and the second with data from
the 1991 to 1999 period. The idea was to quantify potential changes in the effects of climate
on population mortality. For the general population, there were no significant changes in the
model and its projections, at least for Montreal and Quebec.10
It was noted that the 15 to 64 age group seemed to be more vulnerable to climate change
over time. For Montreal, this change was greater for men than for women. An aging
population cannot be related to this finding. In the 15 to 64 age group there were more
people 50 years and older between 1981 and 1989 than there were between 1991 and
1999. One should therefore expect greater vulnerability to the effects of climate change
in this age group in the 1981 to 1989 period than in the 1991 to 1999 period; but the
reverse was the case.
This outcome could be attributed to an increase in air pollution that is not taken into
account in the models. Because pollution and smog episodes are sometimes correlated
with warmer temperatures, the relationship between temperature and mortality obtained
by Doyon et al. (2006) could also have been slightly distorted, particularly for the labour
force (between 15 and 64 years of age) and more specifically for individuals who work
Chapter 6
9
Data not presented here. See Tables 4 and 5 in Doyon et al. (2006).
10 Results not presented here. See Doyon et al. (2006).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
246
outdoors. If air pollution increased significantly between 1981 and 1999, deaths during that
period could be statistically attributed to higher temperatures and the conclusion would be
that the population is becoming more vulnerable to these temperatures.
It is also possible that this observed difference could be attributed to the small number
of deaths, which would modify the stability of the measurement of mortality. On the other
hand, average ozone concentrations (ozone being a pollutant associated with an increase
in deaths among individuals with chronic pulmonary disease (Lajoie et al., 2003)) in the
south of the province continued to increase between 1990 and 2003 (Statistics Canada, 2006).
During this period (1990–1999), an increase in deaths from respiratory illnesses, such
as obstructive pulmonary disease, specifically among men between 25 and 44 years of age
in the Montreal region (Eco-Santé, 2005a), was also noted. Because pollution and smog
episodes are sometimes correlated with warmer temperatures, it is possible that certain
population groups in the labour force are becoming increasingly vulnerable to higher
temperatures (e.g. outdoor workers).
This last hypothesis possibly could be verified by introducing pollution data into the models
for Montreal and Quebec. Some authors have already attempted to quantify the significance
of temperature effects compared with those for pollution (Kunst et al., 1993; Pattenden
et al., 2003; Keatinge and Donaldson, 2006) and agree on the fact that temperature has
a much greater effect on mortality than pollution. Recently, other authors have measured
this difference for Toronto (Rainham and Smoyer-Tomic, 2003) and reached the same
conclusions.11 Therefore, it is unlikely that the addition of pollution indicators to the models
could completely explain the changes in the mortality and temperature relationship for
the 15 to 64 age group.
It is important to realize that the models created for this chapter represent the average
effect of climate. It is difficult to measure the effect of one heat wave (or other ECE) on
death because such events have been historically rare. A binary term has been added to the
model to account for heat waves. Between 1981 and 1999, there were heat waves in the
province but none were comparable to the one that occurred in France in 2003 (InVS, 2003a).
6.4.5
Next Steps
The increases in mortality simulated by the models created for this report nevertheless
remain significant from the point of view of public health. These simulations probably
represent the lower limit of the increases in mortality, given the currently aging demographic
and the possible increase in global emissions of GHGs and global warming. There are
many public health programs addressing risk factors that have much less marked effects on
mortality and morbidity. Therefore, this information must be incorporated into planning for
the prevention of related risk factors and protection of the health of vulnerable populations.
The most populated areas of the province will be the most affected. Issues of warming
and heat waves and their related effects are often perceived in Quebec as affecting only the
Montreal area. The data here demonstrate a much larger challenge that affects almost
everyone in Quebec.
Finally, it will also be useful to pair these simulations with current demographic models
to account for changes in the proportion of seniors and in their residential locations.
The simultaneous effect of atmospheric pollution should also be subject to additional analyses.
Chapter 6
11 The authors demonstrate that the mortality and temperature relationship for men is the one most influenced by controlling
for pollution.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
247
6.5
HEAT WAVES AND COLD SNAPS, AND CURRENT
AND FUTURE ADAPTATIONS
6.5.1
Introduction
Following on evaluations of the health effects of heat waves and cold snaps, particularly
in Europe and North America (Scottish Executive, 2001; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 2004, 2006; WHO, 2005; Centre on Global Change and Health, 2006;
InVS, 2006), this section focuses on three studies conducted for this Assessment. These studies
examined perceptions and behaviours during heat waves (Bélanger et al., 2006b) and cold
snaps (Bélanger et al., 2006c), as well as those concerning the onset of climate change and
proposed solutions to alleviate or adapt to it (Bélanger and Gosselin, 2007). Some of the
results of a 2005 telephone survey in southern Quebec are summarized and provide an initial
response to issues raised by adaptations currently in use for heat waves and cold snaps.
Several future adaptation strategies are suggested, a number of which are already the subject
of national and international recommendations (e.g. Health Canada, 2001, 2006; Menne
and Ebi, 2006). These recommendations include more in-depth research to expand on the
investigations that have taken place to date and the implementation of public health measures
and public services.
6.5.2
Methodology
6.5.2.1 Research population
The study population was composed of individuals living in southern Quebec (Figure 6.12) and
covering 15 of the 18 socio-health regions (SHR), which include more than 99% of the Quebec
population (ISQ, 2006f). The health effects of climate change in the three northern regions
(Figure 6.12: regions 10, 17 and 18) are discussed and summarized in Chapter 7, Health Impacts
of Climate Change in Canada’s North.
Figure 6.12
Socio-health regions in Quebec
Chapter 6
Source: MSSS, 2004.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
248
6.5.2.2 Sample
The sample, stratified according to socio-health region (SHR), residence and post-stratified
for gender (Alavi and Beaumont, 2003), was calculated using 2001 Census data (ISQ,
2005b), with a 95% confidence interval and a precision level of 0.35 (Thompson, 1987). The
total sample included 5,080 Quebeckers aged 18 years and over; half were contacted during
the spring of 2005 and the other half during the fall of 2005.12 Sampling was conducted by
household, based on a random selection of published residential telephone numbers.
Among the respondents,13 5.7% lived in eastern Quebec (Figure 6.12: SHR 01, 03, 11);
5.9% in the north of the province (SHR 02, 08); 14.5% in the Quebec City region (SHR 03, 12);
6.5% in central Quebec (SHR 04); 21.0% and 15.7%, respectively, lived south of Montreal
(SHR 05, 16) and north of Montreal (SHR 07, 14, 15); 30.6% lived in Montreal (SHR 06)
and Laval (SHR 13).14 A slight majority of respondents were female (51.5%), and the
majority was between 35 and 64 years of age (54.7%; 18–34 years: 29.3%; 65 years and
over: 16.0%). French was the first language for 81.3% of respondents, English for 5.8%,
a language other than French or English for 10.1%, and English or French plus another
language for 2.9%.
6.5.2.3 Data collection
A polling company collected the data by telephone (average interview duration: 20 minutes),
seven days a week, between 9:30 a.m. and 9:30 p.m., with a computer system that permitted
random redistribution of the order of questions. To minimize any bias due to an association
with the outdoor temperature on the day of the interview, two rounds of data collection
were conducted. The first (from March 16 to April 19, 2005) was to collect information
on adaptations to heat waves; the second (September 15 to October 25, 2005) was to collect
information on adaptations to cold snaps. Each respondent was interviewed only once.
6.5.2.4 Questionnaire development
Particular attention was paid to the development of the survey questionnaire. It was
prepared as follows: (1) a preliminary questionnaire, based on the literature on health
and climate change issues, was developed for the interviews (Presser et al., 2004);
(2) exploratory interviews (average duration: 2 hours) were conducted with 21 volunteers
(>_18 years of age) to check for the comprehension of certain terms (e.g. chronic illness),
identify which measurement scales to use and which questions to exclude; (3) a first
draft questionnaire was developed; (4) the first draft questionnaire was tested for telephone
use (e.g. clarity and accuracy of questions) with 61 volunteers (>_18 years of age) who
were recruited by project researchers and public health practitioners working in the
15 socio-health regions under study; (5) the questionnaire content (English and French
versions) was validated by five experts working in the field of health and climate
change in Canada; and (6) a polling firm pre-tested the French and English versions
of the questionnaire (n=50) at the beginning of each round of data collection.
Chapter 6
12 For data collected during the spring: 70.2% of those selected (n=3,726) completed the questionnaire; 4.9% were not interviewed
because of survey time limits; 6.6% could not be reached; fewer than 1% (n=7) did not complete the interview; 18.2% refused
to be interviewed.
For data collected during the fall: 70.0% of those selected (n=3,731) completed the questionnaire, 5.8% were not interviewed
because of survey time limits; 7.7% could not be reached; fewer than 1% (n=11) did not complete the interview; and 16,5%
refused to be interviewed.
No difference between the percentage of respondents and non-respondents, depending on the SHR of residence, was noted
in either data collection (p>_0.4).
13 With respect to socio-demographic characteristics, no statistical difference was observed between respondents from the first
round of data collection (heat waves) and the second (cold snaps).
14 Due to rounding of percentages (to the nearest point), the sum may not total 100%.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
249
6.5.2.5 Information collected
Generally, the information collected from all respondents (first and second rounds of
data collection) related to socio-demographic characteristics (e.g. income); health status
(e.g. chronic illnesses); housing (e.g. perceived effectiveness of insulation); means of
transportation (e.g. use of a car); use of media to obtain weather information (e.g. wind
chill index); clothing adaptations as a function of weather; compliance with preventative
advisories issued during ECEs; perceptions about the occurrence of climate change
(e.g. heat waves); and on current suggested solutions to mitigate or adapt to them.15 Both
the first and second rounds of data collection (heat waves and cold snaps, respectively)
addressed ways of cooling (e.g. air conditioning) or heating (e.g. oven) homes, and protection
strategies (e.g. toque) for outdoor activities (e.g. running errands) that are used during
extreme temperatures.
6.5.2.6 Analysis
The collected data were weighted by calibrating for respondent age and language, on
the basis of the 2001 Census data (ISQ, 2005b). The analyses accounted for sampling
by socio-health regions. The Rao-Scott likelihood ratio test was used for the bivariate
analysis; logistic regression was used for the multivariate analysis (Sautory, 2005).16 The
statistical significance threshold of α < 0.0001 was selected because of the high number
of respondents.
6.5.3
Heat Waves
6.5.3.1 Current adaptations
Access to and use of air conditioners and fans
Of all respondents, 10.2% had neither
a fan nor an air conditioner in their home,
53.9% had only a fan, 26.2% had both
a fan and an air conditioner, and 9.6% had
only an air conditioner. Almost half of the
respondents with an air conditioner (35.8%)
had access to a central or wall-based
system (a “fixed” versus a “movable” system,
such as a window or portable unit).
Seniors (41.3%) more often had an air
conditioner at home than younger people
(35–64 years, 36.9%; 18–34 years, 31.0%).
The same is true for respondents who lived
with another person (38.4%) compared with
respondents who lived alone (26.1%)
and for respondents with higher incomes
(>_ $60,000 before taxes from all sources within the past 12 months17, 45.5%) compared
with those with lower incomes (<$15,000, 22.1%; intermediary strata between $15,000 and
$59,999, 28.5% to 39.4%) (Figure 6.13).
Chapter 6
15 Perceptions of climate are discussed in section 6.5.5.
16 The results are not presented here. For more information, see Bélanger et al., 2006b, 2006c.
17 All following income figures are before taxes from all sources within the past 12 months.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
250
Figure 6.13
Home air conditioning, by income levels
Chapter 6
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Income
Percentage with air conditioning
Less than $15,000
15,000 – $29,999
30,000 – $44,999
45,000 – $59,999
$60,000 or more
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
East of
Quebec
North of
Quebec
Quebec City
Region
Central
Quebec
South of
Montreal
North of
Montreal
Montreal
and Laval
Region of residence
Percentage with air conditioning
Access to air conditioning also varied by region of residence: 5.4% in eastern Quebec,
24.1% in northern Quebec (south of the 49th parallel), 24.8% in the Quebec region, 28.4%
in central Quebec, 40.8% and 41.2% south and north of Montreal, respectively, and
44.6% in Montreal and Laval (Figure 6.14).
Figure 6.14
Home air conditioning, by region of residence
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
251
During heat waves, 56.0% of respondents used their air conditioning on a continuous
basis (57.6% fixed systems, 42.4% movable systems), 20.1% used it only at night, 21.0%
used it only during the day and 1.4% never used it. During heat waves, those who used
air conditioning the least during the night were 65 years old and over and had an income
of less than $45,000 (58.5%). The second group referred to respondents under 65 years
old with approximately the same income (75.5%). Finally, the third and fourth groups
included those with better incomes (>_$45,000), first those 65 years and older (79.7%)
and then younger (84.8%). Household air conditioning, particularly for fixed systems,
was the main reason given by respondents for not opening their windows at night during
heat waves.
Four out of five respondents owned at least one fan; 42.8% used them during the day
and at night during extreme heat, 31.8% used them only at night, 17.3% used them only
during the day and 8.1% never used them. Households with air conditioning showed a
lower use of fans at night, which was more common among respondents under 65 years
(35–64 years, 76.8%; 18–34 years, 79.6%) than among those 65 years and older (55.7%)
and among respondents with chronic neurological disease (61.2% day and night, 16.1%
night only, 16.5% day only and 6.2% never) than among respondents with other illnesses
(43.0% day and night, 24.9% night only, 22.5% and 9.6% day only) or who were not
ill (42.2% day and night, 34.7% night only, 15.6% day only and 7.6% never). Respondents
who used fans only at night believed their home insulation was less effective, and opened
their windows at night more often than other respondents.
Preferred location to cool down during heat waves by housing type
To cool down during heat waves, 62.3% of respondents preferred to remain at home
(30.7% in the home and 31.6% on the balcony or in the yard). Approximately half of the
respondents had access to an outdoor pool. Others (37.2%) generally went to public
locations outdoors; preferred places included beaches or locations beside other bodies
of water (15.7%), gardens or parks (9.6%), outdoor pools (7.4%) and places with air
conditioning (9.5%).
Compared to apartment dwellers, respondents who
lived in houses most often preferred to remain at
home to cool down either inside or by their private
pools in equal proportions. They were more likely
to be between 35 and 64 years of age, have children
less than 18 years of age and incomes of $45,000
or more than apartment dwellers. Home dwellers
most often lived in a building that that had been
upgraded since its construction—either by adding
insulation or by replacing doors or windows—and
for which insulation was perceived as very effective
in controlling humidity. Almost 40% had an air
conditioner (fixed, 23.5%; movable, 15.9%).
There were also substantial differences between
apartment dwellers living in small versus large buildings,
as shown in Table 6.4.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
252
Table 6.4
Proportions (%) for some characteristics related to residence
and behaviour during heat waves
Source: Bélanger et al. (2006b)
Among residents of apartment buildings with five floors and more, 60.5% remained at home
during heat waves and more than half of them stayed inside only; 10.2% went out on their
balcony; 25.9% had a pool where they lived. These residents were more likely than other
respondents to be 65 and older (37.7%) compared to home owners (14.4%) or dwellers in
smaller buildings (15.2%). One in two had no children and lived alone. Compared with all
other respondents, they were less likely to live in an apartment that had undergone major
repairs. With regard to air conditioning, 19.9% had fixed systems and 21.6% had movable
systems, for a total of 41.5%.
Residents of buildings with fewer than five floors were the ones who most often left their
homes to cool down during a heat wave (48.7%). They were also more often between 18 and
34 years of age (40.1%) than other respondents and had incomes below $45,000. In addition,
they were the respondents most likely to consider that the insulation in their homes was not very
effective in controlling humidity and were less likely to have air conditioning (4.3% fixed
systems, 23.9% movable systems; total 28.2%).
Running errands or participation in physical activity during a heat wave
Heat waves affected respondents differently with respect to their tendency to go out to do
errands (e.g. shop for groceries): 28.7% always went out to do errands during heat waves,
20.2% often, 26.9% occasionally, 15.0% rarely and 8.0% never. Respondents who went
out at least occasionally were more often employed (80.0%) than unemployed (74.0%),
students (74.4%) or retired (68.3%). Respondents who considered themselves in very
good (80.1%) or good (77.0%) health were more likely to go out to do errands during
a heat wave than those who considered their health to be average (69.3%) or poor (54.3%).
Respondents who did not use a cane, wheelchair or other self-help device (77.8%) were
also more likely to go out than those who sometimes (59.4%) or always used them (37.0%)
(Figure 6.15).
Chapter 6
Apartment dwellers
(less than 5 floors)
Home owners
Stay home to cool down
Between 35-64 years of age
With children below
18 years of age
No children at all
Incomes over $45,000
Insulation improved since
its construction
Doors or windows replaced
since construction
Insulation perceived as effective
in controlling humidity
Living alone
Access to air conditioning
Some characteristics
Apartment dwellers
(5 floors and more)
69.9
61.3
36.2
26.9
50.3
41.6
65.6
40.2
11.0
39.4
51.2
44.7
24.3
49.4
25.4
26.2
55.7
22.4
35.0
28.2
60.5
36.8
12.5
50.7
29.4
12.1
40.7
32.2
50.4
41.5
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
253
Figure 6.15
Likelihood of going out to do errands (at least occasionally) during a heat
wave in relation to the use of a cane, wheelchair or other self-help device
With regard to more intense outdoor activity (e.g. running, mowing the lawn) during extreme heat,
the response was: 14.4% always, 16.4% often, 20% sometimes or rarely, 28.5% never. Men
(60.2%) were more likely to do so than women (41.5%). Those 18 to 34 years of age (58.6%)
were more likely to do so than those 35 to 64 years of age (49.9%) or those 65 years of age and
over (37.2%). Students (68.0%) and workers (58.4%) were also more likely to perform manual
work and be exposed to the heat than those with less physical demands: professionals (49.3%),
unemployed (48.7%) or retired (40.5%). Respondents who believed that ECEs (such as heat
waves) had no effect on their own health (56.9%) were more likely to go out than respondents who
believed that ECEs had negative effects (44.8% a little, 44.6% moderately, 30.5% a great deal).
Use of sunscreen, sunglasses and hats during heat waves
When it was sunny, 64.7% of respondents often or always used sunglasses (11.8% sometimes,
23.4% rarely or never), 48.3% used sunscreen (16.5% sometimes, 35.2% rarely or never)
and 43.4% used a hat (14.3% sometimes, 42.3% rarely or never). When there was cloud cover,
48.1% used sunglasses (15.0% sometimes, 36.9% rarely or never), 34.2% used sunscreen (15.5%
sometimes, 50.3% rarely or never) and 31.0% used a hat (14.7% sometimes, 54.3% rarely
or never).
When it was sunny, women (76.1%) used sunscreen more often than men (52.8%). Parents of
children <18 years old (74.3%) used it more often than parents of children >_18 years old (60.6%)
or respondents without children (59.9%). Respondents with higher incomes used sunscreen more
often than those with lower incomes (72.8% with incomes >_$60,000, 52.7% with incomes
<$15,000, 61.2% to 67.7% intermediary strata). Respondents who often or always followed
preventative advice issued during ECEs (such as heat waves) (70.3%) also used sunscreen more
often than those who followed preventative advice sometimes (63.9%) or rarely or never (49.4%).
Gender (80.7% women, 72.1% men) and compliance with preventative advice (81.0% often or
always, 73.7% sometimes, 67.2% rarely or never) were also associated with wearing sunglasses,
as with the use of a car (80.8% air conditioned, 75.9% no air conditioning, 64.3% no car).
Chapter 6
0%
Occasionally
Always
Never
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Use of a cane, wheelchair or other self-help device
Percentage going out to do errands
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
254
Hats seemed to be worn more by men (66.7%) than women (49.0%) and those over 65 years of
age (61.1%) than those 35 to 64 years of age (57.6%) and 18 to 34 years of age (55.7%). It should
be noted that some behaviours had become ongoing practices among some respondents; they
used sunscreen, sunglasses or a hat even when it was cloudy. There also seems to be a high
correlation among these three preventative behaviours relative to their adoption (or not).
6.5.3.2 Suggestions for future adaptations
Air conditioning
The use of air conditioning has been increasing in Quebec for several decades. It has
grown from 4.7% of households in 1972 to 15.2% in 1993 to 30% in 2003 (ISQ, 2006c)
to 35.8% in 2004 (Figure 6.16).
Figure 6.16
Percent of households with air conditioning in Quebec, 1972 to 2005
Chapter 6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
Year
Percentage of households with air conditioners
Source: Based on ISQ, 2006c and Bélanger et al., 2006b.
The increase, which appears to have moved from east to west geographically, seems to have
started with the temperature warming observed between 1960 and 2003 in southern Quebec
(Yagouti et al., 2006) (Figure 6.17). Projected demographic trends for 2026 based on the
2001 census suggest that warming will be more intense in regions where population will grow
(ISQ, 2003b). Population increase will inevitably augment the need for air conditioning,
particularly because of the increase in urban heat islands associated with greater population
densities in southwestern Quebec (Giguère et al., 2006d). As a result, suggestions have
been made (Bélanger et al., 2006b) to monitor trends in population growth, heat islands and
percent of households with air conditioning to:
• clarify statistics collected on air conditioning (e.g. type of equipment);
• conduct periodic research on temperature changes in correlation with demographic trends; and
• add previous data to an interactive atlas that presents information on maps and graphs,
and that is accessible via the Internet to climate change managers and the general public.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
255
Figure 6.17
Percent of household air conditioning in 2005 and increases
in average temperatures (1960–2003), southern Quebec
Chapter 6
Source: Based on Bélanger et al., 2006b and Yagouti et al., 2006.
Those who are economically disadvantaged were less likely to have air conditioning in their homes.
In 2003, 15.8% of households in Quebec with incomes below $20,000 had an air conditioning
unit compared with 44.3% of households with incomes of $80,000 and more (ISQ, 2006d).
Because those who are economically disadvantaged may be in poorer health (Phipps, 2003), a
subsidy program for air conditioning could be considered for homes of the most disadvantaged
(including assessment of the space to be air conditioned, purchase, installation and maintenance),
especially if health of one of the family members is seriously affected by heat waves according
to Bélanger et al. (2006a).
During extreme heat, those 65 years of age and over are one of the most vulnerable groups
(InVS, 2004a, 2006). However, although they have air conditioning in the home more often
than those who are younger, they use it less frequently at night during heat waves. Identifying
the reasons for this would help in the development and assessment of appropriate public
health messages and interventions directed at this group.
Respondents who lived in apartments more often had movable air conditioning systems than
fixed units; fixed systems are associated with decreases in mortality due to heat (Dixsaut, 2005;
Jacques and Kosatsky, 2005) and provide greater comfort than movable units (Vadnais, 2005).
An estimate of the number of hours required for movable systems to reach a comfort zone
equivalent to that of fixed systems would make an appreciable contribution to public health.
The use of air conditioning in Quebec contributes little to GHGs and air pollution because the
power source in Quebec is hydro-electrical. In addition, the power demand for air conditioning
occurs during a low energy usage period; peak demand in Quebec is during the winter for
residential heating (Hydro-Québec, 2006a). The only other similar situation in North America
is in Manitoba; everywhere else, the use of air conditioning generates additional GHGs and
air pollutants.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
256
Housing insulation
Several respondents who perceived the insulation in their homes as ineffective in controlling
humidity lived in housing built before 1983 and before the adoption of the Loi sur l’économie
de l’énergie dans le bâtiment (An act respecting the conservation of energy in buildings); this
legislation ensures minimum performance for thermal insulation in walls and ceilings (Régie
du Bâtiment, 2006). More funding for an energy efficiency program—such as that announced in
the recent government action plan on climate change (Government of Quebec, 2006e)—should
make it possible to improve housing insulation. First priority should be given to economically
disadvantaged people, whether they are home owners or tenants, who live in buildings that require
major repairs (Bélanger et al., 2006b).
Perceived effectiveness of insulation in controlling humidity was associated with various
housing characteristics (e.g. not air conditioned, built before 1983) that may be related in some
way to mortality during heat waves (Last and Chiotti, 2001; Auger and Kosatsky, 2002;
InVS, 2004a). This perception could be a useful indicator in the area of public health and
climate change.
Solutions for cooling homes other than air conditioning and insulation
Respondents who had movable air conditioner systems or who did not have air conditioning
at all opened their windows at night during heat waves more often than those who had
fixed systems. In certain cases, opening windows may be sufficient to cool the home
(Dixsaut, 2005) as could other solutions not documented in this research, such as neigh-
bourhood revegetation (Giguère and Gosselin, 2006d) or the use of basements. In the
context of sustainable development, the efficiency and effectiveness of these types of
solutions should be explored so more diverse options for heat adaptation (versus only
air conditioning) could be assessed.
Neurological illnesses
Individuals with chronic neurological disease used fans at night more often during heat
waves than other respondents. This result is not surprising because their health may
deteriorate irremediably during extreme heat (Semenza et al., 1999; Green et al., 2001;
McGeehin and Mirabelli, 2001). Of particular note was the number of respondents in
this group who did not have air conditioning at home. The results of this study indicate
that socio-economic factors may contribute to this situation. On the other hand, fans
may be preferred over air conditioners for health-related reasons. More information
on this issue is extremely important, such as identifying the determinants for the use of
fans and air conditioners among this group. However, first priority should be given to
understanding what makes those with neurological disease so vulnerable to heat. Such
research would support the development of better adapted health care and services,
guide public health initiatives implemented during episodes of extreme heat, and likely
encourage the expansion of medical criteria and increase the lump sum allocated for
the purchase and installation of an air conditioner (maximum of $400) under government
programs for assistance with the activities of daily living (MSSS, 2003a).
People living alone
Individuals who lived alone and who were 65 years of age and over, economically disadvantaged
and/or had a chronic health problem, lived in housing without air conditioning more often
than other respondents. Each of these characteristics (including the absence of an air
conditioner) has been considered a “risk factor” during heat waves (InVS, 2003b). “Living
alone” could be a useful synthetic indicator for population studies on health and climate
change; this characteristic may also be available through census data (Pageau et al., 2001).
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
257
It would be desirable to examine, in more detail than in this research, the subgroups of individuals
who live alone and who are most at risk during extreme heat (Klinenberg, 2002), in addition
to identifying the services these subgroups would need to ensure their safety during ECEs. This
information could support front-line workers associated with emergency measures, and the
implementation and assessment of such measures. In addition, research to understand why
“reclusive” people or those who “feel alone” are difficult to reach would be a major asset in
identifying appropriate and timely actions to take during ECEs for individuals in this group,
whether they live alone or not. It would be important to distinguish between social factors
(e.g. support, socialization) and housing factors (e.g. location in the building, such as on the
top floor, or in a building with several floors) in relation to their effects on health during
extreme heat (Auger and Kosatsky, 2002; InVS, 2004b). The examination of various cultural
communities (Klinenberg, 2002) that are often grouped together in certain neighbourhoods
(Laverdière, 2001) would also add important information.
Running errands during heat waves
Respondents who usually use canes, wheelchairs or other self-help devices when going out
of the home rarely if ever went out to do errands (e.g. groceries) during heat waves, particularly
if they were seniors. The reasons they stayed at home were not collected during this research,
but it is likely that those in the Enquête québécoise sur les limitations d’activités (Quebec survey
of activity limitation) (ISQ, 2001) may be applicable—in particular, feeling insecure outside
the home, aggravation of health problems, the need for help upon arrival at the destination, the
use of non-portable self-help aids, unavailability of an attendant and the lack of adapted public
transportation. Such findings are of concern (Bélanger et al., 2006b) because they relate to the
additional stresses that may be faced by individuals in this group during heat waves, as well as
to the range of services that can be provided for their assistance in the absence of adequate social
support. From the point of view of assistance and public health, it would be crucial to collect
information on the needs of this group and propose a range of services that respects their physical
limitations and attendant fears (e.g. fear of opening the door to a delivery person).
Public places used during heat waves
To cool down during heat waves, people who live in apartments are much more likely to go to
public areas than those who live in houses. For this group, the most effective collective
actions to address the health effects of extreme heat would be financial support to municipalities
and neighbourhood organizations to (1) improve and conserve “free,” cool, public areas
located in urban environments (e.g. parks and gardens) and (2) implement a support program
for municipalities and neighbourhood organizations (Government of Quebec, 2002) to develop
the public access network to bodies of water. Over one million Quebeckers participate in
swimming and beach-related activities annually (Government of Quebec, 2002). Temperature
warming will increase participation in these activities as well as the size of beaches because
of drops in water levels (NRCan, 2002). Consequently, better surveillance and vigilance
will be needed to protect both the environment (e.g. erosion, pollution) and the population
(injuries and drownings.)18
Private pools
The number of private pools throughout the province is impressive: 31% of respondents had pools
at home compared with 24% in 1997 (NRCan, 1997). An assessment of their effectiveness
would be useful; however, filling pools will inevitably become a source of conflict during times
of water use restrictions. Regulating the use of water to fill private pools and implementing
mechanisms to ensure enforcement would also be potential adaptation strategies (Giguère and
Gosselin, 2006d).
Chapter 6
18 Drowning was the main cause of death during recreational and sport activities in Canada between 1991 and 2000
(Canadian Red Cross, 2003).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
258
Safety practices for sun exposure during heat waves
The adoption of preventative behaviour to protect against sun exposure (whether or not there
is sun) and the close correlation of the use of sunscreen, sunglasses and a hat (Bélanger et al.,
2006b) demonstrate the importance of habit in maintaining behaviours (Triandis, 1979; Van der
Pols et al., 2005). It also suggests that certain common factors, such as habits, will facilitate the
design, short-term adoption and long-term integration of a behaviour into daily life (Ory et al.,
2002; Solomon and Kington, 2002; Strecher et al., 2002). Currently, very little is known in the area
of the complex interactions among the factors that contribute to certain preventative behaviours
(e.g. sequentially, concomitantly). Information on the various factors that contribute to the
observance and reinforcement of safe behaviours related to sun exposure could complement public
health interventions. Improving knowledge in this little-known area could also significantly
improve the understanding of other environment-related behaviours (e.g. recycling, composting,
reclamation).
6.5.4
Cold Snaps
6.5.4.1 Current adaptations
Type of heating used in the winter
More than three quarters of respondents had access to only one source of energy for heating
their homes in the winter, primarily electricity (60.8%), while 22.2% combined more than one
source, particularly electricity and wood. The prevalence of wood heat (18.5%) was higher
among those who lived in houses (28.1%) than apartments (3%) and among those (23.6%)
with the highest incomes (>_$45,000) than among those (16.8%) with lower incomes (<$45,000).
The use of wood for heat is more frequent outside of Montreal and Laval (Figure 6.18). The
use of wood for heat is not affected by smog warnings or by the perception of living in a region
subject to winter smog.
Figure 6.18
Percentage and frequency of residences using wood heat, by region of residence
Chapter 6
0% 
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Region of Residence
Every day
Not every day
No wood heat
Percentage
East of
Quebec
North of
Quebec
Quebec City
Region
Central
Quebec
South of
Montreal
North of
Montreal
Montreal
and Laval
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
259
Caulking of openings
In the winter, 12.4% of respondents caulked all windows and doors in their homes
and 19.3% caulked some. This strategy was used more often by respondents living in
buildings built before 1983 (35.9%) than in or after 1983 (21.8%) (Figure 6.19) as
well as by respondents who perceived their home insulation to be ineffective against
the cold (55.9% compared to 24.1% when very effective), and ineffective in controlling
humidity (49.6% compared to 27.1% when very effective).
Figure 6.19
Prevalence of caulking of openings in houses, by year of construction
Chapter 6
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pre-1983
1983 or later
Year the house or building was constructed
Percentage Caulking Openings
Adaptation strategies for heating homes during cold snaps
During cold snaps, 27.7% of respondents at least occasionally added weather stripping
to their windows (e.g. rags) and doors (e.g. carpeting) in their homes. Inefficient
home insulation against cold or for controlling humidity seemed to encourage such
solutions, particularly among respondents who had never caulked openings in
their home.
During periods of intense cold, 23.3% of respondents increased heat during the day,
if at home (34.2% sometimes, 42.5% never); 33.8% of respondents at least occasionally
increased it at night compared with 67.1% who never did. The tendency to increase
heat during the day was greater among men aged 18 to 34 years and women of
any age, but particularly among young women (Figure 6.20). At night, it was more
common among those aged 18 to 34, allophones and those who had increased it
during the day.
More than 10% of respondents used a portable heater during cold snaps: 3% often
or always, 8.7% occasionally, 88.6% never. Respondents who used portable heaters
most often considered the insulation of their homes to be only somewhat effective,
or even ineffective, in fighting the cold. They also most often lived in a home built
before 1983.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
260
Figure 6.20
Tendency to increase heat during the day during cold snaps, by age
Chapter 6
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
18–34 years
35–64 years
65 years and older
Age group
Percentage increasing heat
Twelve percent of respondents used their oven to heat their home during cold snaps: 3.7% often
or always, 8.2% occasionally and 88.0% never. These respondents also used various other
strategies to adapt, particularly portable heaters.
Most respondents (85.9%) opened the draperies or blinds on sunny days during periods
of intense cold (6.5% sometimes, 7.6% never), while one-third at least occasionally closed
them when it was windy (17.8% often or always, 17.1% sometimes, 65.1% never). Most
allophones closed their curtains.
When temperatures dipped below normal, respondents—particularly men aged 18 to 34 and
women of all ages, but particularly younger women—used other ways to keep warm at home,
including wearing warmer clothes than usual (47.7% often or always, 29.2% sometimes, 20.3%
never), using a blanket (e.g. to read or watch television) (39.4% often or always, 30.5% sometimes,
30.0% never), or taking hot showers or baths (10.9% often or always, 28.3% sometimes,
60.7% never).
Finally, 52.7% of respondents reported using at least six coping strategies for keeping warm
at home (e.g. using a blanket) or heating their home (e.g. using the oven) during cold snaps,
while 37.8% mentioned three to five and 8.7% mentioned one or two (0.8% mentioned none).
Five groups of respondents used a higher number of solutions (i.e. women aged 18 to 34,
respondents who considered their home insulation to be ineffective in controlling humidity,
respondents who did not caulk the windows or doors of their homes, and respondents residing
in the socio-health regions covering Montreal, Laval, the Montérégie and the Outaouais).
Outings for shopping or intense physical activity during cold snaps
Approximately 50% of respondents often or always ran errands (e.g. groceries) during abnormally
cold temperatures, whereas 28.6% did so occasionally and 19.9% rarely or never did so.
Similarly, one third of respondents, or 33%, often or always engaged in intense, physical outdoor
activities (e.g. shovelling snow, sports), whereas 26.1% did so sometimes, 18.1% rarely and
21.8% never. Respondents who ran errands or engaged in intense, physical outdoor activities
were more often men than women, as well as those who saw themselves as being in good
or very good health. In addition, workers and students went shopping more often than people
who were unemployed or retired. Those living in houses engaged in intense outdoor physical
activities more often than respondents living in apartments.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
261
During such outings, some 75% of respondents always wore warmer clothing than usual. Only
44.4% of respondents always wore warmer footwear than usual. The most popular accessory
was gloves (74.3%, always), followed by neck warmers and head coverings (63.5%, always).
Face coverings were the least used (25.2%). Generally, those aged 18 to 34 and 35 to 64 (to
a lesser degree) used these adaptation strategies more often than older respondents. Use of an
automobile also seems to be associated with the greater use of gloves and warmer clothing.
No difference was noted in behaviour according to knowledge of the wind chill factor for any
type of outing during a cold snap.
Use of a remote car starter in the winter
More than one half of respondents (56.8%)
used a car every day, while 27.0% used
a car less than once per day and 16.2%
never did. The use of a remote starter in
the winter was 32.9% among respondents
using their car on a daily basis and 27.4%
among those using it less frequently.
More women (35.3%) than men (27.1%)
used a starter. Use of a starter was also
more common in the colder regions of
southern Quebec. Bélanger et al. (2006c)
reported that neither smog warnings
nor the perception of living in a region
subject to winter smog influenced the
use of a remote starter in the winter.
6.5.4.2 Suggestions for future adaptations
Wood heating
In Quebec, residential wood heating increased by approximately 60% from 1987 to 2000
(MDDEP, 2006b), particularly following the 1998 Ice Storm (Télasco, 2004). This trend
is worrisome because this type of heat is responsible for half of human-made fine particulates
released in Quebec. These particulates, like some gases generated by wood combustion,
can affect human health. Two factors should not be underestimated: the increased frequency
and intensity of ECEs (NRCan, 2002), which could encourage Quebeckers to burn more
wood, and the recent and future increase of the Quebec population in the regions surrounding
Montreal (ISQ, 2006f) where the prevalence of wood heating is already relatively high.
With a view to protecting public health, the trend toward heating with wood should be
monitored (Bélanger et al., 2006c). Additional information to characterize the exposure and
potential risk (e.g. type of equipment, year acquired) would be an asset. At the same time,
as suggested in a Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment feasibility study for
a program to raise awareness and replace conventional residential wood heating equipment
(Del Matto et al., 2004), it seems important to implement a strategy in stages, with various
actions to be taken jointly. These include (1) the adoption of national legislation prohibiting
the sale of wood heating equipment not certified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA, 1988), along with the application of enforcement measures; (2) the implementation
of an awareness campaign regarding certified equipment; and (3) the implementation of a
long-term national program for replacing conventional equipment, including recycling and
promoting various solutions to address the obstacles to using the new wood heating equipment,
such as the cost of purchasing and installation. Incentives to replace uncertified wood stoves
(set at $320 per stove) seem to be insufficient in some cases (Del Matto et al., 2004). More
generous support of low-income households so they can access new, less polluting technology
is also suggested (Bélanger et al., 2006c).
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
262
Winter adaptation strategies used at home during cold snaps
The combination of certain characteristics of housing and occupant income provides a
reasonable basis for identifying certain subgroups of people at high risk during periods of
intense cold (Wilkinson et al., 2001). With a view to public health and energy savings,
however, it would be best to develop assistance programs for improving home insulation,
more suited to the economic reality of less well-off Quebeckers (Hydro-Québec, 2006c),
whether owners or tenants (Bélanger et al., 2006c), and to implement attractive incentive
programs for energy efficiency.
The preventative caulking of doors and windows in the winter—a concrete, cost-effective
measure for conserving energy at home (NRCan, 2006c)—could be used more. A study
identifying the reasons for the use of caulking would help further messages about conserving
energy (Bélanger et al., 2006c).
The parameters of this study did not include identifying physiological and psycho-social
factors that affect strategies for keeping warm at home during periods of intense cold
(e.g. wearing warmer clothes than usual). From a sustainable development perspective,
further examination might be warranted because, although a major decrease in the number
of heating degree-days is likely in the future (compared with the period from 1961 to 1990)
(Chaumont, 2005), it is also possible that the physiological ability of young people to adapt
to the cold could be reduced and in turn this could reduce possible energy savings.
Immigrants, particularly those from tropical regions, must make greater adjustments to
extremely low temperatures compared with the residents of colder regions, who are much
better adapted to the cold physiologically, socially and culturally (Beaudreau et al., 2004).
These immigrants are among the most vulnerable in winter, particularly those of the first
generation. Included among their difficulties are language and lack of resources, often
including lack of family support; during emergencies, such as a widespread power outage,
their abilities to cope are further compromised by these difficulties (Bélanger et al., 2006a).
If they have not already done so, emergency measures officials should collaborate with
Hydro-Québec, which has already implemented programs aimed at cultural communities in
partnership with welcome and integration organizations. These active outreach programs
in several languages are aimed at communities of unilingual allophones (Hydro-Québec,
2006c). This approach may be increasingly important if certain ECEs increase in frequency
and intensity.
Simultaneous broadcast of wind chill index and clothing recommendations
The study by Bélanger et al. (2006c) did not measure understanding of the wind chill index
but documented the absence of behavioural response to it. It appeared that the wind chill
index and accompanying Environment Canada recommendations for clothing during intense
cold warnings play little or no
part in the choice of clothing
for outings. This may be because
adaptive behaviour depends on
many factors (e.g. attitudes, habits,
social and cultural influences)
other than knowledge (Fishbein
et al., 2001; Core Group, 2003).
It may also be because the
wind chill index is not clearly
understood. This index combines
two measurements—temperature
and wind speed—in a formula that
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
263
attempts to quantify a sensation (Tremblay, 2003), and that can vary by gender, age and
the body part exposed (Harju, 2002), as well as other factors, such as the state of health
(Beaudreau et al., 2004) and the geographic location of residence (Mäkinen et al., 2004).
The validity of the wind chill index among the general population had been questioned
(Bélanger et al., 2006c) on the basis of its development; just six men and six women,
aged 22 to 42, wearing appropriate cold weather clothing were exposed with only the
face showing (Environment Canada, 2001). Assessing the understanding of the wind chill
index and its impact on the use of appropriate clothing worn outside in the winter is
important. It would also be very useful to verify the influence and validity of this index
for the general public, including several age groups, socio-economic conditions (e.g. ability
to buy thermal clothing) and health conditions (e.g. heart, respiratory), and to identify
indicators of compliance with the clothing recommendations issued by Environment Canada
during intense cold warnings.
Use of a remote car starter
Four out of five respondents owned a car, and approximately a third used a remote starter
in the winter, particularly women (Belanger et al., 2006c). No information helped to identify
the reason for this variation by gender, such as a greater perception of cold among the
latter (Harju, 2002) or distinct clothing habits (e.g. hats worn by men). There could be other
reasons as well (e.g. the habit of idling and the popular belief that “it is good for the engine”)
(NRCan, 2006b). More specific research into determinants in remote starter use could clarify
this matter. The identification of determinants in remote car starter use could be useful
in developing initiatives to discourage idling (Bélanger et al., 2006c). Such research is also
recommended in terms of public health and environmental protection. Idling contributes to
atmospheric pollution which is a major cause of health concerns, given its effects on mortality
and morbidity, particularly among children, people with respiratory or cardiovascular illnesses
and seniors (Quénel et al., 2003)—all groups deemed to be highly vulnerable during ECEs
(MacCracken et al., 2001).
Smog warnings
Info-Smog informs the public of meteorological conditions that are conducive to increased
atmospheric pollution. It also gives advice on how to reduce the health effects of smog
and sources of pollution, such as automobile combustion and wood heating (Environment
Canada, 2006a, 2006b; Health Canada, 2006). This program was created in 1994; a
winter component has been included since 2001. The geographic area covered has increased
over the years and Info-Smog currently covers almost all of southern Quebec. The new
national health risk-based Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) is also planned for demonstration
in 2007–2008 (Health Canada, 2006).
Studies indicate that smog warnings do not significantly affect the behaviour of the population
where and when they are issued (Bélanger et al., 2006c; Tardif et al., 2006); they have not
affected the use of cars, remote car starters or wood heat in winter. A possible explanation
is that respondents most frequently using a car or wood heat live in regions where smog
warnings have been only recently introduced. However, respondents living in the greater
Montreal region act no differently than others and they have had access to the information
almost since its inception (in 1994 for summer smog and 2001 for winter smog). Identification
of the determinants related to the adoption of advice given in winter smog warnings could
improve the Info-Smog program. This being said, it is essential to invest in other concrete
measures to reduce atmospheric pollution, such as mass transit infrastructure and the
development of cycling paths (Government of Quebec, 2006a). In this regard, the recent
announcement in the Québec and Climate Change, A Challenge for the Future. 2006–2012
Action Plan is a major signal in this direction (Government of Quebec, 2006e).
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
264
6.5.5
Current Perceptions of Climate Change and Future Adaptations
6.5.5.1 Current perceptions
Extreme climate events and smog
The extreme climate events that were perceived as being the most likely to occur in each study
region (Bélanger and Gosselin, 2007) were cold waves (35.1% very likely, 45.1% moderately
likely, 15.3% somewhat likely, 3.9% not at all likely) and heat waves (27.4% very likely, 47.9%
moderately likely, 18.5% somewhat likely, 6.1% not at all). However, respondents residing in the
northernmost portion of southern Quebec viewed their region as far more subject to wildfires
than to heat waves. As for other extreme weather events, approximately 60% of respondents
considered their region to be very or moderately subject to storms; 50% to ice storms; 40% to
droughts; 20% to floods or wildfires; and fewer than 10% to tornadoes, landslides or avalanches.
Finally, 20% of respondents thought their region of residence was very likely to experience smog
in summer (27.5% moderately likely, 27.4% somewhat likely, 25.3% not at all), whereas 7.6%
thought their region was very likely to experience smog in winter (20.8% moderately likely, 28.1%
somewhat likely, 40.0% not at all); this was particularly true of Montreal and Laval residents.
Strategies to reduce greenhouse gases and adapt to climate change
Most respondents “agreed completely” with many of the 32 strategies (Table 6.5) put forward
to reduce GHGs, adapt to climate change and reduce the harmful effects of these changes
on population health and well-being (Bélanger and Gosselin, 2007).
Table 6.5
Greenhouse gas and climate change adaptation strategies
Chapter 6
Business and industry
• increase monitoring of commercial and/or industrial pollution
• increase monitoring of forestry practices
• increase monitoring of agricultural pollution
• ban construction of oil- and gas-fired power plants
Land use
• plant trees in recreational areas and schoolyards
• plant trees in city centres
• turn vacant lots and public lands into parks and gardens
• rehabilitate beaches and river banks
• prevent construction of houses, cottages and other residences in risk zones (e.g. flood zones)
• plant trees in large outdoor parking lots
Infrastructures
• increase recycling in all municipalities
• repair and improve water supply systems and aqueducts
• rebuild roads to make them more resistant to freeze-thaw cycles and erosion
• increase the number of municipal pools and parks with fountains
• introduce a consumption tax on drinking water
Buildings
• install air conditioning in homes for sick persons and seniors
• install air conditioning in hospitals
• improve insulation standards for residences and rental housing
• subsidize home air conditioning for seniors and low-income people
• subsidize air conditioning for daycare centres
• ban wood burning in the winter when smog is severe
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
265
Source: Bélanger and Gosselin, 2007.
On average, respondents agreed with 19 strategies; 4.2% with fewer than five strategies, 7.6%
with five to nine strategies, 13.0% with 10 to 14 strategies, 21.4% with 15 to 19 strategies,
29.1% with 20 to 24 strategies, and 24.6% with 25 to 32 strategies. Some results are presented
for transportation (Figure 6.21) and housing (Figure 6.22).
Figure 6.21
Transportation: Solutions to reduce the harmful effects of climate change
Chapter 6
Transportation
• increase public transportation (car pooling, buses)
• implement financial incentives for the purchase of “green” vehicles
• reduce the use of cars in large urban centres
• increase the number of transit shelters
• make vehicle inspections mandatory (seven years and older)
• expand air conditioning on buses
• make air conditioning a standard feature in new vehicles
• increase the sales tax on new vehicles
Social measures and research
• expand home care services for sick persons and seniors on low incomes
• increase the number of homeless shelters
• increase funding for health and climate change research
18.2
58.0
59.5
57.9
58.4
69.5
19.3
30.5
25.2
24.5
29.5
24.4
26.6
19.7
9.7
7.6
6.9
3.5
6.8
2.7
7.7
6.7
4.0
2.3
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Taxing the purchase
of automobiles more
Increasing the number
of bus shelters
Providing financial assistance for
the purchase of “green” vehicles
Making inspection of automobiles
mandatory (> 7 years)
Reducing use of
automobiles in cities
Increasing public transit
(ridesharing, buses)
Agree completely
Agree somewhat
Disagree somewhat
Disagree completely
Source: Bélanger and Gosselin, 2007.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
266
Figure 6.22
Housing: Solutions to reduce the harmful effects of climate change
Chapter 6
37.1
62.5
63.1
27.4
21.6
30.6
19.6
14.1
4.2
9.6
1.7
5.8
Preventing heating with wood
when there is smog, in the winter
Preventing construction of houses,
cottages or dwellings in areas
that are at risk (e.g. for flooding)
Improving the insulation
requirements for houses
and dwellings
Agree completely
Agree somewhat
Disagree somewhat
Disagree completely
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Source: Bélanger and Gosselin, 2007.
Almost 67% of respondents were in favour of at least three of the four strategies relating to
business and industry. Some 82% were in favour of increased monitoring of commercial and
industrial pollution, 78% were in favour of stricter controls over forestry practices, 67% were
in favour of increased monitoring of agricultural pollution and 53% were in favour of banning
the construction of oil- and gas-fired power plants.
Some 66.9% were in favour of at least four of the six land use strategies. Approximately 75% of
respondents wanted trees planted in recreational areas, schoolyards and city centres. Some 66% of
respondents were in favour of creating beaches (including along rivers) and transforming vacant
lots and public lands into parks and gardens. Slightly more than 60% were in favour of planting
trees in large outdoor parking lots in cities and also banning residential construction in risk zones.
A little over 70% of respondents were in favour of at least three of the strategies pertaining to
infrastructures. Specifically, 83% of respondents wanted more recycling; 76% were in favour
of rebuilding roads to make them more resistant to freeze-thaw cycles and erosion, as well as
repairing and improving drinking water supply systems; 43% were in favour of increasing the
number of municipal pools and the number of parks with fountains; and 32% were in favour
of a consumption tax on drinking water.
Half of the respondents were in favour of at least four of the six building-related strategies. Fully
66% approved of air conditioning in hospitals and homes for sick persons and seniors; 63% were
in favour of improving residential insulation standards; 52 and 45% were in favour of subsidizing
home air conditioning for seniors and low-income people, as well as for daycare centres,
respectively; and 37% were in favour of banning wood burning at times when smog is severe.
Close to 60% of respondents agreed with at least four of the eight transportation strategies. Some
70% were in favour of increasing public transportation; 60% approved of financial incentives for
the purchase of “green” vehicles; 58% approved of reducing the use of cars in large urban centres,
as well as increasing the number of transit shelters and introducing mandatory inspections for
vehicles seven years old and older. Finally, 36% favoured air conditioning for buses, 29% wanted
air conditioning as a standard feature in new vehicles and 18% favoured higher sales taxes
on new vehicles.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
267
6.5.5.2 Suggestions for future adaptations
Extreme climate events and smog
Perceptions of ECEs demonstrate that some events (e.g. such as cold snaps) are of concern
to everyone to some degree whereas others (e.g. wildfires) are contingent upon regional
geophysical and geomorphological characteristics. Overall, these perceptions also appear to
reflect reality (Klaassen et al., 2003; Warren et al., 2004; Yagouti et al., 2006). It is of note
that respondents did not mention flooding more often than other extreme events, given that
it is of concern for 80% of shoreline municipalities (NRCan, 2006a). Municipal and public
health officials have classified flooding as one of the three primary environmental vulnerabilities
of southern Quebec (Bélanger et al., 2006a). It is also of note that respondents residing south of
Montreal and in Montérégie in particular did not view their region as highly vulnerable to smog,
when atmospheric emissions from the two primary sources of pollution—transportation and
industry—are higher there than in Montreal itself (INSPQ, 2006a, 2006c). A better understanding
of the processes that influence the perceptions of ECEs and smog would be an asset to managers
who deal with these issues.
Greenhouse gas reduction and climate change adaptation strategies
Strategies related to business and industry
Implementation of the provincial government’s 2006–2012 Action Plan should make it possible
to positively address the concerns of the Quebec population, particularly through the consolidation
of climate monitoring systems (Government of Quebec, 2006e). The systematic monitoring of
environmental indicators (such as atmospheric emissions of primary pollutants) and their effects
on health (INSPQ, 2006c, 2006d) is also a step in the right direction. Similar to the existing
health-monitoring measures and the associated reporting required under the Public Health Act
(Éditeur officiel du Québec, 2006c), the Ministère du Développement durable, de l’Environnement
et des Parcs (Ministry of Sustainable Development, Environment and Parks) should improve
current monitoring practices with respect to the state of the environment and its determinants
to gain a better understanding of unfolding trends, as well as to support informed decision
making at the local, regional and provincial levels (Bélanger and Gosselin, 2007). Various criteria
for monitoring and reporting could be used, such as a five-year profile of environmental trends
in Quebec and thematic overviews (e.g., water, air, soil) that could be updated annually.
Monitoring data (e.g. health data, environmental data) should be mapped, and the maps made
available on the Internet.
Land use strategies
Land use regulations related to flood plains were tightened in 2005 through the Politique
de protection des rives, du littoral et des plaines inondables (policy on shorelines, coasts and
flood plains) (Éditeur officiel du Québec, 2005b) and through the requirement to integrate risk
maps into the Municipalités régionales de comtés (regional county municipalities) development
plans under the Loi sur l’aménagement et l’urbanisme (Act respecting land use planning and
development) (Ministère des Affaires municipales et des Régions, 2006b). The implementation
of these measures—including the development of geomatics at the municipal level and the
application of research findings on climate change impacts and adaptations, particularly with
regard to drainage in Quebec’s urban centres (Mailhot et al., 2007)—will help to characterize
and reduce regional vulnerabilities. Moreover, the increased attention being paid to revegetation
in urban centres and the various measures taken in this direction in recent years (e.g. inventories
of municipal tree stands and various regulations) will likely bring about improvements in
the management of urban forestry assets (Giguère and Gosselin, 2006d). These measures are
considered as adaptations to reduce urban heat island effects. Efforts to preserve, restore
or transform natural sites (e.g. beaches), as well as managed sites (e.g. parks), appear to be
crucial in terms of quality of life, particularly for apartment dwellers. Apartment dwellers
are more likely to seek out public places for respite during heat waves than house dwellers
(Bélanger et al., 2006b).
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
268
Strategies related to infrastructures
Quebec’s waste management policy for 1998 to 2008 targeted a recovery and reclamation rate
of 65% (MDDEP, 1998); by 2004, a rate of 49% had already been achieved (Recyc-Québec,
2004). This environmentally sound management approach is in line with expectations in the area
of recycling, and contributes to the reduction of greenhouse gases. Moreover, the initiation of
a major investment cycle targeting Quebec’s aging public infrastructures (e.g. viaducts, roads,
water supply systems) provides an excellent opportunity to establish standards and practices
that reflect the potential impacts of climate change (Bélanger et al., 2006a). Steps in this direction
will generate benefits for the next 50 years, particularly in the areas of health and road safety
(Canadian Automobile Association, 2006). However, far less consensus exists for other strategies,
such as increasing the number of municipal pools and the number of parks with fountains,
or introducing a consumption tax on water. It would seem that the first of these strategies is
aimed at apartment dwellers, the underprivileged, non-drivers, and in short those least likely
to have a home pool or the means to travel to recreational areas during heat waves (Bélanger
et al., 2006b). A consumption tax on water finds greater acceptance among those whose ability
to pay is greater (Villemaire, 1998) and among those from more populated areas where they
are more likely to have been exposed to various proposals for taxing potable water.
Strategies related to buildings
In the study by Bélanger and Gosselin (2007), the majority of respondents agreed on the need
for air conditioning in hospitals and homes for sick persons and seniors—two groups at high
risk during periods of extreme heat (Doyon et al., 2006; InVS, 2006). According to some
researchers (Giguère and Gosselin, 2006d), Quebec data on air conditioning in health facilities
are incomplete. Addressing this gap (including the condition of existing air conditioning
and ventilation systems) would be desirable for health protection and public safety.
Those most in favour of subsidizing home air conditioning for seniors, people on low
incomes and daycare centres were among the more disadvantaged respondents (many of
whom lived in apartment buildings)—in other words, they were the least likely to have home
air conditioning (Bélanger et al., 2006b). In 2003, for example, 15.8% of Quebec households
with an income below $20,000 had air conditioning, whereas this proportion rose to 44.3% among
those who had incomes of $80,000 or more (ISQ, 2006d). Such statistics argue in favour
of initiatives (such as air conditioning) directed at those who are economically disadvantaged,
some or many of whom are at risk of experiencing serious health problems due to extreme
heat. Also, among those most in favour of air conditioning were allophones; related housing
and socio-economic conditions may be an explanation (Citizenship and Immigration Canada,
2005; Leloup, 2005). Studies examining the heat adaptation strategies of various ethnic
communities would be helpful to increase knowledge about health and climate change, and
to optimize the support given to these communities.
The implementation of a more attractive incentive program for energy efficiency, similar to that
announced in the provincial government’s recent action plan on climate change (Government
of Quebec, 2006e), would help to improve home insulation and facilitate adaptations to heat
waves. It is hoped that measures will be introduced for persons whose dwellings require major
repairs, the case for 7.8% of all private dwellings in Quebec in 2001 (INSPQ, 2006d).
The number of households that use wood burning equipment has now reached 20% (Bélanger
et al., 2006c); the number of households using this form of heating increased by approximately
60% between 1987 and 2000 (MDDEP, 2006b). These are worrisome statistics from the standpoint
of air quality and public health (MSSS, 2006b), particularly because close to two thirds of
respondents in the study saw no reason to prohibit this type of heating during severe winter smog.
Closer monitoring of residential wood burning trends and their impact on human health is in
order (Bélanger et al., 2006c). Moreover, the determinants of burning wood for heat need to be
identified so public awareness campaigns can be improved.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
269
Strategies related to transportation
It is reassuring to note that the majority of respondents were in favour of measures to reduce
carbon emissions, including the use of eco-friendly transportation options, the acquisition
of energy-efficient cars and various other positive practices. This support should facilitate
government efforts to reduce or eliminate transportation-related GHGs (Government of Quebec,
2006e), which accounted for 37.4% of all emissions in Quebec in 2003 and contributed to a
host of other negative impacts, including human health impacts (Judek et al., 2005; Ontario
Medical Association, 2005). Increasing public awareness of adaptation strategies to climate
change constitutes a crucial step. It is very likely that those who drive a car every day will be
less enthusiastic about these kinds of transportation strategies than non-drivers or occasional
drivers. To optimize awareness efforts, initiatives should be undertaken to identify the primary
determinants of transportation choices; to estimate the air pollution associated with each of
these choices; and to evaluate people’s knowledge of the link between air pollution and their
transportation choices (Aubin, 2002). Few respondents were in favour of making air conditioning
a standard feature in new cars. This is an encouraging sign because air conditioning consumes
gas and therefore contributes to pollution
(Environment Canada, 2002). Still, motor
vehicle air conditioning trends should
be monitored, particularly in light of the
observation that people will probably
travel more as the cold season grows
shorter and may increase their use of air
conditioning due to rising temperatures
(Lafrance and Desjarlais, 2006). Only
one third of respondents were in favour
of air conditioning on buses. A study to
elucidate the reasons for this response
would be useful in developing marketing
approaches to promote greater use of
public transportation.
Strategies related to social measures and research
Fully 77% of respondents were in favour of providing more home services for seniors and persons
with low incomes; 62% were in favour of increasing the number of homeless shelters; and 56%
wanted to see more funding for research related to health and extreme climate events. In addition,
60% were in favour of adopting at least two of these three strategies—particularly women,
seniors, allophones, the unemployed, the economically disadvantaged, those living alone, apart-
ment dwellers, persons with chronic diseases and those who report their health status as poor.
These are the social subgroups most likely to experience social or economic conditions that make
it difficult to adapt to heat waves and extreme weather (Bélanger et al., 2006b, 2006c; InVS, 2006).
Relocation is not an option for many of these people; therefore, concrete interventions should be
incorporated into action plans, particularly in certain urban neighbourhoods (Laverdière, 2001).
6.5.6
Conclusion
From the community to the individual
Based on the study by Bélanger and Gosselin (2007), GHG reduction strategies that call on
governments, municipalities and institutions to take action tend to find more support than those
directly aimed at individuals. There may be many reasons for this. Some authors contend
that the public feels powerless in the face of a global problem of this magnitude and therefore
expects government and industry to find appropriate solutions (Dotto, 2000). Consequently,
people feel less involved and less inclined to change their behaviour. It would seem that most
people are prepared to support national and international initiatives as long as they themselves
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
270
are not required to make significant changes in their lives (Bord and O’Connor, 1997), sacrifice
their comfort for the greater good (Leiss et al., 2001), or incur costs. Finally, most people are
strongly attached to the status quo, and will often do more to maintain it than they will to improve
things (Rachlinski, 2000).
In fact, little is actually known about the cognitive processes that underlie the adoption of
adaptive behaviours in social and environmental contexts that are multifaceted (everything from
droughts to floods), multidimensional (from the local to the international), and characterized
by multiple vulnerabilities (affecting individuals, communities and institutions). Similarly
unknown is the nature of groups who prefer to maintain the status quo and of those who are
unwilling to pay to effect change (Gelbspan, 2000; Sandalow and Bowles, 2001). Finding
answers to these questions would surely help to advance knowledge in the area of climate change.
That being said, researchers are not starting from scratch. For example, it is known that individual
adaptation measures must be joined by societal and institutional changes to be effective (O’Brien
et al., 2004); that sustained Canadian leadership is needed and expected to ensure that everyone
is playing according to the same rules (Office of the Auditor General of Canada, 2006); and
that individual contributions (e.g. behaviour, responsibility) to climate change received too
little coverage in the Canadian media between 1990 and 2004 (Bouchard et al., 2005).
Because the media reinforce and amplify individual representations, Bélanger and Gosselin (2007)
recommend that non-governmental organizations, researchers, journalists, municipal and
public health managers—all those who have a key role to play—refocus the climate change
debate on consequences, including direct and indirect costs (particularly health sector costs)
(Crawford and Williams, 2006; Rittmaster et al., 2006). Such education and communication
efforts could potentially generate rapid results (Kempton, 1993). In the study by Bélanger
and Gosselin (2007), the respondents who were most accepting of the idea of anthropogenic
causes were also more likely to support a larger number of GHG reduction and climate
change adaptation strategies. Indeed, 70.4% of the respondents who felt that at least 30 of
the 32 proposed strategies should be implemented also believed that human activities were
causing climate change, whereas this proportion was only 28.8% among respondents who
supported at most four strategies.
6.5.7
Synthesis
In industrialized countries, the heat waves of recent decades, particularly those that occurred in
Chicago in 1995 and in Europe in 2003, have provided the impetus for a range of publications
that have identified the segments of society most at risk in situations of extreme heat. This
chapter examined how Quebeckers are adapting to heat waves. Because climate change does not
necessarily occur in a linear fashion, it is important to bear in mind that Quebec will still
experience very cold winters. For this reason, studies commissioned for this Assessment also
examined adaptations to intense cold. Some adaptations to extreme heat and cold are designed
to protect the health of the population, while others appear less effective in the long term. Many
of the adaptations, some of which are both possible and desirable, are already well accepted
by society while others continue to be poorly understood in terms of their link to climate change
or may be unacceptable for reasons that have yet to be elucidated.
Based on the results of this study and the literature on climate change, much remains to be
done to protect public health and the environment from the effects of ECEs that are likely to
become more frequent and more severe. It is important to continue to monitor both impacts
and better understand adaptations. The adaptation strategies proposed in this report are a step
in the right direction.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
271
6.6
PERCEPTIONS OF MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC
HEALTH MANAGERS
6.6.1
Introduction
By the end of the 1990s, municipal managers in Canada had indicated their concerns about
climatic changes (Municipalities Issue Table (MIT), 1998) and proposed measures to reduce
GHG emissions in partnership with all levels of government, the private sector and volunteer
organizations (MIT, 1998). The following sectors of concern were identified: water supply,
waste management, transport, operation of municipal equipment and facilities (e.g. recreational
equipment, social housing), energy consumption and GHG emissions (e.g. municipal regulations,
urban planning, zoning standards, public relations). Between 100 and 200 of the approximately
4,000 incorporated Canadian municipalities (in about the year 2000) were able to respond to ECE
events (MIT, 1998). The Green Municipal Fund, created by the federal government and managed
by the Federation of Canadian Municipalities, has supported some 350 projects19 since 2000
(Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2006), whereas there are currently 3,700 municipalities
across the country according to the Federation. Findings in Quebec are similar; only 93 of
1,110 municipalities20 (Ministère des Affaires municipales et des Régions (MAMR), 2005c)
are registered with the GES Énergie program (Government of Quebec, 2000, 2005b).
In terms of public health, the Climate Change and Impacts Adaptation Programme has
funded only 13 research projects relating to health impacts and human adaptation since 1998
(Government of Canada, 2005). In Quebec, MSSS did not join the Ouranos Consortium
until 2004. In 2002, very few public health professionals were concerned with climate change
(Bélanger et al., 2002). In southern Quebec, interest was piqued by the 2003 heat wave
in France, essentially to implement emergency measures for extreme heat (Giguère, 2005).
It is unlikely that the lack of awareness of the issue or general information is a key factor
in the reluctance of municipal and public health managers to be involved in climate
change issues. In fact, the media have widely broadcasted climate change information in
recent years, particularly because of the Kyoto Protocol. Several synthesis documents
(including some available on the Internet) have also been developed for managers (Isuma,
2001; Auger and Kosatsky, 2002; Gosselin and Grondin, 2002; Ouranos, 2004) and
are widely available in various publications and on Quebec and Canadian government
web sites. Consequently, other factors more incisive than awareness and general knowledge
of climate change would influence public managers in their decisions whether or not
to act on this issue, such as the degree of concern regarding such occurrences in their areas,
various conditions facilitating or hindering action (MIT, 1998; Canadian Public Health
Association (CPHA), 2001), as well as the degree of involvement by partners (Azzah et al.,
2002; Wittrock et al., 2001) and the community (MIT, 1999; CPHA, 2001). To facilitate
communication and collaboration in Quebec between municipal and public health managers,
both of whom are involved in managing the causes and effects of climate change, a better
understanding of their respective perceptions was deemed necessary.
Highlights of a study conducted in 2005 among municipal and public health managers in southern
Quebec are presented here. The study investigated the relationship between managers’ concerns
about climate change and its effects and their perceptions of the importance of planning mitigation
and/or adaptation measures to be taken over the next 10 or 20 years (Bélanger et al., 2006a)
(Figure 6.23).
Chapter 6
19 Examples: feasibility studies, pilot projects, field tests.
20 As of January 1, 2005, prior to reconstitution and pursuant to the decree of December 2004, there were 1,110 municipalities in
Quebec, excluding Aboriginal reserves, federal land, unorganized territories and Inuit land. That number increased to 1,141 as
of January 1, 2006, with reconstitution.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
272
Figure 6.23
Managing the causes and effects of climate change
Chapter 6
Biological exposure
at home, in the community
and in other environments
Microbes transmitted person-to-person,
by vectors (e.g. West Nile virus); toxins
and pesticides in the water, soil, air and
food; formation of pollens, spores, etc.
Ecosystems
Competition between
flora and founa, wetlands,
water, erosion, extreme
events (e.g. wildfires floods)
Individual, family and
social vulnerability
Demographic, cultural, economic,
occupational, health status, individual,
organizational and collective
perceptions and behaviours, lifestyles,
public services (including municipal
infrastructure and health)
Climate change
Changes to climate averages
and variability; increase
in extreme climatic events
(e.g. heat waves, cold
spells, freezing rain)
Study
Plan
Adapt
Innovate
Cooperate
Decide
Managing the
causes and effects
of climate change
Fund
Integrate
Assess
Disseminate
Source: Adapted from models presented by WHO and the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Committee on Climate, Ecosystems, Infectious Diseases and Human Health, 2001; WHO, 2001;
WHO and European Environment Agency, 2002).
In the context of organizational learning theory (Tebourbi, 2000; Berkhout et al., 2004), the study
findings provided some answers to the following questions:
• What socio-economic groups of people in their cities, municipalities or socio-health regions
do managers see as most vulnerable to climate change, in terms of health and the environment?
• How do managers perceive the frequency and severity of climate change in their regions
and in the province? Are they concerned?
• What regional effects of climate change are of concern to managers, particularly in terms
of health, civil security, the built or natural environment, infrastructure and the economy?
• How do managers perceive the need to implement, in their respective regions, specific
programs in relation to climate change? Why are these programs necessary?
• What actions do they feel have already been taken in their regions to deal with climate
change? What key stakeholders are currently involved in this area—locally, regionally
and/or nationally—or could possibly be involved?
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
273
6.6.2
Methodology
The study (Bélanger et al., 2006a) dealt with municipal and public health managers in
southern Quebec, representing more than 99% of the Quebec population (ISQ, 2000). It dealt
particularly with 15 of the 18 socio-health regions (Figure 6.12: excluding regions 10, 17 and 18).
Each of these health regions is served by a regional health and social services agency which
has been responsible for ensuring the delivery of local services since 2003 (Éditeur officiel
du Québec, 2005a). Each regional agency has a public health director—who works in close
cooperation with other institutional partners in the region (e.g. hospitals)—as well as emergency
measures, occupational health, environmental health and infectious disease officials. Each
of these professional groups plays a key role in the climate change file (Cassel, 1990; Royal
Society of Canada, 1995; Patz et al., 2000; Warren et al., 2004), due to the diversity of clients
that may be affected by climate change (e.g. seniors or the chronically ill) and the scope of these
health effects (e.g. social and mental stresses caused by catastrophes, heat stroke in workers,
water and food contamination) (Warren et al., 2004).
In 2005, there were 86 municipalités régionales de comté (MRC) (regional municipalities)
in Quebec, as well as 14 cities (including nine with more than 100,000 residents) that were
not in a regional municipality but exercised some of their authority (MAMR, 2005c). Forty
municipalities were used for the study. This choice was made to reflect the variability of weather
in southern Quebec, in coastal regions (e.g. sea level rises), agricultural regions (e.g. drought),
forests (e.g. wildfires), tourist areas (e.g. erosion of beaches, less snow and skiing) and urban
areas (e.g. heat islands) (Warren et al., 2004). All of the municipalities managed files related to
the effects of climate change, in particular those relating to development, urban planning and
agricultural land (e.g. plans, regulations); civil security; services and infrastructure (e.g. housing,
roads, mass transit, waterworks, sewers); culture, recreation and tourism; communications and
public relations; and administration (e.g. economic development).
A total of 70 health managers and 84 municipal managers were asked to take part in the study.
The response rate was 84.4% (58 health managers, 72 municipal managers); more than two thirds
of the respondents had at least 10 years of experience as managers. The interview questionnaire
was based on health and climate change literature (MIT, 1998; CPHA 2001; Fishbein et al., 2001;
Wittrock et al., 2001; Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2002; Academy for Educational
Development, 2003). To better examine the perceptions of managers, these key variables referred
to various psycho-social theories rather than a single one. The contents and validation procedures
are set forth in Bélanger et al. (2006a).
Three interviewers conducted the data collection by telephone (39 minutes average duration, by
appointment) from May 16 to July 8, 2005. The content of the interviews was coded using N’Vivo
software (Gibbs, 2002; Quality Systems Registrars, 2005). Two-way interaction between the coder
and the researchers or interviewers allowed progressive validation of grouping the data into
intermediate response categories (e.g. water management: potable water, wastewater, recreational
water) and preliminary descriptive generalizations (Huberman and Miles, 1991; Erlandson et al.,
1993). Finally, the thematic content (Paillé and Mucchielli, 2003) was analyzed based on the
following five criteria: internal homogeneity (consistent within a single category), external
heterogeneity (mutually exclusive or clearly different categories), relevance and comprehensiveness
of data, and explanatory productivity (construction of a logical chain of indications and evidence
to support the result observed) (Patton, 1990).
The second stage of the analysis was based on a theoretical organizational learning cycle (Tebourbi,
2000; Berkhout et al., 2004) (Figure 6.24). The learning cycle outlines the processes that
can help an organization learn from its experiences, guide its objectives and select the relevant
information (including the consideration of social, political and structural factors) needed
to resolve its problems (Tebourbi, 2000). The processes assist in the interpretation and
communication of decision-making knowledge, including the formal and informal mechanisms,
used in management and planning.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
274
Figure 6.24
Learning cycle
Chapter 6
External signal
Recognition and interpretation
of the signal
Feedback and iteration
Development of solutions
through experimentation
or research
Articulation and coding
of the knowledge
Municipal
managers
69 (100%)
62 (90%)
57 (83%)
33 (48%)
16 (23%)
6 (9%)
6 (9%)
1 (1%)
6
4
4
16 (23%)
7 (10%)
5
Health
managers
51 (100%)
48 (94%)
47 (92%)
38 (75%)
17 (33%)
16 (31%)
15 (29%)
9 (18%)
4
5
7
13 (25%)
3 (6%)
2
Impacts of climate change
Total number of respondents interviewed regarding
climate change impacts on public health
Negative impacts on public health in general
Negative impacts on general health
Negative impacts on physical health
Respiratory and allergies
Infectious diseases
Water-borne diseases
Enteric diseases
Cancers
Deaths
Other impacts on physical healthi
Impacts on mental health
Moral
Stress
Number of respondents
interviewed
120 (100%)
110 (92%)
104 (87%)
71 (59%)
33 (28%)
22 (18%)
21 (18%)
10 (8%)
10 (8%)
9 (8%)
11
29 (24%)
10 (8%)
7 (6%)
Source: Adapted from Tebourbi, 2000 (Figure 8, p. 71) and Berkhout et al., 2004
(Figure 1, p. 9).
6.6.3
Results
All respondents (municipal and health managers) perceived vulnerabilities in their regions,
whether environmental, socio-economic or health-related. All also reported regional
impacts, as a result of climate change, on the general population or more vulnerable subgroups,
on natural or built environments, on recreational, sporting or tourism activities, and on
the economy (Table 6.6).
Table 6.6
Distribution of managers, by number and percent, and the impacts
of climate change on public health in their regions, by category
Continued on next page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
275
Notes: As one respondent may identify more than one impact, the total number of respondents does
not correspond to the total respondents by category or subcategory.
i
Other impacts on physical health: obstacles to physical activity, dehydration/heat stroke, accidents,
high blood pressure and cardiac problems, chilblains, illnesses of unknown origin, respiratory problems.
ii
Other mental health problems : poverty, depression, passive-aggressive behaviour, post-traumatic
stress, suicide.
iii Other causes: pollution, tornadoes, winter temperature fluctuations, snowstorms, forest fires,
acclimitization, cold, lack of information.
Source: Bélanger et al., 2006a.
At the regional level, most managers felt that average annual temperatures had risen noticeably
over the past few years. They also felt that winters were not as harsh as they were in the past,
winter rains and fluctuations in temperature were more common, and snowstorms and the
amount of snow on the ground had decreased. Increases in the frequency and violence of climatic
events were more commonly noted than rises in temperature. Reference was often made
to events that occurred during the summer and winter, particularly heat waves and cold snaps,
heavy rainfalls or freezing rain (including their effects, such as flooding), and large variations
in temperature. At the provincial level, perceptions of these climatic events were generally
the same as those regionally. A majority of respondents felt that climatic events could be
accelerated by certain human activities, though not all were convinced that the climatic events
they perceived were due to climate change, nor did they did directly relate their observations
to ECEs that had occurred in recent decades in their regions or in the province.
Most municipal and health managers were concerned about the regional and provincial
impacts of climate change over periods of 10 and 20 years. Similarly, most managers
identified the need over the next decade to implement intervention programs related to
the effects of climate change. However, regional emergency measures aimed at adapting
to these effects have been relatively modest to date, are not uniform provincially, and
mostly deal with heat waves. Some respondents noted that the responsibility for and the
management of climate change files should rest primarily with regional municipal health
officials rather than with various organizational levels, as is the current situation.
Chapter 6
3
6
24 (35%)
11 (16%)
6 (9%)
3
8
5 (7%)
3 (4%)
3 (4%)
2
1
12 (17%)
Municipal
managers
2
7
27 (53%)
15 (29%)
11 (22%)
2
3
2 (4%)
4 (8%)
7 (14%)
2
2
5 (10%)
Health
managers
Increased vulnerability
Other mental health problemsii
Causes of impacts on health
Heat/smog
Water quality
Floods and landslides
Other causesiii
Variable impact
Little impact on general population
Other (habits and quality of life)
Positive impacts
Unknown
No impact on public health in general
Impacts of climate change
5 (4%)
13
51 (43%)
26 (22%)
17 (14%)
5 (4%)
11
7 (6%)
7 (6%)
10 (8%)
4 (3%)
3 (3%)
17 (14%)
Number of respondents
interviewed
Continued from previous page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
276
The following obstacles to facilitating the implementation of intervention strategies were noted:
• ambiguous messages from upper levels of government decision makers;
• lack of a mandate defining the respective responsibilities and roles of decision makers; and
• lack of financial and technical support, particularly for small and medium-sized municipalities,
to implement measures for mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate change.
6.6.4
Discussion
6.6.4.1 Rising average temperature in winter
The perception of municipal and health managers that average annual temperatures had not
risen noticeably over the last few decades on a regional basis and, to an even lesser degree
provincially, may be due to the microclimates of southern Quebec. These microclimates may
contribute to a reduced ability to detect “annual” variations that have fluctuated from only 0.5 to
1.2°C between 1960 and 2003 on an east-west trajectory (Yagouti et al., 2006). Furthermore,
warming is not necessarily linear (MacCracken et al., 2001). Compared with annual warming,
the average rise in temperature in the winter, which is corroborated in the literature (Warren
et al., 2004), was most often reported by managers.
6.6.4.2 Increased extreme climate events in summer and winter
The increased frequency and violence of climatic events
had more consensus than increased average temperatures,
both regionally and provincially. No region was exempt:
only the type of events differed, based on the geomorphic
characteristics of the area (e.g. strong winds and erosion
of shores in the east of the province, tornadoes and violent
storms in the west). Some climatic events were mentioned
more frequently, such as heat waves, major fluctuations
in temperature, heavy rainfalls causing floods and ice
storms. Overall, the incidence of these events worries
much of the Quebec population, particularly the many
summer floods that have affected more than 80% of
shoreline communities (NRCan, 2006a). The public has
also been affected by ECEs covered widely by the
media, including heat waves and various catastrophes
over the last 10 years, in particular the Saguenay flood
in 1996 (Warren et al., 2004), the Ice Storm in 1998
and the numerous wildfires caused by lightning in the
summer of 2002 (NRCan, 2002).
6.6.4.3 Contribution of human-made causes to climate change
Recent global warming of 0.5°C can be partially attributed to GHG emissions generated
by human activity (IPCC, 2007). Many managers seemed to be fully convinced of this, some
agreed but were not fully convinced of a direct connection, and some did not agree at all.
Some respondents appeared to have been influenced by the controversial media coverage of
this issue over the last few years (Villeneuve and Richard, 2001). The lack of clarity in the
debate on the causes of climate change is not without consequence; first, because decreasing
the emission of GHGs associated with human activities is important in reducing the rate and
extent of climate change (Warren et al., 2004); second, because this lack of clarity can affect
the decision-making process (Prochaska et al., 1995) by influencing the pace at which changes
in managers’ behaviour take place—from denying the contribution of human-made causes, to
“reacting” to climatic events when they occur and, then, to being “proactive” with regards
to both GHG emissions and the development of adaptation measures.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
277
6.6.4.4 Certainty about the reality of climate change
Not all managers were certain that they were observing a period of climatic change. It is difficult
to categorically state that changes already exist, and the controversy surrounding the causes of
climate change may have influenced the perception of some managers. Various factors related
to the organization with which they were affiliated may also have contributed; municipal
managers seem somewhat less convinced of the reality of climate change than health managers.
The sources of information preferred by municipal and health managers may have had
an influence on their different perceptions of the reality of climate change (Tebourbi, 2000).
Municipal managers primarily consult publications from government departments and
agencies, and economic development organizations21 (Ippersiel and Morissette, 2004) (i.e. a more
general literature focusing on the impacts on infrastructure or territory (MAMR, 2005b)),
while health managers usually refer to the scientific literature on the relationships between
certain risk factors (e.g. climatic variables) and morbidity and/or mortality (e.g. Patz et al., 2005;
McMichael et al., 2006).
The perception that climate change is in progress also has different implications for managerial
practices. In the municipal sector, the formal development of numerous procedures and
regulations specify what is to be done and how it will be done, and directives specify how
to proceed (Tebourbi, 2000). Legislation, policies and best practice guides often direct the
actions of municipal managers. Consequently, the information related to climate change must
be perceived (and then integrated) as being sufficiently strong, foreseeable and reliable to
justify the implementation of the procedures and regulations. The same is not true for public
health managers; the system allows for greater ambiguity or uncertainty, particularly because
it is mandated to protect public health from risks that may be incurred, even in the absence
of irrefutable evidence (the precautionary principle) (Chevalier et al., 2003).
6.6.4.5 Concerns about climate change
Most managers were concerned about climate change over a period of 10 years and others, with
some exceptions, over a period of 20 years. The main concern, regionally and provincially,
related to the health impacts of climate change. Some managers indicated the need to improve
public awareness. Few managers commented on actions that had been taken; the small budgets
allocated to this area are probably instrumental in this regard.
According to Bélanger et al. (2006a), no data are available on the portion of public
sector (federal, provincial and municipal) budgets in Canada or Quebec that are allocated
specifically to preventative environmental activities or preventative public protection
purposes. No category other than the allocation of public funds for pollution prevention
exists (Statistics Canada, 2000). This category included expenditures for such activities
as drinking water supply and purification; waste removal and destruction (and recycling);
and other expenses, such as soil decontamination, atmospheric pollution, environmental
assessments and administration of environment departments. This publication is currently
being revised, but the numbers have probably remained similar (i.e. approximately 4.5%
of the total public sector budget allocated to all of these activities, which are only partially or
not at all of a preventative nature). Of these expenditures, totalling approximately $10 billion,
66% was assumed by municipal administrations, approximately 21% by the provinces and
approximately 13% by the federal government. Allocation by province was not presented, but
it can be assumed that this proportion also applies to Quebec.
Chapter 6
21 This observation is likely. According to Ippersiel and Morissette (2004), the five main sources of information that
municipalities in Quebec consult or would consult are: (1) government departments and agencies and their publications;
(2) economic development organizations and their publications; (3) seminars, conferences and fairs; (4) associations
or non-profit organizations and their publications; and (5) specialized publications and print media.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
278
The situation is clearer for the health sector. In 2005, approximately $8 billion or 5.6% of
public sector budgets was allocated to preventative public health activities (Canadian Institute
for Health Information, 2005). The vast range of such activities covers all areas of health,
including food and drug safety; health and environmental inspections; health promotion
activities; community mental health programs; public health nursing services; measures to
prevent the spread of infectious diseases; and measures to promote and improve workplace
health and safety in public agencies. A breakdown of expenditures by province was not
possible. Specific data for Quebec for these types of expenditures are not available either
from ISQ or MSSS. It is assumed here, given the lack of information, that proportions (5.6%)
are similar in Quebec and the rest of Canada
6.6.4.6 Regional impacts of climate change
All municipal and health managers reported that climate change could have regional
impacts on the general public; more vulnerable subgroups; natural and/or built environments;
recreational, sports and tourism activities; and/or the economy. Generally, the climatic
impacts perceived by respondents referred to regional vulnerabilities that they saw as already
existing, whether environmental, socio-economic or health-related. Overall, however, the
impacts and vulnerabilities most indicated by municipal managers differed from those of
health managers. This is partially attributable to their respective duties and the legislative
framework within which they work.
Municipal managers must ensure that municipal services meet the diverse needs of the
community or region, particularly from the perspective of socio-economic development
(especially among elected officials) while taking into account an aging population, major
environmental issues and the globalization of markets (Soucy, 2002). A considerable number
of laws and regulations govern the activities of these managers, including the Municipal
Powers Act (e.g. water management, transportation) (MAMR, 2006c), the Land Use Planning
and Development Act (e.g. planting and cutting trees, shared agricultural use, erosion and
flooding) (MAMR, 2006b), the Environment Quality Act (e.g. waste management ) (Éditeur
Officiel du Québec, 2006a), the Act to amend various legislative provisions concerning
municipal affairs (e.g. hog farming) (MAMR, 2006a), the Civil Protection Act (e.g. civil
protection) (MSP, 2005), and the Municipal Code of Quebec (e.g. housing) (Éditeur
officiel du Québec, 2006b).
Public health managers are mainly accountable under the Public Health Act (Éditeur
officiel du Québec, 2006c) to protect, maintain or enhance public health and well-being.
Their focus is on a range of illnesses—their causes, prevention and treatment—and the
related risk factors, including pollution and environmental phenomena.
6.6.4.7 Need to implement regional programs specific to climate change
Some respondents felt there was a need to implement regional programs specific to the
effects of climate change over a period of 10 years. To date, very few measures have
been developed and those that have deal mainly with heat waves.
Decision makers in southern Quebec were greatly influenced by the heat wave in
France in 2003 (Giguère, 2005). This highly publicized heat wave demonstrated that some
members of the general public—particularly seniors and the socially or economically
disadvantaged—can die from heat. It also underscored the need to take quick political
and administrative action; to do so, however, first the actions to be taken must be
completely planned. Thus, plans were developed throughout the province to mitigate
the negative effects of heat waves, particularly for major urban centres (Giguère and
Gosselin, 2006d).
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
279
On the other hand, although heavy rains and their impacts on waterways, wastewater and
drinking water were often mentioned by municipal and health managers, few indicated they
had taken relevant action to include considerations of the effects of climate change. However,
flooding affects 80% of shoreline communities in Quebec (including Montreal and Quebec
City) and, on average, costs an estimated $10 to $15 billion per year (NRCan, 2006a). They
are, in fact, the most commonly occuring natural disaster and the consequences of which
can be major, as illustrated by the Saguenay flood in 1996 (Warren et al., 2004). Despite the
observed increase in ECEs over the last 15 to 20 years, the evidence does not seem to be
enough to motivate immediate implementation of adaptation programs integrating climate
change considerations. A similar situation applies to the road networks that are perceived
as highly vulnerable, due to increasingly common sudden temperature changes in the winter
possibly resulting in rains, flooding and damaged infrastructure (NRCan, 2006a).
The question that arises relates to the mandate of managers to implement regional programs to
better manage the effects of climate variability and long-term climatic change. According to some
managers, responsibility in this area falls to federal and provincial levels of government, and
to municipal organizations and public health branches. Some managers also felt involved, given
their respective duties. However, for authorities to become involved, their mandates in this area
must be clear and precise; this does not seem to be the case. For example, the guide to develop an
action plan for the renewal of drinking water and sewer lines, developed in October 2005
(MAMR, 2005a), referred only to the numerous downstream factors in this process (e.g. ability to
pay, opportunity costs, discounted costs based on the funding rate). A federal and provincial
mandate to adapt to climate change would have provided the necessary incentive and direction to
also consider possible upstream factors, including climatic factors such as heavy rains and flooding.
To date, political consideration of climate change seems centred on GHG emissions and
associated rising temperatures, including heat waves. However, increases in flooding and
snowstorms are serious climate change concerns (Warren et al., 2004). In Quebec, they
are also much more common and widespread than heat waves and have a major impact on
public health and well-being, and the economy.
Public service organizations in Quebec place more
importance on organizational innovation than on
technological innovation (Ippersiel and Morissette,
2004). The lack of capital and qualified personnel
for developing and using new technologies might delay
some decisions, but it would be likely that managers
and the public would be not be interested in investing
in such innovations, even if the necessary funds were
available. There could be greater publicity and better
use of various existing “no regrets”22 measures that
are perceived by managers as being already effective
and not necessarily innovative: for example, the
construction of dykes, retention ponds and highway
diversions; development of mass transit and cycling
paths; construction away from flood zones; public
health surveillance systems; public health emergency
measures training and simulation; and programs
on daily life and domestic life aids offered by MSSS.
Chapter 6
22 No regrets measures are those for which benefits, such as energy savings and reduced pollution, at least equal their costs
to society, regardless of the benefits stemming from the mitigation of the effects of climate change.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
280
Budget constraints were also mentioned by managers. Even “no regrets” measures incur
direct costs (e.g. specialized equipment for clearing icy roads in the winter) and indirect costs
(e.g. personnel). The amalgamation of municipalities could facilitate the implementation of
certain strategies for adapting to the effects of climate change (e.g. pooling of specialized material
and human resources) that exceed the financial capacity of many smaller municipalities. For
instance, the additional cost of building all-season roads (other than on permafrost) and bridges
was estimated, respectively, at $85,000 per kilometre and between $65,000 and $150,000 per
bridge (in 2001 dollars), for average increases of 5% in temperature and 10% in precipitation
in this century (Dore and Burton, 2004). However, it is unlikely that amalgamations will remedy
all regional program issues, such as the problems inherent in interaction between numerous
stakeholders during a disaster (e.g. values, training, varying procedures). With respect to
technological innovation, public services in Quebec rarely have access to funds for such
development or to encourage innovators (Ippersiel and Morissette, 2004). As early as 1999,
the Municipalities Issue Table (MIT) noted limited access to capital and limited experience
with external capital sources in relation to the funding of energy savings or GHG emissions
reduction programs (MIT, 1998). In the area of public health, it is primarily research funds
that permit the exploration of new technology and innovation (Bédard et al., 2003).
Unlike federal and provincial
government managers often
working at macro policy levels,
regional and municipal managers
are responsible for implementing
in the field and managing programs
specifically related to climate
change in their areas. Managers
identified municipal branches and
their land use and urban planning
services, public health branches
and environmental health teams,
as possible key players in dealing
with the effects of climate change.
They also remarked that the support of colleagues, leaders (elected officials) and the public
was insufficient. This adds to the difficulties faced particularly by municipal managers who
must ensure that actions taken are approved by the public (Ippersiel and Morissette, 2004) and
contribute to improving the services already offered, while reconciling economic constraints
(Soucy, 2002). Even with popular support for a large number of adaptations, managers have many
other considerations. For example, public health managers must work in close cooperation
with other institutional partners in the region (e.g. hospitals), which have priorities other than
climate change and are not necessarily convinced of its impact on health care services
because its impacts on health are not yet readily observable (McMichael et al., 2006).
Bélanger et al. (2006a) suggested it would be highly desirable to add a component on
reducing existing vulnerabilities to those actions targeted at mitigating GHGs and adapting
to climate change. This would facilitate viewing vulnerability not as the net result of
climate change once the adaptations are in place, but as a characteristic (such as available
income) or a condition (such as being disabled) generated by various social and environmental
processes and exacerbated by climate change (O’Brien et al., 2004). In their opinion, this
approach would solidify the integration of this “human” dimension as the cornerstone of the
entire process to address climate change.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
281
6.6.4.8 Comments on the validity and reliability of results
In this research, the rate of participation was 84.4% (n=130). Managers from various
activity sectors of public and regional interest were interviewed in the 15 socio-health
regions in southern Quebec to reflect the variability of climate impact in coastal, agricultural,
forestry, tourist and urban areas. Respondents included public health directors, emergency
measures officials, occupational health officials, environmental health officials and
infectious disease officials from health and social services agencies in each of the 15 regions.
They also included municipal managers from 40 of the 86 municipalités régionales
de comtés (MRC) and 14 cities that would be concerned with land-use planning (including
agricultural), civil protection, services and infrastructure, culture, recreation and tourism,
communications and public relations, and administration. This sample includes managers
who play key roles in the area of climate change in the various sectors of southern
Quebec’s 15 regions.
Consideration was given to whether some managers answered the questions so that their
statements would be in keeping with media coverage on climate change, particularly
in the context of debates over the Kyoto Protocol (Paulhus, 1991). However, Bélanger
et al. (2006c) believe that the influence of media coverage in favour of ratifying the
Kyoto Protocol in Quebec has had little influence on the data for the following reasons.
First, distribution of responses covered a wide range of possibilities (e.g. from completely
“for” to completely “against” the idea that climate change is a reality). Second, some
managers did not hesitate to indicate their scepticism about the actual reality of climate
change. Before the interviews were concluded, views on the reality of climate change
were confirmed and, if needed, responses were clarified.
It is possible that one-on-one interviews, or longer telephone interviews, would have
allowed for a more detailed response to certain questionnaire topics, such as existing
vulnerabilities or obstacles to the implementation of specific climate change programs.
However, this is highly unlikely for the following reasons. During data collection,
the information provided a diminishing return and the data saturated (which means
that little or no new information showed up from interviewees after the initial period,
a methodological criterion used to assess a qualitative survey’s validity) (Deslauriers,
1991). In addition, although increased ECEs were noted as significant, as was the
rise in winter temperature (based on certain climatic indicators, such as rain, snow
cover), few managers considered this information as significant and sufficiently
predictable to include climate change issues in their agendas. Apart from heat wave
plans, very few new measures are currently in place to systematically mitigate or
counter the impacts of climate change.
This situation is not surprising (Berkhout et al., 2004). Evidence of climate change is
not readily apparent because the signal of such change is “muddied” by natural climate
variability (increased frequency and severity of existing situations). In addition, the
interpretation of that signal depends on specialists outside the organizations with which
managers are associated, and these specialists use complex mathematical modelling
that is not familiar to managers. At this stage of evolving knowledge, the specialists
(scientists) cannot provide, with absolute certainty, exact responses to crucial questions
managers would ask about the scope and timing of climate changes. Therefore, it is
difficult for municipal and health managers to translate the signals of climate change
into concrete action.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
282
6.6.5
Synthesis
Based on the preceding findings, Bélanger et al. (2006a) inquired if immediate action
on climate change was possible—considering that currently the scope of its effects is more
expected than experienced, and its effects will be most evident in populations that for
various other reasons are already vulnerable. In an affirmative response, they put forward
a “no regrets” intervention strategy, adapted for use by municipalities and public health
agencies. It integrates various proven methods for preventing the negative effects of climate
change and includes the following five components.
1. Clarify the mandate for consideration of climate change
Federal and provincial levels of government must present a clear, consistent message about
climate change, including a clear definition of the mandates and roles of the parties involved
in addressing this issue. According to interviewees, this is necessary for municipal and
public health managers to feel that they can proceed with implementing concrete measures
and, as required, start internal processes to develop innovative responses. To support
managers, this message should likely be in the form of a legal obligation to consider the risks
of climate change in the decision-making processes of health and social services agencies,
municipalities and provincial departments.
2. Benefit from the present cycle of investment in public infrastructure
Under the present cycle of investment in public infrastructure, standards and practices
that reflect the possible impact of climate change should be adopted. Several adaptations to
climate change would involve improvements to infrastructures, often those with a life span
of 30 to 50 years (e.g. water treatment plants, buildings, roads). A cycle of major investment
in Canada is beginning as a result of aging infrastructures, many having been constructed
more than 40 years ago. Great opportunities are available at this time for action in the area
of climate change, at minimal additional cost. Taking this opportunity will have beneficial
effects for the next 50 years.
3. Support strengthened standards, procedures and organizational routines
Standards, procedures and organizational routines should be strengthened, particularly
by implementing training to develop skills (e.g. risk assessment, including maps of risk
areas), developing intervention protocols or structured guides that are easy to use,
and creating ad hoc provincial committees with various experts and managers with
field experience who can provide technical assistance to disadvantaged areas facing
uncommon situations.
4. Transfer and share knowledge more effectively
Knowledge about R&D activities, particularly those undertaken to date within Ouranos,
should become more widely available. This transfer of knowledge would facilitate decision
making and the definition of standards and procedures that could be used locally by
organizations and municipalities throughout Quebec. This approach would help to remove
the “high-tech cloud” that seems to surround the climate sciences in the minds of managers.
Some adaptations to climate change have already been implemented by local authorities as
local and regional interventions to address issues other than climate change. The knowledge
gained by sharing “know-how” in this area could be a significant asset for those who do not
have the expertise or resources to implement climate change adaptations.
5. Raise public awareness of climate change
The public and elected officials must be aware of current and future climate change
issues so that initiatives taken by managers receive timely support. A structured, long-term
program to raise public awareness would be a valuable contribution to taking action on
climate change.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
283
6.7
CONCLUSION
The first Canada Country Study: Climate Impacts and Adaptation (Bergeron et al.,
1997) included a chapter on Quebec, which incorporated a health component. The report
concluded that information on impacts and adaptations about health and the effects
of climate change were poor or sketchy. Several recommendations were made, the
first being:
“Initiate multidisciplinary studies
to quantitatively assess the
direct impacts of oppressive
heat waves, intense cold
waves and winter storms on
morbidity and human mortality
and on the social behaviour
of people living in urban and
semi-urban environments
in Quebec.” (p. 196)
It has taken almost 10 years since the study to implement this recommendation; the
summary results are presented in this chapter in brief. Since the study, the base of
scientific knowledge in Quebec has grown significantly, and the understanding of climate
change issues in Canada and globally has evolved. Therefore, the expected scope of
certain effects can be estimated, and preparations for the required adaptations can be
made immediately.
With regard to southern Quebec, these effects are likely to have a negative effect on
health; the effects appear be major in scope, if judged by the simulated future deaths
presented here. In absolute number of deaths per year, there would be an increase of
150 deaths per year by 2020, 550 annual deaths by 2050 and 1,400 by 2080 in southern
Quebec. This is likely a lower value, considering the range of expected impacts. The
simulations do not take into account the fact that the Quebec population will age considerably
during that period; the percentage of people aged 65 and over (who are much more
sensitive to climate variations) will more than double during that period. These estimates
also do not include increases in mortality from extreme weathers events such as heat
waves or storms, or a possible future outbreak of water-, vector- or food-borne infectious
diseases. Other illnesses related to climate change have not yet been accounted for.
It is predicted that the general health of the population could further deteriorate; for
example, the current epidemic of obesity and diabetes—conditions that increase vulnerability
to the effects of climate change—could also complicate this picture over 20 or 30 years.
These simulations also assume that GHGs will be stabilized at twice the current level,
which may be considered optimistic. Important impacts are also expected in Quebec’s
northern regions; these are presented in Chapter 7, Health Impacts of Climate Change
in Canada’s North.
In comparison with the preceding estimates of mortality, traffic accidents kill some
700 people a year in Quebec, while approximately 6,000 are seriously injured (Société
de l’assurance automobile du Québec, 2006). Major programs are directed toward
prevention of traffic accidents and the mitigation of their consequences, and the costs
of these accidents to society are hundreds of millions of dollars each year (Société de
l’assurance automobile du Québec, 2006). The negative health effects of climate change
are not yet of the same scope, but could be in 30 or 40 years according to the simulations,
or possibly earlier.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
284
The good news is that much of the expected effects can be minimized and even prevented.
Just as traffic injuries have fallen by 60% over 25 years because of effective awareness
and prevention programs directed to the public and involving institutions across all sectors,
it is possible to act as effectively with regard to the effects of climate change. This
chapter has outlined a number of opportunities and examples that can be supported and
reinforced that confirm that Quebec has many of the tools and means to undertake such
a challenge.
The other good news is that Quebec has begun to take action in the last few years in certain
areas that will be useful in adapting to climate change. The provincial 2006–2012 action
plan on climate change (Government of Quebec, 2006e) and most of its planned measures are
generally supported by the population. These province-wide measures include the northern
regions where the majority of Aboriginal and Inuit populations reside.
The research results and recommendations emanating from the research projects commissioned
for this Assessment and reported in this chapter have already helped to raise awareness
among health officials in Quebec about the need to implement concrete measures.
The importance of the health research program (and the dissemination of this research)
for the period 2006 to 2009 supported by Ouranos with INSPQ, MSSS, Health Canada,
Environment Canada and university researchers must be noted. Some significant measures
to reinforce health surveillance during ECEs and heat waves are also planned for this
same period. A program for promoting cool islands in urban areas has also been announced,
as have efforts to upgrade ventilation and air conditioning in health care establishments.
Finally, a program to train health care providers is planned. Under the safety of people
and property component of the action plan, the government also recently put in place
a program to prevent and minimize the impact of major natural hazards. The approximately
$75 million program (Government of Quebec, 2006b), administered in collaboration
with municipalities and regional stakeholders, will address problem situations related
to coastal erosion, flooding and landslides. This initiative will guide all future planning
in regards to infrastructure and buildings.
A number of sectors of society have already begun work on adaptation. At the municipal
and provincial level, the priority issue is the reduction of GHG emissions, because no
new or existing adaptation measures will be effective if action is not taken now to stabilize
the future climate. Cities and towns, for example, are capturing the gas emitted by sanitary
landfills, taking preventative measures to reduce emissions through changes in zoning and
incorporating weather emergencies into emergency plans. Businesses are buying hybrid
vehicles, working to lower trucks’ maximum speed to save gasoline and reduce GHGs,
replacing trucks by maritime transport, and moving towards geothermal heating systems.
There is a long list of such initiatives, including the future carbon exchange in Montreal
and the sustainable development and climate change response plan to be released in the near
future by Quebec’s health network.
Still, programs remain to be defined, systematized, solidly budgeted and implemented.
These programs must also be directed in particular to the people and communities who
need or will need them and to those who do not or will not have the means of funding
required infrastructures, services or other adaptations. Great differences, based on
income and state of health, must be taken into account as well, as shown in this chapter
with regard to access to air conditioning and pools during heat waves and adequate
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
285
heat during cold snaps. Differences in behaviours
that vary according to age, gender, habits,
ethnic origin and/or social environments must
also be taken into account, particularly for
effective awareness campaigns and warnings.
With these considerations, an integrated
public health program on adaptations to climate
change can be realized. Many other factors
that are brought forward in this chapter also
warrant consideration. Most adaptations
to climate change are interventions that have
already been implemented (or could be imple-
mented) by existing departments, agencies
and local or regional municipalities. Nevertheless,
these interventions exist for reasons other
than the effects of climate change, and must be
adjusted, better targeted and strengthened to
address these effects.
Climate change presents a challenge of societal equity, between generations and regions,
between the disabled and the able-bodied, and between the rich and the poor. It also
presents the challenge of global equity. The World Health Organization recently reported
that climate change already results in the death of more than 150,000 people each year,
primarily in developing countries that cannot afford the infrastructure needed to address
its effects or reduce GHGs, which are predominantly generated by the developed and
wealthier countries, including Canada (Basu, 2005).
While investments in adaptation are on the rise, a single ingredient still seems to be
lacking in order to maximize the opportunities present in all sectors of society: a clear
and unequivocal message from senior levels of government regarding the need to think
“adaptation” to the effects of climate change and a legal obligation for institutions to consider
this in their daily decisions for the next two or three generations. The public in Quebec
continues to deem this issue a very important one (Léger Marketing, 2006), as it has for
several years.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
286
6.8
REFERENCES
Academy for Educational Development. (2003). Behavioral determinants inter-working group
meeting. Retrieved February 23, 2006, from http://www.coregroup.org/working_groups/
Determinants_meeting_rpt0903.pdf
Agence de développement de réseaux locaux de services de santé et de services sociaux. (2003). Algues
bleues: Cyanobactéries [Blue-green algae: Cyanobacteria]. Retrieved March 14, 2005, from
http://www.regie-monteregie.gouv.qc.ca/Menu_Gauche/4-Publications/6-Dépliants_Guides_
Outils_Information/Sante_Environnementale/DSP_pub_Depliant_cyanobacteries_fr.pdf
Agence de la santé et des services sociaux de la Montérégie (ASSSM). (2002). Protéger la santé
[Health protection]. Retrieved April 11, 2006, from http://www.rrsss16.gouv.qc.ca/
santepublique/protection/environnement/Qualiteairexterieur/tqhp/infopro/fiches/Prot%
E9ger%20la%20sant%E9.pdf
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. (2003). Algae, cyanobacteria and water quality. Retrieved
June 15, 2006, from http://www.agr.gc.ca/pfra/water/algcyano_f.htm
Akaike, H. (1973). Theory and an extension of the maximum likelihood principal. In B.N. Petrov,
and F. Csaki (Eds.), International symposium on information theory. Budapest, Hungary:
Akademiai Kaiado.
Alavi, A., and Beaumont, J-F. (2003). Evaluation and adjustment for non-response in the Canadian
Labour Force Survey. Retrieved February 10, 2006, from http://www.statcan.ca/bsolc/english/
bsolc?catno=11-522-X20030017598
Albert, C., Proulx, R., and Richard, P. (2006). Chaleur accablante et usage de médicaments:
Étude exploratoire en Estrie [Extreme heat and medication use: Exploratory study in the
Eastern Townships]. Bulletin d’information en santé environnementale (BISE), 17(3), 5–8.
Retrieved December 4, 2006, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/pdf/bulletins/bise/BISE-17-3.pdf
American Water Works Association. (1999). Manual of water supply practices—M48: Waterborne
pathogens (1st ed.). Denver: Author.
Aubin, B. (2002, December 15). Inquiets, mais pas encore assez [Worried, but not worried
enough yet]. L’actualité.
Auger, N., and Kosatsky, T. (2002). Chaleur accablante. Mise à jour de la littérature concernant
les impacts de santé publique et proposition de mesures d’adaptation [Extreme heat.
Update on literature regarding effects on public health and proposed adaptation measures].
Montréal: Régie régionale de la santé et des services sociaux de Montréal-Centre.
Auger, P., Verger, P., Dab, W., Guerrier, P., Lachance, A., et al. (2003). Sinistres naturels et accidents
technologiques [Natural disasters and technological accidents]. In M. Gérin, P. Gosselin, S. Cordier,
C. Viau, P. Quénel, et al. (Eds.), Environnement et santé publique: Fondements et pratiques
[Environment and public health: Foundations and practices] (pp. 517–535). Montréal and Paris:
Édisem and Éditions Tec et Doc.
Azzah, J., Lemmen, D., et al. (2002). Final Report on Federation of Canadian Municipalities municipal
infrastructure risk project: Adapting to climate change. Retrieved February 16, 2006, from
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/app/filerepository/BF7416415FCF45F4A6146DE5B6D1EF97.pdf
Basu, P. (2005). Third world bears brunt of global warming impacts. Retrieved August 31, 2006,
from http://www.news.wisc.edu/11878.html
Beaudreau, P., Besancenot, J.P., Caserio-Schönemann, C., Cohen, J.C., Dejour-Salamanca, D., et al. (2004).
Froid et santé: Éléments de synthèse bibliographique et perspectives [Cold and health: Summary
bibliography and perspectives]. France: Institut national de veille scientifique. Retrieved May 15,
2006, from http://www.invs.sante.fr/publications/2004/froid_et_sante/rapport_froid_et_sante.pdf
Bédard, Y., Gosselin, P., Rivest, S., Proulx, M-J., Nadeau, M., et al. (2003). Integrating GIS components
with knowledge discovery technology for environmental health decision support. International
Journal of Medical Informatics, 70(1), 79–94.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
287
Bélanger, D., and Gosselin, P. (2007). Changements climatiques au Québec méridional: Perceptions
de la population générale et suggestions d’adaptations futures [Climate change in southern
Quebec: Perceptions of the general public and suggestions for future adaptations].
Québec: Institut national de santé publique du Québec. Retrieved March 15, 2007, from
http://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/default.asp?E=p&Theme=8
Bélanger, D., Gosselin, D., and Lebel, G. (2002). Tendances, initiatives et besoins dans le domaine
de la surveillance en protection de la santé [Trends, initiatives and needs in health protection
surveillance]. In Bilan et perspectives en matière de surveillance en protection de la santé.
Comité d’orientations stratégiques en matière de surveillance (COSMAS). Québec: Ministère
de la Santé et des services sociaux.
Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., and Poitras, P. (2006a). Changements climatiques au Québec méridional:
Perceptions des gestionnaires municipaux et de la santé publique [Climate change in southern
Quebec: Perceptions of municipal and public health managers]. Québec: Institut national
de santé publique du Québec. Retrieved October 15, 2006, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/
publications/default.asp?E=p&Theme=8
Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., Valois, P., and Abdous, B. (2006b). Vagues de chaleur au Québec méridional:
Adaptations actuelles et suggestions d’adaptations futures [Heat waves in southern Quebec:
Current and proposed future adaptations]. Québec: Institut national de santé publique
du Québec. Retrieved October 15, 2006, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/
default.asp?E=p&Theme=8
—–. (2006c). Vagues de froid au Québec méridional: Adaptations actuelles et suggestions d’adaptations
futures [Cold snaps in southern Quebec: Current and proposed future adaptations].
Québec: Institut national de santé publique du Québec. Retrieved October 15, 2006, from
http://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/default.asp?E=p&Theme=8
Bergeron, L., Lacroix, J., and Vigeant, G. (Eds.)(1997). Canada Country Study, Volume V. Responding
to global climate change in Quebec. Environment Canada. Retrieved January 15, 2008,
from http://dsp-psd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/En56-119-3-1997-1E.pdf
Berkhout, F., Hertin, J., and Gann, D.M. (2004). Learning to adapt: Organisational adaptation
to climate change impacts. Tyndall Centre working paper, no. 47. Brighton, U.K.:
Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research.
Bord, R.J., and O’Connor, R.E. (1997). The gender gap in environmental attitudes: The case
of perceived vulnerability to risk. Social Science Quarterly, 78(4), 586–593.
Bouchard, L., Roy, J.F., Krewski, D., Lemyre, L., Brand, K., et al. (2005). Projet 1.2.2: Analyse
de contenu. Abridged version of the masters thesis of Roy, J.F. (2004). L’amplification
sociale du risque: Les changements climatiques dans la presse écrite au Canada
1990–2004 [Social amplification of risk: Climate change in the print media in
Canada 1990–2004]. Faculté des études supérieures et postdoctorales, département de
sociologie, Université d’Ottawa. In D. Krewski, L. Lemyre, L. Bouchard, K. Brand,
C. Dallaire, et al. (2005), Public perception and acceptable levels of health risk
among Canadians. Ottawa.
Bouden, M., Moulin, B., Gosselin, P., Back, C., Doyon, B., et al. (2005). The geosimulation of
West Nile virus infection on the basis of climate: A tool for risk management in public health.
Paper prepared for C-CIARN conference, Adapting to climate change in Canada 2005:
Understanding risks and building capacity, Montréal, QC. Retrieved June 13, 2006, from
http://www.adaptation2005.ca/posters/bouden_e.html
Canadian Automobile Association. (2006). En route vers un environnement et un avenir sains
[Driving towards a cleaner environment – a healthier future]. Retrieved January 17, 2007,
from http://www.caa.ca/eco-mobility/francais/pdf/CAA_En_Route.pdf
Canadian Cancer Society. (2005). Canadian cancer statistics 2005. Toronto: Canadian Cancer Society/
National Cancer Institute of Canada.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
288
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME). (2004). From source to tap: Guidance
on the multi-barrier approach to safe drinking water. Retrieved March 14, 2005, from
http://www.ccme.ca/
—–. (2005). Infosheets on contaminants. Retrieved April 15, 2005, from http://www.ccme.ca/
sourcetotap/infosheets.html
Canadian Heritage. (2006). The non-official languages. Retrieved April 5, 2006, from http://www.pch.gc.ca/
progs/lo-ol/pubs/census2001/5_e.cfm
Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI). (2005). Total health expenditure by use of funds,
Canada, 2005. Retrieved April 15, 2006, from http://www.cihi.ca/cihiweb/dispPage.jsp?cw_
page=statistics_results_topic_macrospend_e&cw_topic=D%E2%80%9Apenses%20de%
20sant%E2%80%9A&cw_subtopic=Macro-d‚%20penses
Canadian Public Health Association (CPHA). (2001). Roundtable on health and climate change.
Retrieved February 16, 2006, from http://www.cpha.ca/english/natprog/rndtable/proceede.pdf
Canadian Red Cross. (2003). Drownings and other water-related injuries in Canada 1991–2000.
Retrieved January 29, 2006, from http://www.redcross.ca/cmslib/general/10drwn_English.pdf
Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control. (2001). Priorities area: Primary prevention action group.
Retrieved April 13, 2006, from http://209.217.127.72/cscc/priorities_pppage.html
Cassel, C.K. (1990). Medical responsibility and global environmental change. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 113(6), 467–473.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2004). Extreme heat bibliography. Retrieved
February 6, 2006, from http://www.bt.cdc.gov/disasters/extremeheat/bibliography.asp
—–. (2006). Heat stress. Retrieved February 6, 2006, from http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/heatstress/
Centre de recherche sur l’opinion publique (CROP). (2002). Sondage d’opinion sur le protocole
de Kyoto [Opinion survey about the Kyoto Protocol]. Retrieved April 19, 2006, from
http://www.cpeq.qc.ca/apropos/SondageKyoto.ppt
Centre for Research and Information on Canada (CRIC). (n.d.). Quick guide, freshwater. Retrieved
April 3, 2006, from http://www.cric.ca/en_html/guide/water/eau.html
Centre on Global Change and Health. (2006). 2006 publications. Retrieved February 12, 2006,
from http://www.lshtm.ac.uk/cgch/publications.html
Chaumont, D. (2005). Développement de scénarios climatiques à des fins de prévision de la demande
énergétique au Québec pour les besoins de chauffage et de climatisation [Development
of climate scenarios to forecast energy demand in Quebec for heating and air conditioning].
Ouranos Consortium. Retrieved August 22, 2006, from http://www.ouranos.ca/doc/
Rapports%20finaux/Chaumont_energie.pdf#search=%22chaumont%20sc%C3%A9narios%
20climatiques%20ouranos%22
Cheng, C. S., Campbell, M., Li, Q., Li, G., Auld, H., et al. (2005). Differential and combined impacts
of winter and summer weather and air pollution due to global warming on human mortality
in south-central Canada. Technical Report to Health Canada. Retrieved January 15, 2008,
from http://www.toronto.ca/health/hphe/pdf/weather_air_pollution_impacts.pdf
Chevalier, P., Cordier, S., Dab, W., Gérin, M., Gosselin, P., et al. (2003). Santé environnementale
[Environmental health]. In Environnement et santé publique: Fondements et pratiques.
Montréal and Paris: Édisem and Tec and Doc.
Citizenship and Immigration Canada. (2005). Recent immigrants in metropolitan areas: Montreal—
A comparative profile based on the 2001 census. Retrieved January 17, 2007, from
http://www.cic.gc.ca/francais/ressources/recherche/recensement2001/montreal/partiea.asp
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
289
Commission de la santé et de la sécurité du travail (CSST). (2004). Attention au coup de chaleur
[Watch out for heat stroke]. Retrieved March 27, 2006, from http://www.csst.qc.ca/NR/
rdonlyres/52A95AD2-8BAB-4D1C-B110-2845888A24A9/1454/dc_100_1113_5.pdf
Committee on Climate, Ecosystems, Infectious Diseases, and Human Health. (2001). Under the
Weather: Climate, Ecosystems, and Infectious Disease. Board on Atmospheric Sciences and
Climate, National Research Council. Retrieved January 14, 2008, from http://www.nap.edu/
catalog.php?record_id=10025
Core Group. (2003). Behavioral determinants inter-working group meeting at the academy for
educational development. Retrieved February 23, 2006, from http://www.coregroup.org/
working_groups/Determinants_meeting_rpt0903.pdf
Crawford, E., and Williams, T. (2006). Smog and population health. The parliamentary information
and research service of the Library of Parliament (PRB 05-101E). Retrieved January 19, 2007,
from http://www.parl.gc.ca/information/library/PRBpubs/prb05101-e.pdf
Croley, T.E. (2003). Great Lakes climate change hydrologic assessment, I.J.C. Lake Ontario-St-Lawrence
River regulation study. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration technical
memorandum GLERL-126.
Curriero, F.C., Patz, J.A., Rose, J.B., and Lele, S. (2001). The association between extreme precipitation
and waterborne disease outbreaks in the United States, 1948–1994. American Journal of
Public Health, 91, 1194–1199.
Del Matto, T., Foster, D., Wolnik, C., Kassirer, J., Southam, T., et al. (2004). Feasibility assessment
of a change-out/education program for residential wood combustion. Report prepared
for the Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. Retrieved June 8, 2006, from
http://www.ccme.ca/assets/pdf/rwc_final_report.pdf
Deslauriers, J-P. (1991). Recherche qualitative: Guide pratique [Qualitative research. Practical guide].
Collection THEMA. Montréal: McGraw-Hill.
Direction de santé publique (DSP) de Montréal. (2004). Extreme heat. In Prévention en pratique
médicale [Prevention in medical practice], June, Retrieved January 15, 2008, from
http://www.santepub-mtl.qc.ca/Publication/pdfppm/ppmjune04.pdf
—–. (2006). Plan montréalais de prévention et protection en cas de chaleur accablante [Montréal
plan for prevention and protection during extreme heat]. Retrieved June 16, 2006, from
http://www.santepub-mtl.qc.ca/Environnement/chaleur/pdf/planchaleur2006.pdf
Direction de santé publique (DSP) de la Montérégie. (2004). Plan d’urgence spécifique “mesures
accablantes” (2004 ed.) [Specific emergency plan for dealing with oppressive conditions].
Preliminary version.
Dixsaut, G. (2005). Vague de chaleur et climatisation: Revue bibliographique [Heat waves and air
conditioning: Bibliographic review]. Bulletin d’information en santé environnementale
BISE, 16(3), 1–6. Retrieved June 16, 2006, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/pdf/bulletins/bise/
BISE-16-3.pdf#search=%22dixsaut%20bise%22
Donaldson, G.C., Kovats, R.S., Keating, W.R., and McMichael, A. (2001). Overview of climate change
impacts on human health in the U.K. In Expert Group on Climate Change and Health in
the U.K. (Ed.), Health effects of climate change in the U.K. Retrieved April 14, 2006, from
http://www.dh.gov.uk/assetRoot/04/10/80/61/04108061.pdf
Dore, M., and Burton, I. (2004). The costs of adaptation to climate change: A critical literature review.
In F. Warren, E. Barrow, R. Schwartz, J. Audrey, B. Mills, et al., Climate change impacts
and adaptations: A Canadian perspective (p. 31). Ottawa: Natural Resources Canada.
Dotto, L. (2000). Public confusion over climate change: The role of the media. Communication
conference. Session F1. Influence on public understanding of climate change 2. Retrieved
January 17, 2007, from http://www.fes.uwaterloo.ca/research/climateconference/F1.pdf
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
290
Doyon, B., D. Bélanger and P. Gosselin. (2006) Effets du climat sur la mortalité au Québec méridional
de 1981 à 1999 et simulations pour des scénarios climatiques futures [Climate effects on
mortality in southern Quebec from 1981 to 1999 and simulations for future climate scenarios].
Québec: Institut national de santé publique du Québec. Retrieved 29 November 2007, from
http://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/notice.asp?E=p&NumPublication=536
Ducas, S. (2004). Presentation given at the 8th annual public health day. Montréal au premier plan
[Montreal first]. Retrieved April 13, 2006, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/jasp/archives/
pdf/2004/20041130/02Chaleur/JASP2004-Ducas-Urbanisme.pdf
Earth Institute. (2007). Companies lay out global framework to fight climate change. Retrieved
February 27, 2007, from http://www.earth.columbia.edu/news/2007/story02-20-07.php
Eco-Santé. (2005a). Eco-Santé Québec [Eco-Health Quebec]. Retrieved March 5, 2006, from
http://www.inspq.qc.ca
—–. (2005b). Revenu personnel disponible par habitant [Personal disposable income, by inhabitant].
Retrieved September 11, 2006, from http://www.ecosante.fr/QUEBFRA/120600.html
Éditeur officiel du Québec. (2005a). An act respecting local health and social services network
development agencies. R.S.Q., c. A–8.1. Retrieved February 15, 2006, from http://
www.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/accueil.fr.html
—–. (2005b). Politique de protection des rives, du littoral et des plaines inondables. [Québec Water
Policy : Water. Our Life. Our Future.] L.R.Q., c. Q-2, a. 2.1. Retrieved January 14, 2008,
from http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/eau/rives/
—–. (2006a). Environment Quality Act. Retrieved April 11, 2006, from http://
www2.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/dynamicSearch/telecharge.php?type=2&file=/
Q_2/Q2A.htm
—–. (2006b). Municipal Code of Quebec. Retrieved April 11, 2006, from http://
www2.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/dynamicSearch/telecharge.php?type=2&file=/
C_27_1/C27_1-A.htm
—–. (2006c). Public Health Act. Retrieved April 11, 2006, from http://
www2.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/dynamicSearch/telecharge.php?type=2&file=/
S_2_2/S2_2-A.htm
Energy Information Administration. (2002). Norway: Environmental issues. Retrieved
April 5, 2006, from http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/norenv.html
Environment Canada. (2001). The new formula for cold. Retrieved June 26, 2006, from
http://www.ec.gc.ca/science/sandenov01/article2_e.html
—–. (2002). Impacts et adaptation lies aux changements climatiques: Perspective canadienne—
Les resources en eau [Climate change impacts and adaptation : A Canadian perspective –
Water resources]. Rapport de la Direction des Impacts et de l’adaptation liés aux
changements climatiques. Natural Resources Canada.
—–. (2005a). National climate archive. Retrieved March 4, 2006, from http://climate.weatheroffice.ec.gc.ca/
—–. (2005b). The science of climate change. Retrieved April 3, 2006, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/science/
sandejan01/article 4-e.html
—–. (2006a). Fact sheet: Winter info-smog program. Retrieved June 8, 2006, from http://
lavoieverte.qc.ec.gc.ca/atmos/dispersion/main_e.html
—–. (2006b). Info-smog now serving 7.2 million Quebeckers all year round. Retrieved July 11, 2006,
from http://www.ec.gc.ca/press/2006/060517_n_e.htm
Erlandson, D.A., Harris, E.L., Skipper, B.L., and Allen, S.D. (1993). Doing naturalistic inquiry.
A guide to methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
291
Fagherazzi, L., Guay, R., and Sassi, T. (2005). Climate change analysis of the Ottawa River system.
Report to the International Joint Commission—Lake Ontario – St. Lawrence River study on
discharge regulation.
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM). (2002). Final report on FCM (Federation of Canadian
Municipalities) municipal infrastructure risk project: Adapting to climate change. Retrieved
February 16, 2006, from http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/projdb/pdf/16-e.pdf
—–. (2006). Green Municipal Fund. Retrieved January 15, 2006, from http://www.fcm.ca/
english/gmf/gmf.html
Filion, P., and Lauzier, J.J. (2002). L’énergie au Québec, edition 2002 [Energy in Quebec, 2002 edition].
Retrieved 14 April, 2006, from http://www.mrn.gouv.qc.ca/publications/energie/energie/
energie-au-quebec-2002.pdf
Fishbein, M., Triandis, H.C., Kanfer, F.H., Becker, M., Middlestadt, S.E., et al. (2001). Factors
influencing behavior and behavior change. In M. Fishbein, H.C. Triandis, F.H. Kanfer,
M. Becker, S.E. Middlestadt, et al. (Eds.), Handbook of health psychology. New Jersey:
Laurence Earlbaum Associates.
Gachon, P., and Dibike, Y. (2006). La méthode de mise à l’échelle statistique utilisée pour la
construction de scénarios de changements climatiques [Statistical scaling method used to build
climate change scenarios]. Internal report, not published. Montreal: Ouranos Consortium.
Gachon, P., St-Hilaire, A., Ouarda, T., Nguyen, V-T-V., Lin, C., et al. (2005). A first evaluation of the
strengths and weaknesses of statistical downscaling methods for simulating extremes over
various regions of Eastern Canada. Sub-component, Climate Change Action Fund (CCAF).
Final report. Montréal: Environment Canada.
Garneau, M., Milton, J., Vigeant, G., Drouin, L., Bonvalot, Y., et al. (2005). Hausse des concentrations
polliniques causée par le changement climatique et ses conséquences potentielles sur les
maladies respiratoires des populations vulnérables en milieu urbain [Increased pollen
concentrations due to climate change and the potential consequences on respiratory disease
among vulnerable populations in urban areas]. Université du Québec à Montréal and
Ouranos Consortium. CCAF Project. Retrieved August 21, 2005, from http://www.ouranos.ca/
doc/ia/MGarneau.pdf
Gelbspan, R. (2000). The mismatch between the cultures of journalism and science. Communication
conference. Session F1. Influence on public understanding of climate change 2. Retrieved
January 17, 2007, from http://www.fes.uwaterloo.ca/research/climateconference/F1.pdf
Giani, A., Bird, D.F., Prairie, Y.T., and Lawrence, J. (2005). Empirical study of cyanobacterial toxicity along
a trophic gradient of lakes. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 62(9), 2100–2109.
Gibbs, G. (2002). Qualitative data analysis: Exploration with NVivo. Buckingham, Philadelphia:
Open University.
Giguère, M. (2005). Les impacts des vagues de chaleur et de l’effet d’îlot thermique urbain sur la
santé: Examen des initiatives d’adaptation actuelles au Québec [The effects of heat waves
and the urban thermal island effect on health: Review of current adaptation initiatives
in Quebec]. Essay presented to the Centre universitaire de formation en environnement.
Sherbrooke: Université de Sherbrooke.
Giguère, M., and Gosselin, P. (2006a). Eau et santé: Examen des initiatives actuelles d’adaptation
aux changements climatiques au Québec [Water and health: A review of current initiatives
for adaptation to climate change in Quebec]. Retrieved October 15, 2006, from
http://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/default.asp?E=p&Theme=8
—–. (2006b). Événements climatiques extrêmes et santé: Examen des initiatives actuelles d’adaptation
aux changements climatiques au Québec [Extreme climatic events and health: A review
of current initiatives for adaptation to climate change in Quebec]. Retrieved October 15, 2006,
from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/default.asp?E=p&Theme=8
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
292
—–. (2006c). Maladies zoonotiques et à transmission vectorielle: Examen des initiatives actuelles
d’adaptation aux changements climatiques au Québec [Zoonotic and vector-borne diseases:
A review of current initiatives for adaptation to climate change in Quebec]. Retrieved
October 15, 2006, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/default.asp?E=p&Theme=8
—–. (2006d). Vagues de chaleur, effet d’îlot thermique urbain et santé: Examen des initiatives actuelles
d’adaptation aux changements climatiques au Québec [Heat waves, urban thermal island effect
and health: A review of current initiatives for adaptation to climate change in Quebec]. Retrieved
October 15, 2006, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/default.asp?E=p&Theme=8
Gordon, C., Cooper, C., Senior, C.A., Banks, H., Gregory, J.M., et al. (2000). The simulation of SST,
sea ice extents and ocean heat transports in a version of the Hadley Centre coupled model
without flux adjustments. Climate Dynamics, 16, 147–168.
Gosselin, P. (2005). A first interactive web tool to better understand health vulnerabilities and climate.
GEOIDE and INSPQ project, Health Canada and Ouranos Consortium. Retrieved September 19,
2006, from http://www.ouranos.ca/programmation/atlas_e.html
Gosselin, P., and Grondin, J. (2002). Changing behaviours in a time of climate change: Social science
perspectives on the health impact assessment of climate change and adaptative behaviours.
Sainte Foy, QC. Report on a workshop held in Québec, QC, August 27-28, 2002.
Gosselin, P., Lebel, G., Rivest, S., and Douville-Fradet, M. (2005). The integrated system for public
health monitoring of West Nile Virus (ISPHM-WNV): A real-time GIS for surveillance and
decision-making. International Journal of Health Geographics, 4(21). Retrieved September 13,
2005, from http://www.ij-healthgeographics.com/content/4/1/21
Government of Canada. (2005). Climate Change Action Fund. Retrieved February 18, 2006, from
http://climatechange.gc.ca/francais/ccaf
Government of Quebec. (2000). Quebec action plan on climate change 2000–2002. Retrieved
February 16, 2006, from http://www.mrnf.gouv.qc.ca/publications/climatiques/climat.pdf
—–. (2002). Water. Our life. Our future. Quebec water policy. Retrieved January 28, 2006, from
http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/eau/politique/policy.pdf
—–. (2005a). An Act respecting land use planning and development, R.S.Q. c. A-19.1. Retrieved
April 13, 2006, from http://www2.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/dynamicSearch/
telecharge.php?type=2&file=/A_19_1/A19_1-A.html
—–. (2005b). Quebec in action to fight climate change. Retrieved February 16, 2006, from
http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/chang-clim/clim-change.pdf
—–. (2006a). Better choices for citizens: Québec public transit policy. Retrieved September 19, 2006,
from http://www.mtq.gouv.qc.ca/en/modes/personnes/polit_collectif2006.asp
—–. (2006b). Cadre de prévention des risques naturels [Natural hazards prevention framework].
Retrieved November 30, 2006, from http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/Infuseur/
communique.asp?no=1029
—–. (2006c). Démographie. Le phénomène du vieillissement [Demographics. Aging of the Population].
Retrieved February 27, 2007, from http://www.gouv.qc.ca/portail/quebec/pgs/commun/
portrait/demographie?lang=fr#Vieillissement
—–. (2006d). Portrait du Québec [Portrait of Quebec]. Retrieved February 27, 2007, from
http://www.gouv.qc.ca/portail/quebec/pgs/common/
—–. (2006e). Québec and climate change: A challenge for the future. 2006–2012 action plan. Retrieved
June 19, 2006, from http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/changements/plan_action/2006-2012_en.pdf
Green, H., Gilbert, J., James, R., and Byard, R.W. (2001). An analysis of factors contributing to
a series of deaths caused by exposure to high environmental temperatures. American Journal
of Forensic Medicine and Pathology, 2220, 196–199.
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
293
Haines, A., Kovats, R.S., Campbell-Lendrum, D., and Corvalan, C. (2006). Climate change and
human health: Impacts, vulnerability and public health. The Lancet, 367(9528), 2101–2109.
Harju, E-L. (2002). Cold and warmth perception mapped for aged, gender, and body area.
Somatosensory & Motor Research, 19(1), 61–75.
Health Canada. (2005). Exercice de chaleur accablante [Extreme heat exercise]. Report prepared
by DDH Environnement Ltée, report # DDH-05-044.
—–. (2006). A health-based national Air Quality Index (AQI). Retrieved February 27, 2007, from
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/air/out-ext/air_quality_f.html
Hill, D., White, V., Marks, R., Theobald, T., Borland, R., et al. (1992). Melanoma prevention:
Behavioral and nonbehavioral factors in sunburn among an Australian urban population.
Preventive Medicine, 21(5), 654–669.
House, J., and Brovkin, V. (2005). Climate and air quality. In R. Hassan, H. Scholes, and N. Ash (Eds.),
Ecosystems and human well-being. Volume 1: Current state and trends. Washington:
Island Press. Retrieved March 8, 2006, from http://www.millenniumassessment.org//en/
Products.Global.Condition.aspx
Huberman, A.M., and Miles, M.B. (1991). Qualitative data analysis: A sourcebook of new methods.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hydro-Québec.(2006a). Annual report 2005: People with energy. Retrieved February 28, 2007,
from http://www.hydroquebec.com/publications/en/annual_report/2005/index.html
—–. (2006b). EnerGuide grant for existing houses. Retrieved June 8, 2006, from http://
www.hydroquebec.com/residential/energuide/index.html
—–. (2006c). Serving consumers effectively: Meeting special needs. Retrieved May 25, 2006,
from http://www.hydroquebec.com/sustainable-development/societe/servir_clients_rep.html
Institut de la statistique du Québec (ISQ). (2000). Perspectives démographiques du Québec 1996–2041,
régions administratives, régions métropolitaines et municipalités régionales de comté, édition 2000,
Quebec. [Demographic perspectives in Quebec, 1996–2041, administrative regions, metropolitan
regions and regional county municipalities, 2000 edition, Quebec]. Retrieved August 29, 2006,
from http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/donstat/societe/demographie/persp_poplt/index.htm
—–. (2001). Enquête québécoise sur les limitations d’activités, 1998. [Quebec survey of activity
limitations, 1998]. Retrieved January 17, 2006, from http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/
publications/sante/enq-qla98-an.htm
—–. (2003a). Perspectives de la population. Édition 2003 basée sur 2001: Six nouveaux scénarios
[Population projections. 2003 edition based on 2001: Six new scenarios]. Retrieved August 29,
2006, from http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/donstat/societe/demographie/persp_poplt/index.htm
—–. (2003b). Population projections, Québec and regions, 2001–2051, 2003 edition. Retrieved
August 21, 2006, from http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/donstat/societe/demographie/persp_poplt/
pers2001-2051/index_an.htm
—–. (2005a). Population and land occupation, Montréal and Laval administrative regions, 2001.
Retrieved March 10, 2006, from http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/regions/recens2001_06/
population06/occupter06_an.htm
—–. (2005b). Québec 2001 population census: Québec. Retrieved January 27, 2005, from
http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/regions/lequebec/quebec_index_an.htm
—–. (2006a). Interprovincial comparisons. Income, table 5.2. Retrieved April 5, 2006, from
http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/donstat/econm_finnc/conjn_econm/TSC/pdf/chap5.pdf
—–. (2006b). Interprovincial comparisons. Production, table 4.1. Retrieved April 5, 2006,
from http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/donstat/econm_finnc/conjn_econm/TSC/pdf/chap4.pdf
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
294
—–. (2006c). Proportion des ménages qui disposent de certaines composantes de l’équipement
ménager et d’une maison de campagne, Québec, Ontario et Canada, 1972–2003 [Proportion
of households with certain household equipment and a country home, Quebec, Ontario and
Canada, 1972–2003]. Retrieved January 11, 2006, from http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/donstat/
societe/famls_mengs_niv_vie/patrm_equip/4equip_pourcent.htm
—–. (2006d). Proportion des ménages qui disposent de certaines composantes de l’équipement ménager,
selon la tranche de revenue, Quebec, 2004 [Proportion of households with certain household
equipment, by range of income, Quebec, 2004]. Retrieved January 11, 2006, from http://
www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/donstat/societe/famls_mengs_niv_vie/patrm_equip/5equip_repar.htm
—–. (2006e). Quebec handy numbers. Retrieved April 5, 2006, from http://stat.gouv.qc.ca/publications/
referenc/pdf2006/QCM2006_an.pdf
—–. (2006f). View of regions. Retrieved June 18, 2006, from http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/regions/profils/
region_00/region_00_an.htm
Institut de veille sanitaire (InVS). (2003a). Impact sanitaire de la vague de chaleur en France survenue
en août 2003. Rapport d’étape [Health impact of the heat wave in France in August 2003.
Progress report]. Retrieved April 12, 2004, from http://www.invs.sante.fr/publications/2003/
chaleur-aout_2003/index.html
—–. (2003b). Vague de chaleur et santé: Revue bibliographique [Heat waves and health: Bibliographic
review]. Retrieved April 12, 2004, from http://www.invs.sante.fr/beh/2003/45_46/index.htm
—–. (2004a). Étude des facteurs de risque de décès des personnes âgées résidant à domicile durant
la vague de chaleur d’août 2003 [Study of risk factors in the death of seniors living
at home during the heat wave of August 2003]. Retrieved January 12, 2006, from
http://www.invs.sante.fr/publications/2004/chaleur2003_170904/
—–. (2004b). Système d’alerte canicule et santé 2004 (SACS 2004). Rapport opérationnel [2004 extreme
heat and health warning system (SACS 2004). Operational report]. Retrieved January 12, 2006,
from http://www.invs.sante.fr/publications/2004/syst-alerte_canicule/index.html
—–. (2006). Chaleur et santé [Heat and health]. Retrieved February 6, 2006, from http://www.invs.sante.fr/
surveillance/canicule/default.htm
Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ). (2006a). Changements climatiques
et développement durable [Climate change and sustainable development]. Retrieved
March 29, 2006, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/domaines/index.asp?Dom=50&Axe=55
—–. (2006b). Infocentre de santé publique [Public health infocentre]. Retrieved April 11, 2006,
from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/domaines/ind.ex.asp?Dom=surv&Axe=103
—–. (2006c). Portrait de santé du Québec et de ses régions 2006. Les analyses (section 1.4)
[2006 health portrait of Quebec and its regions. Analyses (section 1.4)]. Les publications
du Québec. Retrieved December 4, 2006, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/pdf/publications/
portrait_de_sante.asp?E=p
—–. (2006d). Portrait de santé du Québec et de ses régions 2006. Les statistiques [2006 health
portrait of Quebec and its regions. Statistics.] Retrieved January 21, 2007, from
http://www.inspq.qc.ca/pdf/publications/545-PortraitSante2006_statistiques.pdf
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2007). Summary for policymakers. In
S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, et al. (Eds.). Climate change 2007:
The physical science basis. Working Group I contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report (pp. 1–18). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
Ippersiel, M.F., and Morissette, J.F. (2004). L’innovation dans les municipalités: Perceptions
des acteurs et defies [Innovation in municipalities: Perceptions of actors and challenges].
Retrieved April 22, 2006, from http://sbisrvntweb.uqac.ca/archivage/18046447.pdf
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
295
Isuma Canadian Journal of Policy Research. (2001). Climate change. Retrieved February 16, 2006,
from http://www.isuma.net/v02n04/index_e.shtml
Jacques, L., and Kosatsky, T. (2005). Commentaires faisant suite à la parution de l’article Vague
de chaleur et climatisation de Gilles Dixsaut [Comments following publication of the article
Heat waves and air conditioning, by Gilles Dixsaut]. Bulletin d’information en sante
environnementale (BISE), 16(4), 5–7.
Judek, S., Jessiman, B., Stieb, D., and Vet, R. (2005). Estimated number of excess deaths in Canada
due to air pollution. Retrieved January 19, 2007, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ahc-asc/media/
nr-cp/2005/2005_32bk2_e.html
Kalkstein, L.S., and Greene, J.S. (1997). An evaluation of climate/mortality relationships in large U.S. cities
and the possible impacts of climate change. Environmental Health Perspectives, 105(1), 84–93.
Kalkstein, L.S., and Smoyer, K.E. (1993). The impact of climate on Canadian mortality: Present
relationships and future scenarios. Report no. 93-7. Unpublished manuscript. Ottawa:
Environment Canada/Canadian Climate Centre.
Keatinge, W.R., and Donaldson, G.C. (2006). Heat acclimatization and sunshine cause false indications
of mortality due to ozone. Environmental Research, 100, 387–393.
Kempton, W. (1993). Will public environmental concern lead to action on global warming? Annual
Review of Energy and the Environment, 18, 217–245.
Klaassen, J., Cheng, S., Auld, H., Li, Q., Ros, E., et al. (2003). Estimation of Severe Ice Storm Risks
for South-Central Canada. Retrieved January 15, 2008, from http://ww3.ps-sp.gc.ca/research/
resactivites/natHaz/EC-MSC_2002D002_ENG_CD.pdf
Klinenberg, E. (2002). A social autopsy of disaster in Chicago: Heat wave. Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press.
Kunst, A.E., Caspar, W.N., Looman, W.N., and Mackenbach, J.P. (1993). Outdoor air temperature
and mortality in the Netherlands: A time-series analysis. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 137, 331–341.
Lafrance, G., and Desjarlais, C. (2006). Impact socio-économique du changement climatique:
La demande d’énergie [Socio-economic impact of climate change: Demand for energy].
Retrieved February 5, 2007, from http://www.ouranos.ca/doc/Rapports%20finaux/Lafrance.pdf
Lajoie, P., Dagenais, G., Ernst, P., and Neukirch, F. (2003). Systèmes respiratoire et cardio-vasculaire
[Respiratory and cardio-vascular systems]. In Environnement et santé publique: Fondements
et pratiques. Paris and Montréal: TEC & DOC and Edisem.
Last, J.M., and Chiotti, Q.P. (2001). Climate change and health. Isuma Canadian Journal of Policy
Research, 2, 66–74.
Laverdière, J. (2001). Portrait de la pauvreté sur le territoire du CLSC-CHSLD Basse-Ville-Limoilou-Vanier:
Étude de la vulnérabilité socioéconomique des quartiers et des secteurs de dénombrement
[Portrait of poverty in the Basse-Ville-Limoilou-Vanier CLSC-CHSLD: Study of the socio-
economic vulnerability of neighbourhoods and enumeration areas]. Québec: CLSC-CHSLD
Basse-Ville-Limoilou-Vanier.
Léger Marketing. (2006). Greenpeace/equiterre poll. Retrieved April 5, 2006, from http://
www.greenpeace.ca/f/archives.php
Leiss, W., Dowlatabadi, H., and Paoli, G. (2001). Who’s afraid of climate change? A guide for the
perplexed. Retrieved January 30, 3006, from http://www.isuma.net/v02n04/leiss/leiss_f.pdf
Leloup, X. (2005). Conditions de logement des ménages immigrants au Québec: Une réalité contrastée
[Housing conditions of immigrant households in Quebec: A contrasted reality]. Retrieved
January 17, 2007, from http://www.habitation.gouv.qc.ca/publications/M18366.pdf
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
296
MacCracken, M., Barron, E., Easterling, D., Felzer, B., and Karl, T. (2001). Scenarios for climate
variability and change. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Magnuson, J.J., Webster, K.E., Assel, R.A., Bowser, C.J., Dillon, P.J., et al. (1997). Potential effects
of climate change on aquatic ecosystems: Laurentian Great Lakes and Precambrian Shield
Region. In C.E. Cushing (Ed.), Freshwater ecosystems and climate change in North America:
A regional asssessment. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Mailhot, A., Rivard, G., Duchesne, S., and Villeneuve, JP. (2007). Impacts et adaptations liés aux
changements climatiques (CC) en matière de drainage urbain au Québec [Impacts and
adaptations linked to climate change (CC) in relation to urban drainage in Quebec]. Report
no. R-874. Retrieved February 5, 2007, from http://www.ouranos.ca/doc/Rapports%20finaux/
Mailhot.pdf
Mäkinen, TM., Pääkkönen, T., Palinkas, LA., Rintamäki, H., Leppaäluoto, J., Hassi, J. (2004).
Seasonal changes in thermal responses of urban residents to cold exposure. Comparative
Biochemistry and Physiology, Part A, 139(2), 229–238.
Maltais, D., Robichaud, S., and Simard, A. (2001a). Sinistres et individus [Disasters and individuals].
Chicoutimi, Quebec: Éditions JCL.
—–. (2001b). Sinistres et intervenants [Disasters and interventions]. Chicoutimi, Quebec:
Éditions JCL.
Manitoba Energy, Science and Technology. (2003). Energy development initiative. Retrieved
April 5, 2006, from http://www.gov.mb.ca/est/energy/initiatives/hydro.html
McCullagh, P., and Nelder, J.A. (1989). Generalized linear models. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
McGeehin, M.A., and Mirabelli, M. (2001). The potential impacts of climate variability and change
on temperature-related morbidity and mortality in the United States. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 109(Suppl. 2), 185–189.
McMichael, A.J., Woodruff, R.E., and Hales, S. (2006). Climate change and human health: Present
and future risks. The Lancet, 367(9513), 859–869.
Menne, B., and Ebi, K.L. (Eds.). (2006). Climate change and adaptation strategies for human health.
Published on behalf of the World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe. Germany:
Steinkopff Verlag Darmstadt.
Michelozzi, P., DeDonato, F., Bisanti, L., Russo, A., Cadum, E., et al. (2005). The impact of the
summer 2003 heat waves on mortality in four Italian cities. Eurosurveillance, 10(7), 161–165.
Retrieved April 3, 2006, from http://www.eurosurveillance.org/em/v10n07/1007-226.asp
Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Pêcheries et de l’Alimentation du Québec (MAPAQ). (2006).
Surveillance de la santé animale [Animal health surveillance]. Retrieved June 28, 2006,
from http://www.mapaq.gouv.qc.ca/Fr/Productions/santeanimale/surveillance/
Ministère de la Santé et des Services sociaux (MSSS). (1992). Policy on health and well-being.
Retrieved March 30, 2006, from http://publications.msss.gouv.qc.ca/acrobat/f/documentation/
1992/92_713.pdf
—–. (2003a). Programme sur les aides à la vie quotidienne et à la vie domestique [Daily and domestic
living assistance program]. Retrieved February 12, 2006, from http://msssa4.msss.gouv.qc.ca/
fr/sujets/handicape.nsf/0/5e878d8ba912ed3e85256d8000560fb6/$FILE/AVQ-AVD_guide_de_
gestion_oct03_rev-mai04.pdf
—–. (2003b). Quebec public health program 2003–2012. Retrieved March 27, 2006, from
http://msssa4.msss.gouv.qc.ca/fr/document/publication.nsf/ed7acbc94b12630f852566de004c8587/
f83fd818c4afad8085256e3800553476?OpenDocument
—–. (2004). Heat waves are deadly serious. Retrieved August 28, 2006, from http://www.canlii.org/
qc/laws/sta/c-47.1/20061117/whole.html
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
297
—–. (2005). Quebec’s health and social services system. Retrieved March 28, 2006, from http://
msssa4.msss.gouv.qc.ca/fr/reseau/santebref.nsf/49dd266bd183416e852566e2005c98b6/
feaef2d6fb32728c852568eb000bdbd8?OpenDocument
—–. (2006a). Plan chaleur accablante, volet santé publique [Extreme heat plan, public health
component]. Retrieved August 28, 2006, from http://www.msss.gouv.qc.ca/sujets/santepub/
pdf/plan-chaleur.pdf
—–. (2006b). Smog. Retrieved January 27, 2007, from http://www.msss.gouv.qc.ca/sujets/santepub/
environnement/index.php?smog.
Ministère de la Sécurité publique (MSP). (2004). Typologie des risques. [Typology of risks].
Internal document.
—–. (2005). Civil Protection Act. Retrieved April 3, 2006, from http://www.msp.gouv.qc.ca/secivile/
secivile-en.asp?txtSection=loi
Ministère des Affaires municipales et des Régions (MAMR). (2005a). Guide d’élaboration d’un plan
d’intervention pour le renouvellement des conduites d’eau potable et d’égout: Pour une gestion
efficace de l’eau [Guide for the development of an action plan for the renewal of drinking
water and wastewater pipes: For effective water management]. Retrieved April 17, 2006, from
http://www.mamr.gouv.qc.ca/publications/infrastructures/guid_plan_interv.pdf
—–. (2005b). Guide des bonnes pratiques: La réduction des émissions de gaz à effet de serre et
l’aménagement du territoire [Best practices guide: Reducing greenhouse gas emissions
and land use planning]. Retrieved April 14, 2006, from http://www.mamr.gouv.qc.ca/
publications/amenagement/Guide_bonnes_pratiques.pdf
—–. (2005c). L’organisation municipale du Québec [Municipal organization in Quebec]. Retrieved
February 16, 2006, from http://www.mamr.gouv.qc.ca/publications/organisation/
org_mun_qc_fra.pdf
—–. (2006a). An Act to amend various legislative provisions concerning municipal affairs.
Retrieved January 15, 2008, from www2.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/dynamicSearch/
telecharge.php?type=5&file=2003C3A.PDF
—–. (2006b). An Act respecting land use planning and development, R.S.Q. c. A-19.1. Retrieved
April 11, 2006, from http://www.canlii.org/qc/laws/sta/a-19.1/20050211/whole.html
—–. (2006c). Municipal Powers Act, R.S.Q. c. C-47.1. Retrieved April 11, 2006, from http://
www.canlii.org/qc/laws/sta/c-47.1/20061117/whole.html
Ministère du Développement durable, de l’Environnement et des Parcs (MDDEP). (1998). La politique
québécoise de gestion de matières résiduelles 1998–2008 [Quebec’s waste management policy
1998–2008]. Retrieved January 23, 2007, from http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/matieres/mat_res/
—–. (2002a). Bilan de la qualité de l’eau potable au Québec, janvier 1995–juin 2002 [Report on the
quality of drinking water in Quebec January 1995–June 2002]. Retrieved April 13, 2006,
from http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/eau/potable/bilan03/bilan.pdf
—–. (2002b). General orientation paper for a future policy on water management. Retrieved
March 31, 2006, from http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/eau/orientation/index.htm
—–. (2002c). Quebec water policy. Water. Our life. Our future. Retrieved March 30, 2006, from
http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/eau/politique/index-en.htm
—–. (2005a). Fleurs d’eau de cyanobactéries [Cyanobacterial blooms]. Retrieved February 15, 2006,
from http://www.menv.gouv.qc.ca/eau/eco_aqua/cyanobacteries/
—–. (2005b). Regulation respecting the quality of drinking water. Retrieved March 30, 2006, from
http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/eau/potable/brochure-en/index.htm
—–. (2005c). Signing of the Great Lakes–St. Lawrence River Basin Sustainable Water Resources
Agreement. Retrieved March 30, 2006, from http://www.mnr.gov.on.ca/mnr/water/
greatlakes/index.html
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
298
—–. (2006a). Sustainable Development Act. Retrieved August 14, 2006, from http://
www2.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/dynamicSearch/telecharge.php?type=
5&file=2006C3A.PDF
—–. (2006b). Wood heating. Retrieved May 15, 2006, from http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/air/
chauf-bois/index.htm
Ministère du Développement économique, de l’Innovation et de l’Exportation (MDEIE). (2007). Le
commerce extérieur du Québec [Quebec foreign trade]. Le calepin, édition décembre 2007.
Retrieved 14 janvier, 2008 from http://www.mdeie.gouv.qc.ca/page/web/portail/exportation/
nav/publications.html?&page=details_publication.jsp&iddoc=62167
Municipalities Issue Table (MIT). (1998). Canada’s national climate change process. Retrieved
February 16, 2006, from http://www.nccp.ca/NCCP/pdf_f/mun_found.pdf
—–. (1999). Municipalities table options paper. Retrieved February 16, 2006, from
http://www.nccp.ca/html_f/tables/pdf/options/MT_OR_fr-12-1999.pdf
Nakicenovic, N., Alcamo, J., Davis, G., de Vries, B., Fenhann, J., et al. (2000). Emissions scenarios.
A special report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). (1997). 1997 survey of household energy use. Major household
appliances. Retrieved February 2, 2006, from http://www.oee.nrcan.gc.ca/publications/
infosource/pub/energy_use/sheu_e/sheu_5.cfm
—–. (2002). Climate change impacts and adaptation: A Canadian perspective. Retrieved April 14, 2006,
from http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/perspective/index_ephp
—–. (2006a). A change in the wind: Climate change in Québec. Retrieved April 22, 2006, from
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/posters/gc/index_e.php
—–. (2006b). Idle-free zone. Retrieved June 8, 2006, from http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/communities-government/
idling.cfm?attr=16
—–. (2006c). Office of Energy Efficiency-Residential. Retrieved January 29, 2006, from
http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/Equipment/english/page125.cfm?Text=N&PrintView=N
Nguyen, T., Nguyen, V., and Gachon, P. (2005). Using statistical downscaling model to project local
climate change in future under scenarios simulated by Hadcm3: A case study at 20 stations
in Quebec province, Canada. Ouranos Report, in review.
O’Brien, K., Eriksen, S., Schjolden, A., and Nygaard, L. (2004). What’s in a word? Conflicting
interpretations of vulnerability in climate change research. Retrieved April 15, 2006, from
http://www.fishclimate.ca/pdf/OBrien_CICERO_March_2004_Vulnerability.pdf
Office of the Auditor General of Canada. (2006). The commissioner’s perspective. 2006 Report of the
Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development. Retrieved January 15, 2008,
from http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/domino/reports.nsf/html/c2006menu_e.html
Ogden, N.H., Maarouf, A., Barker, I.K., Bigras-Poulin, M., Lindsay, L.R., et al. (2006). Climate
change and the potential for range expansion of the Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis
in Canada. International Journal of Parasitology, 36(1), 63–70.
Oke, T.R. (1982). The energetic basis of urban heat island. Journal of the Royal Meteorological
Society, 108(455), 1–24.
Ontario Forest Research Institute. (2003). A synopsis of known and potential diseases and
parasites associated with climate change. Forest research information paper no. 154.
Sault Ste. Marie, Ont.: Author.
Ontario Medical Association. (2005). Illness costs of air pollution (ICAP) 2005. Retrieved
January 19, 2007, from http://www.oma.org/Health/Smog/report/icap05a.asp
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
299
Ory, M.G., Jordan, P.J., and Bazzarre, T. (2002). The behavior change consortium: Setting the stage for
a new century of health behavior change research. Health Education Research, 175, 500–511.
Ouranos Consortium. (2004). Adapting to climate change. Retrieved March 27, 2006, from
http://www.ouranos.ca/cc/table_e.html
Pageau, M., Choinière, R., Ferland, M., and Sauvageau, Y. (2001). Le portrait de santé—
Le Québec et ses regions [A portrait of health: Quebec and its regions]. Quebéc: Institut
national de santé publique du Québec. Retrieved January 17, 2006, from http://
www.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/accueil.fr.html
Paillé, P., and Mucchielli, A. (2003). L’analyse qualitative en sciences humaines et socials
[Qualitative analysis in human and social sciences]. Paris: Armand Colin.
Pattenden, S., Nikiforov, B., and Armstrong, B.G. (2003). Mortality and temperature in Sofia and
London. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 57, 628–633.
Patton, M.Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Patz, J.A., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Holloway, T., and Foley, J.A. (2005). Impact of regional climate
change on human health. Nature, 438(7066), 310–317.
Patz, J.A., McGeehin, M.A., Bernard, S.M., Ebi, K.L., Epstein, P.R., et al. (2000). The potential
health impacts of climate variability and change for the United States: Executive summary
of the report of the health sector of the U.S. national assessment. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 108(4), 367–376.
Paulhus, D.L. (1991). Measurement and control of response bias. In J.P. Robinson, P.R. Shaver,
and L.S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes
(pp. 17–59). New York: Academic Press.
Phipps, S. (2003). The impact of poverty on health: A scan of research literature. Canadian Institute
for Health Information (CIHI). Retrieved June 15, 2006, from http://www.cihi.ca/cihiweb/
dispPage.jsp?cw_page=GR_323_E
Presser, S., Couper, M.P., Lessler, J.T., Martin, E., Martin, J., et al. (2004). Methods for testing
and evaluating survey questionnaires. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Prochaska, J.O., Norcross, J.C., and Diclemente, C.C. (1995). Changing for good. A revolutionary
six-stage program for overcoming bad habits and moving your life positively forward.
New York: Avon Books.
Quality Systems Registrars. (2005). Qualitative analysis and software services. Retrieved
December 5, 2005, from http://www.qsr.com/
Quénel, P., Dab, W., Festy, B., Viau, C., and Zmirou, D. (2003). Qualité de l’air ambient [Ambient
air quality]. In M.P. Gérin, P. Gosselin, S. Cordier, C. Viau, P. Quénel, et al. (Eds.),
Environnement et santé publique: Fondements et pratique. Canada: Editions TEC & DOC.
Rachlinski, J.J. (2000). The psychology of global climate change. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Law School.
Retrieved February 22, 2007, from http://env.chass.utoronto.ca/env200y/ESSAY2001/
globwarm.pdf
Rainham, D.G.C., and Smoyer-Tomic, K.E. (2003). The role of air pollution in the relationship
between a heat stress index and human mortality in Toronto. Environmental
Research, 93, 9–19.
Recyc-Québec. (2004). La performance relative à la gestion des matières résiduelles selon les objectifs
de 2008 [Waste management performance in relation to the 2008 objectives]. Retrieved
January 31, 2007, from http://www.recyc-quebec.gouv.qc.ca/upload/publications/MICI/
BILAN2004/Fiche1B.pdf
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
300
Régie du bâtiment du Québec. (2006). An Act respecting the conservation of energy in buildings.
Retrieved January 29, 2006, from http://www2.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/dynamicSearch/
telecharge.php?type=2&file=/E_1_1/E1_1_A.HTM
Rittmaster, R., Adamowicz, W.L., Amiro, B., and Pelletier, R.T. (2006). Economic analysis of health
effects from forest fires. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 36(4), 868–877.
Rolland, A., Bird, D.F., and Giani, A. (2005). Effects of environmental factors and composition
of cyanobacterial communities on the occurrence of hepatotoxic blooms in four eutrophic
Quebec lakes. Journal of Plankton Research, 27(7), 683–694.
Royal Society of Canada. (1995). Implications of global change for human health. Final report
of the Health Issues Panel of the Canadian Global Change Program.
Sandalow, D.B., and Bowles, I.A. (2001). Climate change: Fundamentals of treaty-making on climate
change. Science, 292(5523), 1839–1840.
Sautory, O. (2005). Atelier sur les procédures SAS d’échantillonnage et d’analyse de données d’enquête
[Workshop on SAS sampling procedures and analysis of survey data]. Québec: Francophone
symposium on surveys.
Schwartz, J., Spix, C., Touloumi, G., Bacharova, L., Barumamdzadeh, T., et al. (1996). Methodological
issues in studies of air pollution and daily counts of deaths or hospital admission. Journal
of Epidemiology and Community Health, 50, S3–S11.
Scottish Executive. (2001). Potential adaptation strategies for climate change in Scotland. Retrieved
August 28, 2006, from http://www.scotland.gov.uk/cru/kd01/lightgreen/pascc-00.asp
Semenza, J.C., McCullough, J.E., Flanders, W.D., McGeehin, M.A., and Limpkin, J.R. (1999).
Excess hospital admissions during the July 1995 heat wave in Chicago. American Journal
of Preventive Medicine, 164, 269–277.
Société de l’assurance automobile du Québec. (2006). Bilan routier 2005 [2005 highway report].
Retrieved August 31, 2006, from http://www.saaq.gouv.qc.ca/salle_presse/communiques_2006/
20060530a.html
Société d’habitation du Québec (SHQ). (2006). Programmes et services [Programs and services]. Retrieved
March 29, 2006, from http://www.habitation.gouv.qc.ca/programmes/liste_alphabetique.html
Solomon, S., and Kington, R. (2002). National efforts to promote behavior-change research: Views from
the Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research. Health Education Research, 175, 495–499.
Soucy, C. (2002). La réforme de l’organisation municipale au Québec: Bilan et contexte [Reform
of municipal organization in Quebec: Report and context]. Retrieved April 11, 2006, from
http://www.mamr.gouv.qc.ca/publications/obse_muni/ReformeMunicipaleAuQuebec.pdf
Statistics Canada. (2000). Human activity and the environment 2000. Retrieved May 23, 2006,
from http://www.statcan.ca/bsolc/english/bsolc?catno=11-509-X
—–. (2006). Canadian environmental sustainability indicators: National status and trends. Retrieved
March 5, 2006, from http://www.statcan.ca/francais/freepub/16-251-XIF/2005000/
findings/air/status f.htm
Strecher, V., Wang, C., Derry, H., Wildenhaus, K., and Johnson, C. (2002). Tailored interventions
for multiple risk behaviors. Health Education Research, 175, 619–626.
Tardif, I., Bellerose, C., and Masson, E. (2006). Environnements et santé: Le point de vue des Montérégiens
[Environment and health: Point of view of the people of Montérégie]. Bulletin d’information
en santé environnementale (BISE),17(6). Institut national de santé publique du Québec. Retrieved
February 14, 2007, from http://www.inspq.qc.ca/pdf/bulletins/bise/BISE-17-6.pdf
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
301
Tebourbi, N. (2000). L’apprentissage organisationnel: Penser l’organisation comme processus de
gestion des connaissances et de développement des théories d’usage [Organizational learning:
Thinking of organization as a knowledge management process and developing theories of use].
A research paper by the Bell chair in technologies and work organization, under the direction
of D. G. Tremblay, Télé-Université. Université du Québec.
Télasco, A. (2004). La problématique et les interventions relatives au chauffage résidentiel au bois.
[The problem and interventions regarding residential wood heat]. Retrieved June 15, 2006,
from http://www.apcas.qc.ca/2004052710h30Telasco.ppt
Thomas, M.K., Charron, D.F., Waltner-Toews, D., Schuster, C., Maarouf, A.R., et al. (2006). A role
of high impact weather events in waterborne disease outbreaks in Canada, 1975–2001.
International Journal of Environmental Health Research, 16, 167–180.
Thompson, S.K. (1987). Sample size for estimating multinomial proportions. The American
Statistician, 411, 42–46.
Tremblay, M. (2003). Wind chill and humidex (The ridiculous got a temperature). Retrieved
June 12, 2006, from http://ptaff.ca/humidex/?lang=en_CA
Triandis, H.C. (1979). Values, attitudes, and interpersonal behavior. In Nebraska Symposium
on Motivation. London: University of Nebraska Press.
U.K. Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). (2005). Consultation on draft
AQEG report. Air quality and climate change: A U.K. perspective. Retrieved March 31, 2006,
from http://www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/consult/airqual-climatechange/chapter4.pdf
Union des municipalités du Québec (UMQ). (2006). La municipalité, maître d’œuvre de son développement
et de son avenir [The municipality: architect of its own development and its own future].
Annual report 2005. Montréal: Author. Retrieved December 4, 2006, from http://www.umq.qc.ca/
publications/rapport_annuel/_pdf/Version%20finale.pdf
United Nations. (2007a). Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twelfth session, held at
Nairobi from November 6–17, 2006. Part one: Proceedings. Retrieved February 27, 2007,
from http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2006/cop12/eng/05.pdf
—–. (2007b). UNFCCC Executive Secretary calls for speedy and decisive international action on
climate change. Retrieved February 27, 2007, from http://unfccc.int/files/press/news_room/
press_releases_and_advisories/application/pdf/070202press_rel_paris_en.pdf
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). (1988). Wood stoves certification. Retrieved
June 25, 2006, from http://www.epa.gov/Compliance/monitoring/programs/caa/whcert.html
Vadnais, C. (2005). Au frais, en silence. Protégez-vous [Stay cool in silence. Protect yourself]. Retrieved
January 12, 2006, from http://www.protegez-vous.qc.ca/cahiers/statique/cahiers16.html
Van der Pols, J.C., Williams, G.M., Neale, R.E., Clavarino, A., and Green, A.C. (2005). Long-term increase
in sunscreen use in an Australian community after a skin cancer prevention trial. Retrieved
January 26, 2006, from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?cmd=Retrieve&db=
pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16325898&query_hl=4&itool=pubmed_docsum.
Vescovi, L. (2003). The state of Canada’s water. In A.K. Biswas (Ed.), Water resources of North America.
Centre for Water Management. Mexico City: Springer Verlag.
Ville de Montréal. (2005). Le plan stratégique de développement durable de Montréal [City of Montreal
sustainable development plan]. Retrieved April 13, 2006, from http://www2.ville.montreal.qc.ca/
cmsprod/fr/developpement_durable/plan_strategique
Ville de Québec. (2004). Plan de réduction des gaz à effet de serre [Greenhouse gas reduction plan].
Retrieved December 4, 2006, from http://www.ville.quebec.qc.ca/fr/document/gesplanaction.pdf
Chapter 6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
302
—–. (2006). Québec prend le virage [Quebec City moves in a new direction]. Retrieved December 4,
2006, from http://www.ville.quebec.qc.ca/fr/ma_ville/ville_action/ecologie.shtml
Villemaire, M. (1998). Les compteurs d’eau domestique, la goutte qui fait déborder le vase:
Entrevue avec François Patenaude, chercheur à la Chaire d’études socio-économiques
de l’UQAM [Arguments against domestic water meters : Interview with François
Patenaude, UQAM research chair in socio-economic studies]. Changements, 7(2).
Retrieved January 24, 2007, from http://www.consommateur.qc.ca/union/133.htm
Villeneuve, C., and Richard, F. (2001). Vivre les changements climatiques: L’effet de serre
expliqué [Living with climate change: The greenhouse effect explained]. Sainte-Foy:
Éditions MultiMondes.
Warren, F., Barrow, E., Schwartz, R., Audrey, J., Mills, B., et al. (2004). Climate change impacts
and adaptations: A Canadian perspective. Ottawa: Natural Resources Canada.
Wilkinson, P., Landon, M., Armstrong, B., Stevenson, S., Pattenden, S., et al. (2001). Cold
comfort: The social and environmental determinants of excess winter death in England,
1986–96. Bristol, UK: The Policy Press.
Wittrock, V., Wheaton, E.E., and Beaulieu, C.R. (2001). Adaptability of prairie cities: The role
of climate. Current and future impacts and adaptation strategies. Retrieved February 21, 2006,
from http://www.parc.ca/pdf/research_publications/communities6.pdf
World Health Organization (WHO). (2000). Climate change and human health: Impact and adaptation.
WHO/SDE/OEH00.4. Retrieved April 14, 2006, from http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/
2000/WHO_SDE_OEH_00.4.pdf
—–. (2001). Monitoring Health Impacts of Climate Change in Europe: Meeting report. London:
World Health Organization.
—–. (2002). Planning meeting for ministries of health to address climate change and health.
WHO/SDE/OEH02.4. Meeting report. Geneva. Retrieved April 14, 2006, from
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2002/WHO_SDE_PHE_02.04.pdf
—–. (2003). Climate change and human health—Risks and responses. Retrieved March 30, 2006,
from http://www.who.int/globalchange/publications/cchhsummary/en/
—–. (2005). Health topics: Disasters. Retrieved February 12, 2006, from http://www.euro.who.int/
healthtopics/HT2ndLvlPage?HTCode=disasters
World Health Organization and European Environment Agency. (2002). Children’s health and
environment: A review of evidence. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Yagouti, A., Boulet, G., and Vescovi, L. (2006). L’évolution des températures au Québec
méridional entre 1960 et 2003 [Changing temperatures in southern Quebec from 1960
to 2003]. Retrieved January 12, 2006, from http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/
chang-clim/meridional/resume.htm
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Health Impacts of Climate
Change in Canada’s North
Christopher Furgal
Contributors: 
Mark Buell
Laurie Chan
Victoria Edge
Daniel Martin
Nicholas Ogden
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
305
CONTENTS
7.1
Introduction .............................................................................................................. 307
7.1.1 Climate Change and the Canadian North ........................................................ 308
7.1.2 Focus of the Chapter ........................................................................................ 312
7.1.3 Methods ............................................................................................................ 312
7.2
Northern Demographics, Health and Well-Being, and Socio-Economic Status .... 314
7.2.1 Demographics .................................................................................................. 314
7.2.2 Population Density .......................................................................................... 317
7.2.3 Aboriginal Populations .................................................................................... 317
7.2.4 Health Status .................................................................................................... 318
7.2.5 Socio-Economic Status .................................................................................... 320
7.3
Northern Health and Well-Being: Impacts and Exposure 
to Climate Change .................................................................................................... 324
7.3.1 Direct Impacts of Climate Change and Variability .......................................... 324
7.3.1.1 Extreme precipitation events and natural hazards ............................ 324
7.3.1.2 Unpredictability of weather conditions .............................................. 325
7.3.1.3 Temperature-related injuries .............................................................. 326
7.3.2 Indirect Impacts of Climate Change and Variability ........................................ 326
7.3.2.1 Climate warming and ice safety ........................................................ 327
7.3.2.2 Increased exposure to UV radiation .................................................. 328
7.3.2.3 New and emerging diseases .............................................................. 329
7.3.2.4 Food security ...................................................................................... 330
7.3.2.5 Water security .................................................................................... 333
7.3.2.6 Permafrost, coastal erosion and community infrastructure ................ 335
7.3.2.7 Mental, social and cultural well-being .............................................. 337
7.3.3 Multiple Stressors, and Health and Well-Being: 
Climate, Culture and Socio-Economic Change .............................................. 337
7.4
Northern Health and Well-Being: Adaptations and Adaptive Capacity .............. 340
7.4.1 Adaptations ...................................................................................................... 340
7.4.1.1 Precipitation extremes and natural hazards ........................................ 343
7.4.1.2 Unpredictability of weather conditions .............................................. 343
7.4.1.3 Temperature extremes ........................................................................ 344
7.4.1.4 Warming temperatures and changing ice conditions ........................ 344
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
306
7.4.1.5 Increased exposure to UV radiation .................................................. 345
7.4.1.6 New and emerging diseases .............................................................. 345
7.4.1.7 Threats to food security  .................................................................... 345
7.4.1.8 Changes in drinking water quality and accessibility ........................ 346
7.4.1.9 Impacts on community and public health infrastructure  .................. 347
7.4.2 Adaptive Capacity ............................................................................................ 347
7.4.2.1 Economic and material resources  .................................................... 347
7.4.2.2 Technology  ........................................................................................ 348
7.4.2.3 Information and skills ........................................................................ 349
7.4.2.4 Institutional arrangements  ................................................................ 349
7.4.2.5 Community and public health infrastructure .................................... 350
7.4.2.6 Disparities in health status ................................................................ 350
7.4.2.7 Socio-ecological resilience ................................................................ 351
7.4.2.8 Disparities in adaptive capacity ........................................................ 351
7.5
Key Vulnerabilities .................................................................................................... 352
7.5.1 Precipitation and Natural Hazards .................................................................... 352
7.5.2 Unpredictable Weather, Ice Conditions and Travel Hazards .......................... 352
7.5.3 Temperature-Related Injuries .......................................................................... 353
7.5.4 New and Emerging Diseases ............................................................................ 353
7.5.5 Traditional Livelihoods, Food and Water Security .......................................... 353
7.5.6 Permafrost, Coastal Erosion and Community Infrastructure .......................... 354
7.6
Knowledge Gaps and Conclusions .......................................................................... 355
7.6.1 Knowledge Gaps and Research Recommendations ........................................ 355
7.6.2 Conclusions ...................................................................................................... 357
7.7
References .................................................................................................................. 358
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
307
7.1
INTRODUCTION
There is strong evidence that the Canadian Arctic, like other circumpolar regions, is 
already experiencing changes in its climate (Huntington et al., 2005; McBean et al., 2005;
Ouranos, 2005; Bonsal and Prowse, 2006). According to the Arctic Climate Impact
Assessment, over the past 30 to 50 years the western and central Canadian Arctic have 
experienced a general warming, most dramatically during winter months, of approximately
2–3°C (Weller et al., 2005). Although significant cooling (-1.0 to -1.5°C) was reported 
for the period of 1950–1998 for the extreme northeast regions, warming is now reported for
recent years (Zhang et al., 2000). As well, community residents, Aboriginal1 hunters and
Elders have reported significant warming throughout the North in recent decades, corroborating
these scientific observations and describing the impacts these changes have already had
(Huntington et al., 2005; Nickels et al., 2006). According to both scientific measurements and
local knowledge, these climatic changes have led to significant decreases in the extent 
and thickness of winter sea ice throughout Canadian Arctic waters, melting and destabilization 
of permafrost, increased coastal erosion of low-lying areas, and shifts in the distribution and
migratory behaviour of some Arctic wildlife species. The current and future implications of
these changes for human communities in the North are far-reaching. The complex changes in
northern climate and environmental systems observed to date require greater understanding
and involvement by individuals and
institutions to accurately assess 
the impacts of these changes 
on the health of some of Canada’s
most vulnerable populations 
and to aid in the development of
effective adaptation strategies 
to minimize risks to health in this
region (Ford et al., 2006; Furgal 
and Séguin, 2006).
The Canadian North warrants 
particular attention in this 
Assessment for a number of 
reasons. Despite a small 
and dispersed population, the circumpolar Arctic is recognized as being an increasingly 
significant region in global environmental, political and economic systems. Contaminant 
production and use, predominantly in more industrialized regions of the world, their 
transport to and within the North, and recognition of their negative impacts on the health 
of Arctic residents have led to finalizing global environmental health agreements such 
as the Stockholm Convention (Downey and Fenge, 2003). Polar regions are important for 
the rest of the country and world for climate regulation and because they provide extensive 
areas that remain wild and relatively unaffected by human activities; these regions serve 
as critical areas for many culturally and otherwise important migratory species that are 
important components of global biodiversity (Chapin et al., 2005). The increasing level 
of mineral exploration and extraction activities, the significant but as yet unharnessed 
oil and gas reserves, and the rising importance of northern development sites to global 
markets has increased the importance of this region in the global economy. With 
warming and projected decreases in sea ice cover and extent, and the potential increased 
Chapter 7
1
In this chapter, “Aboriginal” refers collectively to those individuals recognized as “First Nations,” “Inuit” or “Métis” 
in Canada. Where research results are specific to any one group, they are identified accordingly in the text.
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
308
access and travel through the Northwest Passage in the future, the Canadian North is 
projected to garner significant attention, and to undergo potentially significant further 
and irreversible change.
The increased pressures that polar regions are experiencing imply that they are approaching 
critical thresholds (such as thawing of permafrost and vegetation change), yet the exact 
timing and nature of these thresholds are not well known. Crossing these thresholds will 
likely trigger a cascade of effects, with significant impacts (some positive and some 
negative) on human health and well-being (Chapin et al., 2005). In fact, some regions are
already reporting changes and associated impacts, many of which are presented in sections 
of this chapter and elsewhere (Furgal and Séguin, 2006). These northern communities and 
the northern public health system may very well be a bellwether for some of the more 
vulnerable populations in other parts of the country. What is already taking place and how
communities are adapting may provide valuable knowledge to support proactive adaptation 
in other regions. Finally, there is a sense of environmental injustice in relation to the issue 
of climate change and northern health. The Arctic regions are reported to be the first to 
experience climate change and its related impacts, and these regions are where change may 
be the greatest (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2001). These regions 
are also where large groups of Aboriginal people reside; they are still inextricably tied 
to their local environments through culture and tradition, and a reliance upon the natural 
environment for many aspects of livelihoods, health and well-being. These regions are 
also undergoing rapid social, cultural, political and economic change, which place stresses 
on communities and populations both from the inside and externally. Northern residents 
(and the regions in which they live) are in general among the lowest proportional contributors
to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the country. However, it is these populations, and 
particularly Aboriginal residents, who are the most exposed and potentially most vulnerable 
to climate change health impacts in Canada.
Research on climate change and health impacts in northern Canada, as in other circumpolar
regions, is in its infancy (Berner, 2005; Hassi et al., 2005; Furgal and Séguin, 2006). Recently,
particular attention has been given to impacts on northern Aboriginal populations. Some 
limited work, incorporating Aboriginal knowledge and local observations of environmental
change along with scientific assessments of the impacts associated with these and other 
kinds of change in remote and rapidly changing communities, has been completed (Berner 
et al., 2005; Huntington et al., 2005; Furgal and Séguin, 2006). This chapter assesses 
the current level of exposure to climate-related hazards, health impacts and vulnerabilities, 
as well as the capacity of northern communities to adapt to the risks that climate change 
is posing for Canada’s northern populations.
7.1.1
Climate Change and the Canadian North
In the context of this Assessment, the “North” is referred to here as the three territorial 
administrative regions (the Yukon, Northwest Territories (NWT) and Nunavut) north of 60°,
Nunavik (Arctic Quebec north of 55° N) and the north coast of Labrador within the
Nunatsiavut land claim settlement. The latter two comprise communities with proportionately 
large Aboriginal populations and share many biogeographical characteristics with 
the other Arctic regions of Canada. It is a vast area encompassing 112 communities of 
varying languages and cultures, including many different ecological zones, and makes 
up approximately 60% of the Canadian land mass (Figure 7.1).
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
309
Figure 7.1 Communities, political boundaries and permafrost zones 
of the Canadian North
Note: Includes 112 communities spread across three territories and the northern 
regions of two provinces.
Source: Furgal and Prowse, 2008.
There are five major distinct physical geographic regions across the North: the Canadian
Shield, Interior Plains, Arctic Lowlands, Cordillera and Innuitian Region (Fulton, 1989) 
(Figure 7.2). The Canadian Shield of the central and eastern Arctic is characterized by 
rolling terrain and exposed rock, lakes and rivers, and it extends to the mountainous 
regions of the eastern islands (e.g. Baffin Island, Arctic Cordillera). The low-lying Interior
Plains of the central Arctic stretch west to the complex Cordillera regions (Boreal and 
Taiga Cordillera). Steep mountainous landscapes and some of the highest peaks in North
America are characteristic of this area (Prowse, 1990; French and Slaymaker, 1993). 
The Cordillera separates the interior of the continent from the Pacific Ocean, and affects 
the movement of air masses and thus climate. Permafrost underlies significant portions 
of many of these regions and influences the development of infrastructure in the North. 
Along with the presence of permafrost, the underlying geography and geology have 
always influenced (and continue to influence) the climate, and the distribution of wildlife 
and other natural resources (e.g. minerals) and human settlement, activities and 
development today.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
310
Figure 7.2 Physiographic and eco-regions of the Canadian North and their geographic
and biological characteristics
Source: Adapted from Fulton, 1989; Furgal et al., 2003.
Climate model projections for the Canadian North appear to indicate that the recently
observed rates of change across the North will continue (McBean et al., 2005). Coupled 
with a unique degree of sensitivity of northern ecosystems, the impacts of climate change 
in the Arctic over the next hundred years are expected to surpass that in many other 
regions of the country and the world. However, the complexity of responses in biological 
and human systems, and the fact that northern populations are also experiencing stress 
from many other sources, must also be considered. The projections of impacts resulting from
changes in the climate system, which are often examined in isolation, must be considered 
in the context of other driving forces of change—potentially increasingly important 
ones in relation to northern health and well-being.
Chapter 7
Landforms
Massive icefields and glaciers
cap the rugged mountains
Lowland plains with glacial
moraines in the West, and
uplands with plateaux and rock
hills in the East
Broadly rolling upland and 
lowland plains
Broad lowlands and plateaux,
incised by major rivers
Rolling terrain with uplands, 
wetlands and innumerable lakes
Steep, mountainous topography
with sharp ridges and narrow
valleys
Level to gently rolling plains
Mountain ranges with high 
peaks and extensive plateaux
Climate
Very cold and arid
Very dry and cold
Long, cold winters and
short, cool summers
Semi-arid and cold
Subarctic continental 
climate, with low 
precipitation
Dry, cold winters and
short, cool summers
Moist climate with cold
winters and moderately
warm summers
Long, cold, dry winters
and short, warm 
summers
Vegetation
Largely absent due to 
permanent ice and snow
Dominated by herbs 
and lichen
Dwarf shrubs that decrease
in size to the north
Dwarf birch, Labrador tea,
willows and mosses
Open forests and arctic 
tundra
Shrubs, mosses, lichens,
dwarf birches, willows
Spruce, tamarack, jack pine,
white birch, balsam, poplar
Spruce, alpine fir, trembling
aspen, white birch
Wildlife
Polar bear, walrus, seals, 
narwhal, whale
Caribou, muskox, wolf, 
arctic hare, lemming
Moose, muskox, wolf, arctic
fox, grizzly and polar bear,
caribou
Moose, woodland caribou, 
wolf, black bear, marten
Caribou, moose, wolf, 
snowshoe hare, black and 
grizzly bears
Dall’s sheep, caribou, lynx,
wolverine
Woodland caribou, mule 
deer, coyote, boreal owl
Woodland caribou, Dall’s 
sheep, mountain goat, 
marten, ptarmigan
Ecozone
Arctic Cordillera
Northern Arctic
Southern Arctic
Taiga Plains
Taiga Shield
Taiga Cordillera
Boreal Plains
Boreal Cordillera
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
311
Climate simulations consistently indicate a “polar amplification” phenomenon, which is
greater warming in the northern high latitudes compared with warming over the entire globe
(Christensen et al., 2007). For the Arctic regions, climate models predict an increase in 
temperature of 2–4°C by the middle of the 21st century, and an increase of 4–7°C by the end
of the century, depending on the GHG emission scenario used (Kattsov et al., 2005; Weller 
et al., 2005) (Figure 7.3). In the Canadian Arctic the largest seasonal warming is projected to
occur in the autumn and winter over the Arctic Ocean, with decreased seasonal warming in
the summer (Furgal and Prowse, 2008). This trend extends onto land, though it is much less 
pronounced (Kattsov et al., 2005; Christensen et al., 2007). Despite the general warming
trend, there is considerable spatial variability in expected temperature change in the Arctic. 
Simulations also show a general increase in precipitation (10–28%) over the Arctic by the 
end of the 21st century, which is robust among models and can be attributed to the projected
warming and related changes in atmospheric moisture content (Christensen et al., 2007). 
This increase in precipitation also exhibits spatial variability in the Canadian Arctic, with the
greatest projected increase to occur over regions in the high Arctic and Arctic Ocean (30–40%),
and the smallest to occur in the Atlantic sector (<5–10%) (Kattsov et al., 2005; Christensen 
et al., 2007; Furgal and Prowse, 2008). The percentage increase in precipitation is projected 
to be largest in the winter season and smallest in the summer, which is consistent with the
warming projections (Christensen et al., 2007; Kattsov et al., 2005).
Figure 7.3 Atmosphere-Ocean General Circulation Model projected annual 
temperature changes over the Canadian North for three 30-year periods:
2020s, 2050s and 2080s
Chapter 7
Minimum Change
Median Change
Maximum Change
Region: North
Annual mean temperature change (°C)
2020s
2050s
2080s
2020s
2050s
2080s
Temperature Change (°C)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
84°
80°
76°
72°
68°
64°
60°
-140°
-120°
-110°
-100°
-90°
-80°
-70°
-60°
-130°
Sachs
Harbour
Tuktoyaktuk
Inuvik
Resolute
Pond Inlet
Baker Lake
Rankin Inlet
Hay River
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
Old
Crow
Watson Lake
Cambridge
Bay
Pangnirtung
Iqualuit
Alert
84°
80°
76°
72°
68°
64°
60°
-140°
-120°
-110°
-100°
-90°
-80°
-70°
-60°
-130°
Sachs
Harbour
Tuktoyaktuk
Inuvik
Resolute
Pond Inlet
Baker Lake
Rankin Inlet
Hay River
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
Old
Crow
Watson Lake
Cambridge
Bay
Pangnirtung
Iqualuit
Alert
84°
80°
76°
72°
68°
64°
60°
-140°
-120°
-110°
-100°
-90°
-80°
-70°
-60°
-130°
Sachs
Harbour
Tuktoyaktuk
Inuvik
Resolute
Pond Inlet
Baker Lake
Rankin Inlet
Hay River
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
Old
Crow
Watson Lake
Cambridge
Bay
Pangnirtung
Iqualuit
Alert
84°
80°
76°
72°
68°
64°
60°
-140°
-120°
-110°
-100°
-90°
-80°
-70°
-60°
-130°
Sachs
Harbour
Tuktoyaktuk
Inuvik
Resolute
Pond Inlet
Baker Lake
Rankin Inlet
Hay River
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
Old
Crow
Watson Lake
Cambridge
Bay
Pangnirtung
Iqualuit
Alert
84°
80°
76°
72°
68°
64°
60°
-140°
-120°
-110°
-100°
-90°
-80°
-70°
-60°
-130°
Sachs
Harbour
Tuktoyaktuk
Inuvik
Resolute
Pond Inlet
Baker Lake
Rankin Inlet
Hay River
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
Old
Crow
Watson Lake
Cambridge
Bay
Pangnirtung
Iqualuit
Alert
84°
80°
76°
72°
68°
64°
60°
-140°
-120°
-110°
-100°
-90°
-80°
-70°
-60°
-130°
Sachs
Harbour
Tuktoyaktuk
Inuvik
Resolute
Pond Inlet
Baker Lake
Rankin Inlet
Hay River
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
Old
Crow
Watson Lake
Cambridge
Bay
Pangnirtung
Iqualuit
Alert
84°
80°
76°
72°
68°
64°
60°
-140°
-120°
-110°
-100°
-90°
-80°
-70°
-60°
-130°
Sachs
Harbour
Tuktoyaktuk
Inuvik
Resolute
Pond Inlet
Baker Lake
Rankin Inlet
Hay River
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
Old
Crow
Watson Lake
Cambridge
Bay
Pangnirtung
Iqualuit
Alert
84°
80°
76°
72°
68°
64°
60°
-140°
-120°
-110°
-100°
-90°
-80°
-70°
-60°
-130°
Sachs
Harbour
Tuktoyaktuk
Inuvik
Resolute
Pond Inlet
Baker Lake
Rankin Inlet
Hay River
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
Old
Crow
Watson Lake
Cambridge
Bay
Pangnirtung
Iqualuit
Alert
84°
80°
76°
72°
68°
64°
60°
-140°
-120°
-110°
-100°
-90°
-80°
-70°
-60°
-130°
Sachs
Harbour
Tuktoyaktuk
Inuvik
Resolute
Pond Inlet
Baker Lake
Rankin Inlet
Hay River
Yellowknife
Whitehorse
Old
Crow
Watson Lake
Cambridge
Bay
Pangnirtung
Iqualuit
Alert
Source: Furgal and Prowse, 2008.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
312
These projected trends in temperature and precipitation regimes throughout the Canadian
Arctic highlight the need to better understand the current status of and changes in relationships
between northern residents and their environment (e.g. cold and heat exposure, use and 
contact with snow, ice, wildlife and other environmental resources). This understanding 
must consider seasonality and regional specificity because a variety of physical processes,
feedback systems, and natural variations will cause uneven climate impacts across the North.
These regional and seasonal specificities imply differential environmental health risks in 
these regions.
7.1.2
Focus of the Chapter
Recent scientific assessments have been conducted in the Arctic that incorporate evaluations 
of various aspects of change (social, environmental, political) and their impacts on human 
populations. These include the work performed by the Third Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2001), the Arctic Monitoring and
Assessment Program (AMAP) (AMAP, 2002), the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA)
(ACIA, 2005), the Arctic Human Development Report (AHDR) (AHDR, 2004) and the
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (Chapin et al., 2005). Much of this work has focussed 
on describing impacts of change. In regard to their treatment of human impacts, the 
conclusions of previous assessments have tended to be speculative in nature due to a lack of
locally specific data, and sparse impact and adaptation research at the local scale. However,
they are extremely valuable because they summarize the state of knowledge and identify
knowledge gaps regarding climate change impacts in circumpolar regions, and thus can guide
current and future research activities.
The current chapter adds to the
existing body of knowledge by 
taking a vulnerability approach 
in the assessment of climate 
change impacts on health in the
Canadian North. The limitations
imposed by the lack of local-scale
qualitative and quantitative data 
on the subject remain. However,
this chapter attempts to provide 
a synthesis of key existing and future health vulnerabilities by also considering current 
and future factors that influence the exposure of local populations and their ability 
to respond (adaptive capacity) to changes in local climatic conditions. The term 
“vulnerability” means “the degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable 
to cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate variability and 
extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the character, magnitude, and rate of climate 
variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity.” 
(IPCC, 2007, p. 21).
7.1.3
Methods
Climate change takes place amid a number of interacting social, economic and environmental
variables across local, regional, national and international scales. It is therefore important 
to consider the vulnerability of “systems” which connect humans to their environment, and
support ways of life, livelihoods and health. To assist communities and individuals in 
developing strategies to enhance their adaptive capacity and ultimately reduce vulnerability, 
it is imperative to understand the current status of factors that affect this vulnerability. 
To achieve this, an approach similar to that used by others (World Health Organization (WHO),
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Eric Loring
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
313
2003; Ebi et al., 2006) has been taken. A step-wise process describes the current distribution 
and burden of climate-sensitive diseases; identifies and describes current capacities to reduce
the impacts of these diseases; reviews the health implications of the potential impact of climate
variability and change on various sectors, estimating future potential impacts; and finally 
synthesizes the results of the assessment and identifies potential adaptation measures to reduce
the negative health effects. Despite the lack of local-scale data from climate and health-related
work in the Canadian North, information does exist on the status and trends in various northern
sectors about the current exposure to environmental hazards and the adaptive capacity to
respond to change; this information aids in an assessment of this type.
This chapter first describes the current distribution and burden of climate-influenced health 
outcomes, as well as the status of selected variables reported to influence vulnerability 
and adaptive capacity (see Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity 
in Canada). A discussion of the state of knowledge about the relationships between 
climate-related variables and health impacts in northern regions is then provided. Via a 
predominantly qualitative analysis, employing a process of data triangulation (Farmer 
et al., 2006) or weight-of-evidence approach, the chapter draws upon various qualitative 
and quantitative sources of data to review key vulnerabilities and provide an initial assessment 
of the factors that influence adaptive capacity. The chapter then presents a review of current
health adaptations in reaction to climate and environmental change in the Canadian North. 
It concludes with a summary of key knowledge gaps and recommendations for research 
and action on these issues.
The chapter draws on information from the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program,
Arctic Human Development Report, Arctic Climate Impact Assessment and the Millenium
Ecosystem Assessment as they pertain to the Canadian Arctic. These assessments are 
an assemblage of scientific review and expert opinion. This chapter uses, where available,
peer-reviewed studies on this topic in the Canadian North as well as grey literature, and
research and policy reports. Some of this work is specific to climate and health; much is 
more generally oriented toward environmental change and human impacts. This work 
comes from the fields of health and medical sciences, as well as anthropology, sociology,
human ecology and human geography. Local reports of observations of change and 
perspectives on impacts presented in workshop reports and community-based projects 
are also used, reflecting much of the recent work done in the Canadian Arctic. Where 
possible, the methods used to collect these various sources of data are discussed in order 
to assess the confidence and utility of the information for the assessment of current 
and future vulnerability.
The data used in the assessment include both quantitative and qualitative survey information 
(e.g. Regional Health Survey, Aboriginal Peoples Survey, census statistics), Aboriginal 
knowledge and observations on changes and impacts, and indicators of organization and 
community adaptive capacity. In some cases, Aboriginal knowledge and local reports 
are the best and only local-scale data regarding individual exposure and health vulnerabilities 
to climate change in northern communities (Furgal and Séguin, 2006). Much of this 
information has been gathered either from projects using semi-directed interview methods
(Huntington et al., 2000; Furgal et al., 2002) or a small workshop format (Nickels et al.,
2002). Qualitative analysis of these various sources (e.g. more than 20 community workshops
and Aboriginal organizational reports focussed on the topic of environmental change 
and community impacts) was conducted to identify indications of locally observed climate
changes and health impacts, which were organized by health determinants in support 
of this assessment chapter (Barron, 2006).
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
314
7.2
NORTHERN DEMOGRAPHICS, HEALTH AND WELL-BEING,
AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC STATUS
Health vulnerabilities to climate change are related to current and future levels of exposure
and the ability to respond. This adaptive capacity—the ability to respond—can be influenced
by a number of factors including existing health and socio-economic status (see section 7.5). 
A short review of pertinent demographic and health statistics potentially influencing Northerners’
vulnerability to the health impacts of climate change is presented here. Because the statistics 
are influenced by demographic structure and population size, the crude rates shown for some
indicators are to be interpreted with caution.
7.2.1
Demographics
While most of Canada’s population lives in cities south of the 60° N parallel, approximately
150,000 live in Canada’s North. Most of the northern population lives in three territories, with
comparatively smaller but significant populations living in the northern regions of Quebec
(Nunavik) and Labrador (in the Inuit Settlement Area of Nunatsiavut) (Table 7.1). Still a relatively
sparsely inhabited region of the country, the North has experienced significant demographic,
social, economic and political change in recent decades. In the late 1950s and 1960s, significant
population and economic growth, associated with resource development and the establishment 
of public administration, took place; however, this trend has since slowed (Chapin et al., 2005).
During that time, many Aboriginal people who were living a traditional lifestyle on the land
were settled permanently in communities. Most population growth since the establishment of
communities has occurred primarily in the three main urban centres (Whitehorse, Yellowknife
and Iqaluit), and population density remains low outside of these locations (Bogoyavlenskiy
and Siggner, 2004). Since the 1980s, much of the population growth has been attributed to an
increase in the non-Aboriginal population; this is associated with resource development and
public administration (Bogoyavlenskiy and Siggner, 2004; Chapin et al., 2005). The northern
population is projected to continue to grow in the coming years, most significantly in the NWT
where the population is expected to surpass 50,000 residents within the next 25 years (Table 7.1).
This is likely attributed, at least in part, to industrial development associated with the Mackenzie
Valley pipeline project and other mineral extraction activities in that region, and increases in
employment opportunities.
Table 7.1
Current (2005) and projected (2031) populations (thousands) 
for Canadian northern regions
Note: Scenario 3 assumes medium growth and medium migration rates with medium fertility, life
expectancy, immigration and interprovincial migration (as outlined in Statistics Canada, 2006b).
* Data not available at the regional level included in this chapter.
Source: Statistics Canada, 2006b.
Chapter 7
Mean Annual Growth Rate for
Scenario 3 (range of scenarios 1–6)
7.3 (4.5–10.0)
*
*
4.0 (1.2–6.6)
9.1 (5.8–11.4)
3.6 (0.7–5.5)
2005 Population
32,270.5
23.9
9.6
30.0
43.0
31.0
Canada
Labrador
Nunavik
Nunavut
Northwest Territories
Yukon
Projected Population in 2031 for
Scenario 3 (range of scenarios 1–6)
39,024.4 (36,261.2–41,810.0)
*
*
33.3 (30.0–35.6)
54.4 (49.9–57.7)
34.0 (31.5–35.7)
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
315
Today, the northern population is, on average, rapidly growing compared with the rest 
of Canada. Crude rates of births and mortality vary among regions. However, in general 
they are much higher in the North than the Canadian average (Tables 7.2, 7.3). Growth 
in northern populations, and among Aboriginal groups in particular, has been largely 
due to an increase in medical services and a reduction in infant mortality and mortality 
caused by infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis and vaccine preventable diseases 
of childhood, since the mid-part of the last century.
Table 7.2
Selected health indicators for Canadian northern regions
* Data from the former Health Labrador Corporation, which provided services to all of Central,
Western and Coastal Labrador, including Black Tickle and points north (this organization merged
with Grenfell Regional Health Services in 2005 to form Labrador-Grenfell Health).
† Data not available at the regional level included in this chapter.
‡ The population estimates used for the 2003 birth and fertility rate calculations are July 1, 2003 updated
postcensal estimates, adjusted for net census undercoverage and include non-permanent residents.
Source: Statistics Canada, 2004a.
§ Low birth weight is average from 1999–2003. Source: INSPQ, 2006.
# Population aged 12 and over reporting level of physical activity, based on their responses to questions
about the frequency, duration and intensity of their participation in leisure-time physical activity.
Source unless otherwise indicated: Statistics Canada, 2003.
Chapter 7
Labrador*
†
8.9
73.6
78.7
†
†
†
64
48.7
Nunavik
†
†
63.3
70.2
17.8
6.7§
3,853§
51
†
Indicator
Public health spending per capita ($)
Crude birth rates (live births per 
1,000 residents) (2003)‡
Life expectancy at birth (males, 2002)
Life expectancy at birth (females, 2002)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live
births, 500 grams or more, 2001)
Low birth weight rate (% of births 
less than 2,500 grams)§
Potential years of life lost due to uninten-
tional injury (deaths per 100,000 residents)
Self-reported health (% aged 12 and
over reporting very good or excellent
health)
Physical activity (% aged 12 and 
over reporting physically active or 
moderately active)#
Nunavut
7,049
26.0
67.2
69.6
15.6
7.6
2,128
51
42.9
NWT
5,862
16.6
73.2
79.6
4.9
4.7
1,878
54
38.4
Yukon
4,063
11.0
73.9
80.3
8.7
4.7
1,066
54
57.9
Canada
2,535
10.6
75.4
81.2
4.4
5.5
628
59.6
42.6
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
316
Table 7.3
Selected crude mortality rates by cause (per 100,000 deaths) 
for Canadian northern regions
Note: Crude mortality rates per 100,000 deaths in 2003 unless otherwise noted.
* Source: INSPQ, 2006.
† Not available at the regional level included in this chapter.
‡ Population estimates used for the 2003 mortality rate calculations are July 1, 2003 updated 
postcensal estimates, adjusted for net census undercoverage and included non-permanent residents
(Statistics Canada, 2004a).
Source unless otherwise indicated: Statistics Canada, 2006a.
The northern population is considerably younger than the national average, with Nunavut and
Nunavik having significant segments of their population under the age of 15 years. As well, a 
significantly smaller percentage of residents are over the age of 65 in the North compared with the
rest of the country (Table 7.4). This combination makes for dependency ratios slightly lower than
the national average in the Yukon and the NWT, yet higher in Nunavut. Based on Statistics Canada
projections for the next 25 years, the North will continue to be a predominantly young population
compared with the rest of Canada. However, with a growing percentage of people over the age
of 65, the dependency ratios will increase across the territories as well. This is most significant 
in the Yukon where the dependency ratio is projected to increase from 33.6 to 55.8 over the next
quarter century, predominantly associated with an aging population (Table 7.4). Comparable 
statistics are not available at the regional level for Nunavik and Labrador (north coast or
Nunatsiavut Settlement area).
Table 7.4
Comparison of current (2006) and projected (2031) median age and population
dependency ratios for Canada and northern regions under moderate 
population projection Scenario 3
Note: Scenario 3 assumes medium growth and medium migration rates with medium fertility, life
expectancy, immigration and inter-provincial migration (as outlined in Statistics Canada, 2006b).
* Data not available at the regional levels included in this chapter.
Source: Statistics Canada, 2006b; INSPQ, 2006 (Nunavik data).
Chapter 7
Labrador
8.3†
†
†
†
†
†
†
†
†
Nunavik*
7.1
†
†
†
†
†
†
†
131.2
Indicator
Total mortality rate (per 1,000) (2004)‡
Major cardiovascular diseases
Acute myocardial infarction
Deaths due to heart attacks
Lung cancer
Accidents, unintentional injuries
Transport accidents (motor vehicle, other
land transport, water, air and unspecified)
Accidental drowning
Intentional self-harm (suicide)
Nunavut
4.1
78.9
10.3
3.7
209.5
30.9
27.5
<0.5
106.4
NWT
3.6
118.5
35.5
28
61
59.2
16.6
7.1
23.7
Yukon
5.4
111.3
6.5
37.1
73.2
65.5
19.6
9.8
19.6
Canada
7.1
233.2
58.9
52.1
48.2
28.6
9.9
0.8
11.9
Labrador
current (projected)
*
*
*
*
Nunavik
current (projected)
22.2 (*)
35.1(*)
3.0 (*)
56.6 (*)
Indicator
Median Age
% Aged 0-14
% Aged 65 and over
Total dependency ratio
Nunavut
current (projected)
23.0 (24.5)
54.3 (50.9)
4.4 (9.1)
58.7 (60.0)
NWT
current (projected)
30.8 (35.7)
33.7 (31.3)
6.9 (23.5)
40.6 (54.8)
Yukon
current (projected)
37.6 (40.7)
23.9 (25.0)
9.8 (30.8)
33.6 (55.8)
Canada
current (projected)
38.8 (44.3)
24.9 (23.5)
19.0 (37.7)
43.9 (61.3)
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
317
7.2.2
Population Density
Nearly two thirds of Canadian northern communities are coastal, and the large majority 
are small and isolated; only three centres of more than 5,000 people exist. In some regions, 
the majority (67% in Nunavut) of the population live in communities of less than 
1,000 people. However, these small communities (100–499 residents) represent only 11% 
of all northern residents (Bogoyavlenskiy and Siggner, 2004). Large centres account 
for significant proportions of some regional populations (e.g. the Yukon 58.7%, Table 7.5). 
As well, approximately 60% of northern communities are situated along coastlines, 
with this distribution reaching as high as 100% of communities in some regions (e.g. Nunavik,
some regions of Nunavut and the NWT, Nunatsiavut). A smaller yet significant number 
are located in very mountainous areas.
Table 7.5
Population characteristics of Canadian northern regions
* Data from the former Health Labrador Corporation, which provided services to all of Central,
Western and Coastal Labrador, including Black Tickle and points north (this organization merged
with Grenfell Regional Health Services in 2005 to form Labrador-Grenfell Health).
† The official Statistics Canada definition of “urban” is used where “urban areas” are those continuously
built-up areas having a population concentration of 1,000 or more and a population density 
of 400 or more per km2 based on the previous census; rural areas have concentrations or densities
below these thresholds.
‡ Aboriginal people are those who reported identifying with at least one Aboriginal group (e.g. North
American First Nations, Métis or Inuit) and/or those who reported being of Treaty Indian status 
or of Registered Indian status as defined by the Indian Act and/or those who were members of an
Indian Band or First Nation.
Source: Statistics Canada, 2001a (20% sample).
7.2.3
Aboriginal Populations
Just over half of northern residents are Aboriginal, and they represent diverse cultural 
and linguistic groups—from the 14 Yukon First Nations in the west to the Inuit of 
Nunatsiavut in the east, some of which have been in these regions for thousands of years. 
Nearly half of the residents in the North are non-Aboriginal and comprise a range of 
regional populations (from 8.1% in Nunavik to 77.1% in the Yukon, Table 7.5) (Statistics
Canada, 2001a). Inversely, the number of Aboriginal residents as a proportion of 
regional or territorial populations is highest in Nunavik and then decreases as one moves
toward Nunavut, the NWT and then to the Yukon. The majority of small communities 
are predominantly Aboriginal in composition and are places where various aspects 
of traditional lifestyles are still strong components of day-to-day life. When interpreting 
northern health statistics, which are often not available according to Aboriginal status, 
these ratios and their geographic distribution are important to note.
Chapter 7
Labrador*
0.11
68.3
34.1
Nunavik
0.02
0.0
91.3
Indicator
Population density (per km2)
Urban population (% of total population)†
Aboriginal population (% of total 
population)‡
Nunavut
0.01
32.4
85.2
NWT
0.03
58.3
50.5
Yukon
0.06
58.7
22.9
Canada
3.33
79.6
3.4
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
318
7.2.4
Health Status
In this chapter, health is regarded as a “state of complete physical, mental and social well-being 
and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity” (WHO, 2006). This definition supports 
a multidimensional view of the concept of health and embraces the more traditional 
and holistic concepts of health held by many Aboriginal groups in the Canadian North and
elsewhere. In general, the health status of the Canadian Northern population is lower than the
national average (Tables 7.2, 7.3), and Northerners are more highly exposed to a variety of
environmental hazards that account for significant proportions of common causes of mortality
and hospitalization. The exposure and negative outcomes are even greater among northern
Aboriginal residents (Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ), 2006). A
variety of health status indicators are summarized in the text that follows; these help describe
current health sensitivities and factors that may influence adaptive capacity in the context 
of climate change.
Life expectancy for both males and females living in the North is as much as 10 years less
than the national average, and even lower among Aboriginal Northerners, likely due in part 
to factors such as higher rates of infant mortality (Table 7.2). The average life expectancy 
for all residents in regions in which Inuit comprise the majority of the population (Nunatsiavut,
Nunavik, Nunavut and the Inuvialuit Settlement Region (ISR) of the NWT) is 66.9 years,
which is comparable to the national average as it was in 1950 (Statistics Canada, 2005). Similarly,
in regions with higher Aboriginal populations, the potential years of life lost due to all causes 
are much higher, and incidences of trauma and lifestyle-related cancers are greater (INSPQ, 2006)
(Table 7.2). According to Wigle et al. (2005), children and youth in the Canadian Arctic, 
and particularly Aboriginal children, suffer from comparatively lower health status than 
children and youth in other Arctic countries and in comparison with the Canadian general
population as well.
Differences in the common causes 
of death among Arctic Aboriginal 
populations exist when compared with
the national or northern non-Aboriginal
population (AMAP, 2002). All northern
regions report much lower rates of
death from cardiovascular disease, acute
myocardial infarction and heart attacks
than the national average (Statistics
Canada, 2001a) (Table 7.3). However,
northern populations report higher 
than national rates of mortality 
from causes such as lung cancer and 
unintentional injuries (accidents) 
associated with motor vehicle accidents and drowning. The latter is likely associated, in 
part, with the high level of dependence on various modes of transport (e.g. skidoo, four-wheel 
all-terrain vehicle, boat) for activities that are a strong part of livelihoods and traditions 
in these areas (i.e. hunting, fishing and gathering activities). More than 70% of northern
Aboriginal adults report harvesting natural resources by hunting and fishing and of 
those, more than 96% do so for traditional and subsistence purposes (Statistics Canada,
2001a). Finally, significantly higher rates of mortality are reported from intentional 
self-harm (suicide) than other regions of the country and this is particularly the case in
Nunavut (Statistics Canada, 2001a) (Table 7.3). This indicator of social stress is also 
supported by statistics of perceived low level of social support among individuals in some
regions of the North (Statistics Canada, 2001b) (Table 7.6).
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
319
Table 7.6
Selected social and economic indicators for Canadian northern regions
* Data from the former Health Labrador Corporation, which provided services to all of Central,
Western and Coastal Labrador, including Black Tickle and points north (this organization merged
with Grenfell Regional Health Services in 2005 to form Labrador-Grenfell Health).
† Level of perceived social support reported by population aged 12 and over, based on their responses
to eight questions about having someone to confide in, someone they can count on in a crisis, 
someone they can count on for advice, and someone with whom they can share worries and concerns.
Source: Statistics Canada, 2003.
‡ Labrador-Grenfell Health region: Includes all of mainland Labrador.
§ Labour force aged 15 and over who did not have a job any time during the current or previous year.
Source unless otherwise indicated: Statistics Canada, 2001a (20% sample).
The pattern of general and comparative indicators of mortality between northern populations
and the rest of Canada sheds light on possible vulnerabilities. It is important to acknowledge that
mortality differs with geographic location and socio-demographic characteristics. Significantly
more deaths occur from cancers and cardiovascular disease in the larger communities of the NWT,
including Yellowknife, whereas in the smaller communities, intentional and unintentional
injuries account for the largest proportion of deaths (22%) (Government of the Northwest
Territories (GNWT), 2005). More than half of injury-related deaths and hospitalizations occur
among individuals aged 15 to 44, whereas seniors have the highest injury-related deaths and
hospitalization rates. Most injury-related deaths occur among males (78%); this is over three
times the rate for females. The age-standardized injury-related mortality and hospitalization
rates among Inuit and Dene in the NWT are more than twice as high as those among other
residents (injury-related mortality: 179, 118 and 49 per 100,000, respectively; injury-related
hospitalization: 2,576, 2,243 and 983 per 100,000, respectively) (GNWT, 2004).
Despite the territorial and provincial governments spending significantly more per capita on public
health in northern regions, Northerners self-report poorer health status than elsewhere in the
country (Statistics Canada, 2001b) (Table 7.2). Approximately half of Northerners in each region,
slightly lower than the national average, report that their health is either “very good” or “excellent”
(Table 7.4). When differentiating between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal residents, there are
further differences. For example, in the 1996 Census a much lower percentage of Aboriginal
than non-Aboriginal people in the territories reported their self-assessed health as “high” 
(47% versus 69%) (Statistics Canada, 1998).
Chapter 7
Labrador*
85.8
87.6‡
15.5
28,478
10.2
9.3
83.9
Nunavik
–
72.0
35.5
23,215
17.0
8.7
52.7
Indicator
Sense of high social support†
Sense of belonging to local community
(very strong or somewhat strong)
Percentage of Census families that 
are lone female-parent families
Personal average income $ (in the 
year 2000)
Government transfer income 
as proportion of total % (2000)
% long-term unemployed (labour 
force aged 15 and over)§
% of population aged 25–29 that are
high school graduates
Nunavut
58.1
80.9
25.7
26,924
12.9
11.2
64.7
NWT
74.5
72.3
21.0
35,012
7.3
4.8
77.5
Yukon
78.0
69.3
19.8
31,917
8.6
6.0
85.4
Canada
–
62.3
15.7
29,769
11.6
3.7
85.3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
320
In terms of other key health behaviours, Northerners in general are more frequent smokers,
have higher rates of obesity and alcohol consumption, yet report feeling less stress than 
the average Canadian (Statistics Canada, 2002). Approximately 80% of all Canadians had
contact with a medical doctor in the year previous to the National Community Health 
Survey. This number was comparable in the Yukon (83%) and the region serviced by the Health
Labrador Corporation (79%), but it was significantly lower in the NWT (71%) and Nunavut (53%)
(Statistics Canada, 2001b). Contact with a doctor by Aboriginal residents was less than 
the non-Aboriginal territorial averages (59% versus 76%: Statistics Canada, 2002); however,
contact with a nurse, who is often the 
primary health professional in small 
northern communities on a full-time basis,
was much higher (Statistics Canada, 1998). 
The availability of general practitioners and
specialists per capita is much lower in the 
territories than in other regions of the country
(Statistics Canada, 2002). In general, 
Northerners are less satisfied with the health
care they receive compared with the national
average (84.9%), and the percentage of the
population that are “very or somewhat” 
satisfied with the health care they receive
decreases as one moves to the regions with 
a higher percentage Aboriginal population
(Yukon, 85.3%; NWT, 81.6%; Nunavut,
74.2%) (Statistics Canada, 2004b).
7.2.5
Socio-Economic Status
Many northern community economies are now a mix of traditional land-based renewable
resource and subsistence activities, and formal wage-earning sector activities often tied to
non-renewable resource extraction. It is important to understand the economic capacity for
adaptation at the household and regional or territorial levels in the North because it is a significant
factor influencing the feasibility of local responses to minimize some forms of climate 
change impacts. A short description of economic activities, highlighting the nature of northern
economic capacity and diversity at various scales, is provided in the text that follows.
Estimates of the “land-based” or traditional and subsistence economy are difficult, but are
important to include in estimates of the gross domestic product (The Conference Board 
of Canada, 2005). The Conference Board of Canada estimated Nunavut’s land-based economy 
to be worth between $40 and $60 million per year; an estimated $30 million is attributed 
to all food-oriented economic activity. Country foods2 provide a non-cash or in-kind benefit in 
the amount of about $3.35 million annually in the ISR of the NWT alone or approximately
$1,150 per capita. A typical household produces several thousand dollars’ worth of food 
that it does not have to buy at the store (Smith and Wright, 1989; Usher and Wenzel, 1989).
Tourism, which includes guiding, sport hunting camps and polar bear hunts, is estimated 
to be worth $4 million per year in Nunavut. However, the true value of such activities 
is difficult to measure because they also contribute significantly to the social, human and 
cultural capital of the region, and do not benefit people only in a monetary sense (The
Conference Board of Canada, 2005). In general, fishing, hunting and trapping contributed 
$7.6 million to the wage-based gross domestic product of Nunavut in 1999. The traditional 
economy is similarly important in other northern regions (Duhaime et al., 2004).
Chapter 7
2
While the terms “country food” and “traditional food” are used differently by different aboriginal groups within Canada, 
they have been used interchangeably for the purposes of this chapter.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
321
Large-scale mineral resource extraction is central to the northern Canadian economy today.
The NWT, Nunavut, Nunavik and Nunatsiavut are all home to major developments devoted 
to extracting minerals and hydrocarbon resources (Duhaime et al., 2004). While only a 
fraction of the revenue from these sources remains in the regions in which the activities are
carried out, the employment directly associated with the activities represent significant 
benefits to the regions in terms of economic spin-offs in the form of related wage-earning
employment for labour and infrastructure development; however, these benefits are typically 
only for the life of the project.
Geographic patterns of economic activity mirror the disparities in levels of personal income
from region to region (Table 7.6). For example, in the NWT, workers in the mining industry
receive high salaries resulting in a high regional per capita income in this region compared to 
others. On the other hand, in Nunavut, some of the higher paying jobs are in the government
sector, and the overall regional average income is lower than elsewhere in Canada (Duhaime 
et al., 2004). Regional disparities in economic activity and personal income are important 
in the context of climate change because regional and community economies are significant 
factors that influence the capacity to adapt and minimize negative impacts. It is apparent 
that some regions likely have a greater economic ability to collectively respond to change 
than others.
For some climate change impacts, adaptation is likely to be most feasible at the individual 
or household scale, and thus economic disparities at these levels are also important to 
understand. In Nunavik, more than 55% of Inuit households live below the low-income
threshold and represent more than 68% of the total population (Chabot, 2004). Longitudinal 
studies show that Inuit in Nunavik earn less than the non-Inuit working in this region; 
however, the gap is slowly narrowing (Duhaime et al., 1999). A similar pattern exists 
when looking at the sources of income and the amount that comes from government 
transfer payments. In Nunavut and Nunavik, a higher percentage of personal income 
comes from these transfers than other northern regions; thus, their economic capacity 
is more dependent upon outside sources than it is in other northern regions (Statistics 
Canada, 2001a) (Table 7.6).
These socio-demographic, 
economic and health factors 
combine to create important 
issues for public and environmental
health in northern regions.
Individuals in some regions are
challenged simply with the costs 
of access to adequate housing 
and food. For example, 80% of
renters and 25% of home owners 
in Nunavik spend more than 
30% of their household income 
on housing costs compared 
with national averages (39% of
renters and 16% of home owners) (Statistics Canada, 2001a). Further, many Aboriginal 
residents have significant issues with the quality and safety of available housing. As of 2001, 
28% of residents in Labrador, 68% in Nunavik, 54% in Nunavut, 35% in the NWT and 
43% in the Yukon lived in overcrowded homes (Statistics Canada, 2001a; Council of Yukon 
First Nations (CYFN), 2006). Approximately 16% of homes in the NWT and 33% in 
the Yukon require major repairs, compared with the national average of 8% (Statistics Canada,
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
322
2001a; GNWT, 2005; CYFN, 2006). The housing issues are not uniform across the territories;
problems (at least one of overcrowding, quality or affordability) are more often found 
among units in small communities (30%), compared with Yellowknife (9%) in the NWT
(GNWT, 2005). Structural factors, social conditions and some health behaviours can 
combine to negatively influence the health of more vulnerable groups of the population in
these regions. For example, Kovesi et al. (2006) identified potential risk factors related 
to poor indoor air quality for viral lower respiratory tract infections in infants living in 
Inuit homes on Baffin Island; these factors included reduced 
levels of air exchange, high occupancy and levels of 
environmental tobacco smoke exposure.
In Canada, 33% of female single-parent households and 
21% of Aboriginal households are at risk for being “food 
insecure” or lacking “food security.” Food insecurity 
is most common in the three territories where there are 
a significantly higher number of female single-parent 
households (Statistics Canada, 2001a; Ledrou and Gervais,
2005) (Table 7.6, Figure 7.4). The role of economics in 
this situation is critical in the North where the cost of 
a standard list of grocery items can be as much as three times more than that in southern 
locations (Statistics Canada, 2005) (Table 7.7).
Figure 7.4 Prevalence of food insecurity by province and territory compared 
with the Canadian mean
Chapter 7
PEI
ON
QC
MN
NB
NL
AB
SK
NS
BC
YK
NWT
NVT
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
13
13
14
14.7
15
15
17
17
17
17
21
28
56
Data source: 2000/01 Canadian Community Health Survey
* Significantly different from estimate for Canada (P<0.05)
Source: Statistics Canada, 2005.
According to Ledrou and Gervais
(2005), a “food insecure household”
is one in which someone in the
household had not eaten the quality
or variety of food wanted, had 
worried about not having enough 
to eat or had actually not had
enough to eat because of a lack 
of money in the year previous 
to their survey.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
323
Chapter 7
Table 7.7
Cost ($) of Northern Food Basket for selected northern and southern locations
Note: Cost is for 2006 unless otherwise indicated. The Northern Food Basket is comprised of 
46 items, based on Agriculture Canada’s Thrifty Nutritious Food Basket used to monitor cost 
of a nutritious diet for a lower-income reference family of four (a girl 7–9 years, a boy 13–15 years, 
and a man and woman 25–49 years of age).
Source: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC), 2007.
The health and socio-economic information presented above illustrates some of the factors 
that need to be considered in assessing vulnerabilities to climate change and the geographical
variability that has to be taken into account in a regional assessment of the North. Some 
trends are more uniform across regions such as the higher level of exposure to environmental
risks among Aboriginal residents, largely based on their close relationship with the local 
environments that are an important part of their traditions, cultures, health and well-being
(Berner et al., 2005). The smaller communities of the North with proportionately larger
Aboriginal populations are likely to experience greater health vulnerabilities to climate
change. Current knowledge of exposures and impacts, and documentation of existing 
adaptive responses will be further explored in subsequent sections.
Non-Perishables
106
82
129
145
161
165
165
187
94
161
154
167
99
219
78
90
93
108
Perishables
90
64
92
99
114
127
153
135
65
148
129
180
64
169
66
64
72
65
Location
Labrador and Nunatsiavut
Nain, Nunatsiavut (2002)
Happy Valley-Goose Bay (2002)
Nunavik
Kuujjuaq
Kangiqsujuaq
Nunavut
Iqaluit (2005)
Pangnirtung (Baffin) (2005)
Rankin Inlet (Kivalliq)
Kugaaruk (Kitikmeot)
Northwest Territories
Yellowknife
Deline
Tuktoyaktuk
Paulatuk
Yukon
Whitehorse (2005)
Old Crowe
Selected southern cities
St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador (2003)
Montreal, Quebec (2005)
Ottawa, Ontario
Edmonton, Alberta
Total Food Basket
196
146
220
244
275
292
318
322
159
309
282
343
163
388
144
155
166
173
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
324
7.3
NORTHERN HEALTH AND WELL-BEING: IMPACTS 
AND EXPOSURE TO CLIMATE CHANGE
The relationships between climate change and human health in northern populations are complex
and often mediated through environmental, physical, social and behavioural factors. In a
review of potential impacts on human health from climate change in Nunavik and Labrador,
Furgal et al. (2002) reviewed medical and health sciences literature and conducted interviews
with local experts (Elders, hunters, harvesters). They identified a list of direct and indirect
relationships between health and climate for northern populations. Similarly, in the Arctic
Climate Impact Assessment, Berner et al. (2005) took a mechanistic approach to the description
and review of impacts on northern residents with a particular focus on Aboriginal populations. 
The review in this chapter adopts a similar approach. The direct impacts are considered “those
health consequences resulting from direct interactions with aspects of the environment that 
have changed or are changing with local climate (i.e. resulting from direct interactions with
physical characteristics of the environment: air, water, ice, land; and for example exposure 
to thermal extremes)” (Berner et al., 2005, p. 869). Following Berner et al. (2005), indirect
impacts are “those health consequences resulting from indirect interactions mediated via
human behavior and components of the environment that have changed or are changing with
local climate” (p. 878). Data are presented in this section to provide an overview of the current
state of knowledge on both direct and indirect impacts and exposures to climate-related variables
across Canada’s northern regions.
7.3.1
Direct Impacts of Climate Change and Variability
The direct impacts of climate on human health are primarily related to such phenomena 
as extreme precipitation events, climate-influenced natural hazards, uncharacteristic weather,
extreme temperatures, and related injuries and stress (Table 7.8).
Table 7.8
Summary of potential direct climate-related health impacts 
in Nunavik and Labrador
Source: Adapted from Furgal et al., 2002.
7.3.1.1 Extreme precipitation events and natural hazards
Increased precipitation and warming temperatures have the potential to increase the risks 
of avalanches and landslides for communities and residents in mountainous regions of 
the North. Fatal avalanches and property damage have been recorded in Nunavik (Arctic
Quebec), Nunavut, NWT and the Yukon previously. Following an avalanche in 1999 in the
Nunavik community of Kangiqsualujjuaq that killed nine people and injured 25, the Ministère 
de la Sécurité publique du Québec (Quebec ministry of public security) conducted a review 
of avalanche risks and protective measures in 2000 (Lied, 2000). Topography, early winter
Chapter 7
Identified Climate-Related Change
Increased (magnitude and frequency) 
temperature extremes
Increase in frequency and intensity of 
extreme weather events (e.g. storms, etc.)
Increase in uncharacteristic weather patterns
Increased ultraviolet radiation exposure
Potential Direct Health Impacts
Increased heat- and cold-related morbidity and mortality
Increased frequency and severity of accidents while 
hunting and travelling resulting in injuries, death, 
psychosocial stress
Increased risks of skin cancers, burns, infectious 
diseases, eye damage (cataracts), immunosuppression
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
325
rain, freezing, heavy winds and snowfall on a crust of ice that allowed the destabilization 
of the snow mass were included among conditions reported as associated with this avalanche.
Based on the analysis, a recurrence of the 1999 event every 50 years was estimated (Lied,
2000). Communities in Nunatsiavut and other regions have reported an increasing 
frequency of mid-winter thaw–freeze events that can create conditions conducive to avalanches
(Communities of Labrador et al., 2005). Current model projections report the greatest 
warming during the winter in the eastern Arctic, accompanied by increased precipitation.
However, regions of western Arctic are particularly vulnerable; communities most at risk 
are those in the mountainous regions of the Yukon where significant winter warming has
already been experienced to date and significant increases in winter precipitation are 
projected for the future.
In summer and fall months, landslides are a concern on slopes where permafrost is melting
and exposed to heavy rainfall. Communities in the ISR of the NWT and in Arctic Bay,
Nunavut, have reported recent observations of such events for the first time in existing 
memory (Ford et al., 2006; Nickels et al., 2006). These events are reported to result in 
an increase in dangerous travelling conditions in these locations (Ford and Smit, 2004;
Community of Arctic Bay et al., 2005; Barron, 2006; Ford et al., 2006).
7.3.1.2 Unpredictability of weather conditions
Aboriginal residents of small remote communities in all regions of the Canadian Arctic 
have reported that the weather has become more “uncharacteristic” or less predictable and, 
in some cases, that storm events progress more quickly today than in previous memory
(Huntington et al., 2005; Ford et al., 2006; Nickels et al., 2006). Residents involved in 
these studies report that this unpredictability limits current participation in traditional and 
subsistence activities and travel; it also increases the risks of being stranded or involved 
in accidents out of reach of the community (Furgal et al., 2002; Ford and Smit, 2004; Ford 
et al., 2006; Nickels et al., 2006). 
In their community case study 
on vulnerability to environmental
change in Arctic Bay, Nunavut,
Ford et al. (2006) reported that
“increased storminess” was said 
to increase the danger of summer
boating and decrease access 
to some hunting grounds. These
impacts have associated economic
implications at the household level 
in terms of damaged equipment 
and decreased access to traditional
food resources.
Motor vehicle (including snowmobile and four-wheel all-terrain vehicle) injury is currently 
a significant cause of death and hospitalization in the NWT and the Yukon, and more common
among younger Aboriginal males living in small communities (GNWT, 2004; CYFN, 2006).
However, whether these injuries are the result of accidents in the community or on the land, 
and whether or how many are associated with poor or unpredictable weather conditions is not
known. There is some qualitative evidence to suggest that the incidence of accident-related
injuries is increasing in smaller coastal communities that are located in already variable local
environments (Nickels et al., 2006).
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
326
7.3.1.3 Temperature-related injuries
The greatest warming in the Canadian North is expected during the winter months, and 
more dramatic warming (above current regional norms) in the future is projected for the
extreme northwest (Kattsov et al., 2005). Therefore, with decreases in mean winter cold 
temperatures, one might expect a reduction in cold-related injuries, such as frostbite and
hypothermia, among all northern residents, particularly among those who are the most
exposed (i.e. Aboriginal residents and others spending extended periods of time outdoors). 
In the Yukon First Nations Regional Health Survey, residents reported that 2%, 7% and 
1% of injuries among adults, youth and children, respectively, were cold-related (hypothermia,
frostbite or other) (CYFN, 2006). However, the relationship between exposure to cold 
and individual behaviours is more complex. For example, winter warming may be associated
with increased weather instability; consequently, individuals may experience increased 
exposure to cold associated with storms and other hazardous conditions while out on the 
land. Therefore, a linear reduction in cold-related injuries may not be seen.
Some reports of respiratory distress on very hot days in the summer have been reported
among Elders in Nunatsiavut and Nunavik in recent years (Furgal et al., 2002). Although 
current modelling of temperature extremes does not allow for a precise projection of the 
maximum temperatures to be expected, in northern Sweden, Messner (2005) identified 
a temperature rise of only 1°C to be associated with an increase in non-fatal acute myocardial
infarctions by 1.5%. He proposed that this increase could be explained by a disruption in
adaptation and a resulting increase in susceptibility to artherosclerotic diseases (Messner,
2005). The current rates of acute myocardial infarctions and cardiovascular-related deaths
among all northern residents are comparatively lower than the national average in Canada
(Table 7.5). However, cardiovascular and respiratory diseases in general are significant 
causes of mortality and hospitalization in many northern regions (GNWT, 2004). As the 
climate changes, ongoing fluctuations in the climate system are likely to result in new 
temperatures and extremes of heat; these will add to health-related stresses, and are likely 
to increase in frequency (e.g. summer daily temperatures greater than 30°C) (Kattsov 
et al., 2005).
7.3.2
Indirect Impacts of Climate Change and Variability
Indirect health impacts of climate change are primarily related to:
• changes in temperature influencing ice conditions;
• changes in exposure to animal-transmitted (zoonotic) diseases;
• changes in environmental conditions that influence the number of animals, human access 
to wildlife, and the health and quality of wildlife for human consumption (traditional 
food security);
• changes in exposure to food- and water-borne pathogens;
• melting permafrost which has implications for health infrastructure;
• changes in stratospheric temperatures and enhanced ozone depletion resulting in changes 
in human exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation; and
• the combined effects of environmental and other changes on social and mental 
well-being (Table 7.9).
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
327
Table 7.9
Summary of potential indirect climate-related health impacts 
in Nunavik and Labrador
Source: Adapted from Furgal et al., 2002.
7.3.2.1 Climate warming and ice safety
Both scientific studies and local observations report an increase in the length of the ice-free
season, and a decrease in ice thickness and in total sea ice cover throughout the North
(Huntington et al., 2005; Walsh et al., 2005; Nickels et al., 2006). Sea ice cover has decreased 
by 5 to 10% during the past few decades, as has multi-year ice cover and the thickness 
of sea ice in the central Arctic (Walsh et al., 2005). Earlier break-up and later freeze-up 
have combined to lengthen the ice-free season of rivers and lakes by up to three weeks 
since the early 1900s. Model projections show a continuation of recent trends throughout 
the 21st century, with sea ice retreat and summer sea ice loss projected to be the greatest 
in the Beaufort Sea (Walsh et al., 2005). Flato and Brown (1996) estimated that continued
warming will decrease landfast ice thickness and duration of cover by approximately 
0.06 m per 1°C and 7.5 days per 1°C, respectively. Ford et al. (2006) suggested that this 
could mean a decrease in thickness of 50 cm and in duration of coverage by two months 
by 2080 to 2100 for communities such as Arctic Bay, Nunavut.
The ice provides a stable travelling and hunting platform for many northern residents, and 
is critical to the reproduction and survival of some Arctic marine species (e.g. ringed seal,
and polar bear) that are important for Aboriginal residents. Changes in the timing of the 
ice season and the security of this platform for human use are therefore critical for the safety
Chapter 7
Identified Climate-Related Change
Increased (magnitude and frequency) 
temperature extremes
Decrease in ice distribution, stability and 
duration of coverage
Change in snow composition (decrease in quality
of snow for igloo construction with increased
humidity)
Increase in range and activity of existing and new
infective agents (e.g. biting flies)
Change in local ecology of water-borne and 
food-borne infective agents
Increased permafrost melting, decreased stability
Sea level rise
Changes in air pollution (contaminants, pollens
and spores)
Potential Indirect Health Impacts
Increase in infectious disease incidence and transmission,
psychosocial disruption
Increased frequency and severity of accidents while hunting
and travelling resulting in injuries, death, psychosocial stress
Decreased access to country food items, decreased food
security, erosion of social and cultural values associated
with country foods preparation, sharing and consumption
Challenges to building shelters (igloos) for safety while 
on the land
Increased exposure to existing and new vector-borne 
diseases
Increase in incidence of diarrheal and other infectious 
diseases
Emergence of new diseases
Negative impacts to stability of public health, housing 
and transportation infrastructure
Psychosocial disruption associated with community 
relocation (partial or complete)
Psychosocial disruption associated with infrastructure 
damage and community relocation (partial or complete)
Increased incidence of respiratory and cardiovascular 
diseases, increased exposure to environmental contaminants
and subsequent impacts
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
328
of northern residents that are active on the land,
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal alike. Inuit 
residents of northern communities report that 
the changes in ice characteristics increase the 
dangers of being on the land and decrease access
to hunting areas and traditional foods (Riedlinger
and Berkes, 2001; Huntington et al., 2005; Nickels
et al., 2006) (see Section 7.3.2.4 on food security 
for greater detail). An increase in the number of
accidents and drownings associated with changing
ice conditions is reported in some communities
(Barrow et al. 2004; Lafortune et al., 2004); 
however, no review of accident data has been 
conducted to confirm these trends to date. 
Nickels et al. (2006) and Ford et al. (2006) reported impacts to Inuit household economies
related to loss of earnings from seal pelt or narwhal harvests, damage to equipment and loss
of access to certain wildlife food resources.
Finally, Aboriginal residents in all northern regions report that these ice changes have had
negative implications for social cohesion and mental well-being because they disrupt the 
regular cycle of traditional land-based activities and impact the sharing of traditional foods
(Huntington et al., 2005). Similar impacts to participation in hunting and fishing activities,
human safety, and social and cultural well-being are reported in association with the increases
in uncharacteristic weather patterns (Berner et al., 2005; Huntington et al., 2005; Ford et al.,
2006; Nickels et al., 2006).
7.3.2.2 Increased exposure to UV radiation
With increasing concentrations of atmospheric GHGs and the consequent trapping of more heat
below the stratosphere, stratospheric cooling will occur. This is likely to increase the frequency
and severity of episodes of stratospheric ozone depletion (Weatherhead et al., 2005). Ozone
concentrations in the stratosphere influence the amount of UVB radiation reaching the Earth’s
surface. Therefore there is a relationship between GHG emissions, climate change and UV
radiation. Despite international action to reduce and eliminate the use of ozone-harming 
chemicals via the Montreal Protocol, these substances remain in the atmosphere for long periods 
of time, and thus ozone repair is expected to take at least until the middle of the current 
century (De Fabo, 2005). Ozone depletion at polar latitudes peaks during late winter and early
spring (Weatherhead et al., 2005), when significant outdoor activity occurs in Canadian Arctic
communities. The potential human health effects of enhanced UV exposure are therefore
important to consider in the context of projected climate change. Although current rates of
skin cancers are low in northern regions, community residents have reported increased incidence
of sun rashes, burns and snow blindness in recent decades and in regions where these ailments
were not previously observed (Furgal et al., 2002; Huntington et al., 2005; Nickels et al.,
2006). In humans, UV exposure has been linked to conditions such as melanoma, cataracts,
immunosuppression and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, among others. Data on the incidence 
and distribution of such conditions and their relationship to current levels of UV exposure
among Arctic populations are lacking. However, they warrant attention considering the 
projections of low ozone and elevated UV reaching the Earth’s surface for several decades 
into the future (Weatherhead et al., 2005). This is especially important for those northern 
residents frequently exposed to the sun for long durations, such as Aboriginal residents 
spending significant periods of time on the land hunting and travelling during the late 
winter and early spring.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
329
7.3.2.3 New and emerging diseases
Climate warming during El Niño-Southern Oscillation events has been associated with illness 
in marine mammals, birds, fish and shellfish. These illnesses have included botulism, avian
Newcastle disease, duck plague, influenza in seabirds, and a herpes-like virus epidemic in
oysters. Consequently, it is likely that long-term temperature changes resulting from climate
change will be associated with changes in the types and incidences of diseases and outbreaks 
in those species that can transmit disease to humans (Bradley et al., 2005).
Many zoonotic diseases currently occur in Arctic host species,
such as tularemia in rabbits, muskrats and beavers; rabies in 
foxes (Dietrich, 1981); brucellosis in ungulates, foxes and bears;
echinococcosis in rodents or canine species (Chin, 2000); 
trichinosis in walruses and polar bears; and cryptosporidiosis in both
marine (ringed seals) and terrestrial mammals. Changes in the 
spatial occurrence of these diseases is likely because they are spread
through temperature-mediated mechanisms, such as the movement 
of animal populations and contamination of surface waters used
by Arctic populations.
The most common agents of food- and water-borne diseases in the NWT are Giardia (from
drinking contaminated water) and Salmonella and Campylobacter (from contaminated foods,
usually those that are unpasteurized, or are eaten raw or poorly cooked) (GNWT, 2005). 
Some regions have documented significant cases of zoonotic infections in the past. For 
example, since 1982, 11 outbreaks involving 86 confirmed cases of trichinosis have been 
documented in Nunavik. Walrus meat was the source in 97% of cases (Proulx et al., 2000),
but no deaths have been recorded from the disease. Reported cases of Campylobacter and
Salmonella have declined in recent years in the NWT (GNWT, 2005). However, an increase
in parasites in caribou has been reported in the central and eastern Arctic in recent years, 
and local hunters have expressed concerns about the safety of the consumption of this meat
(Nickels et al., 2006). Kutz et al. (2004) described the role that a combination of climate
warming, shrinking habitats and
changes in other ecological factors
have played in the emergence 
of three nematode species in
muskoxen in the central and 
western Arctic, one of which 
may be important in regulating 
population numbers of this 
species on Banks Island, Nunavut.
Similarly, the over-wintering survival
and the distribution of some insect
species are increased by warming
temperatures, and create opportunities
for the introduction of new diseases
into Arctic regions or increased risk from endemic pathogens (Parkinson and Butler, 2005).
Insects are therefore likely to change in their distribution with warming in Arctic regions and
increase the incidence of diseases among human populations (Bradley et al., 2005; Parkinson 
and Butler, 2005). Climate change may have already shifted the range of tick-borne encephalitis
toward more northern latitudes (Rogers and Randolph, 2006). Studies suggest that increasing
temperature will continue to favour further northward expansion of the geographic range of
Ixodes scapularis, the tick vector of Lyme disease; temperature conditions suitable for this tick
may occur in the NWT by the 2080s (Ogden et al., 2006). The spread of the spruce bark beetle
and its contribution to increasing forest fire risk in the Yukon, and the potential impacts this has
Chapter 7
El Niño-Southern Oscillation events
are characterized by a decrease in
western trade winds and sustained
increase in sea surface temperature
off the west coast of North and
South America, resulting in a warmer
and wetter climate for the Americas,
typically lasting for 1 to 2 years.
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
330
for residents of that region is another example of how insect activity and climate change can 
be related to risks to humans (Furgal and Prowse, 2008). In the ISR of the NWT, where 
more warming has taken place in recent decades, residents have reported seeing increased
numbers and new species of insects, including biting flies and bees (Barrow et al., 2004;
Nickels et al., 2006).
No coordinated effort to date has examined and catalogued endemic and potential zoonoses 
in the Canadian North. The research that has been conducted to measure these zoonoses 
in a way that is likely to assess or monitor climate change effects is limited. Gosselin et al.
(2006a, 2006b) are currently conducting a review of environmental health surveillance 
systems in the Canadian North, however the data for many zoonotic diseases in northern
regions is not yet sufficient to allow a comparable assessment across the Arctic.
7.3.2.4 Food security
Food security is not only an issue of insufficient amounts of food but also access to enough
safe and nutritious foods. It is an important determinant of health, cultural and social well-being,
justice and dignity (McIntyre et al., 2003).
People who are “food insecure” (not achieving a status of “food
security”) are at increased risk of being overweight, and having
chronic health conditions, mental health challenges and a lower
learning capacity (McIntyre et al., 2003). In Canada, younger 
generations, women and Aboriginal people are most likely to report
experiencing food insecurity (McIntyre et al., 2003; Ledrou 
and Gervais, 2005). Residents in the North are the most likely to
report food insecurity at the household level, with the rate in
Nunavut being four times higher than the national average (Statistics Canada, 2005) (Figure 7.4).
In northern communities, the diet of many residents is a combination of imported foods from
outside of the region and local foods harvested from the environment. Items from outside of
the region are transported by air, 
by truck on seasonal or all-weather
roads, by boat or by a combination 
of mechanisms. Thus, the food 
security of northern residents may
be influenced by climate change
through impacts to the access,
availability or quality of locally
harvested wildlife, or through
impacts to transportation networks
linking northern communities with
southern sources of market foods.
Country/Traditional foods
Aboriginal residents maintain a strong and vital connection to the Arctic environment through
traditional and subsistence activities of hunting, fishing and gathering a variety of animal 
and plant species. The traditional and cultural importance of these activities distinguishes them
from other northern residents. Country food-related activities have crucial economic and
dietary importance; they are also important in maintaining social relationships and cultural
identity (Nuttall et al., 2005). Food items, collected from the land, sea, lakes and rivers, 
continue to contribute significant amounts of protein to the total diet, and help individuals 
to meet or exceed daily requirements for several vitamins and essential nutrients. In some
instances, they protect individuals from some types of cardiovascular disease and contaminant
toxicity (Blanchet et al., 2000; Kuhnlein et al., 2000; Van Oostdam et al., 2005).
Chapter 7
Yaro (2004, p. 23) defines food
security as “secure access by house-
holds and individuals to nutritionally
adequate food at all times and 
procured in conformity with human
aspirations and dignity.”
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
331
Dietary survey work conducted throughout the North with Yukon First Nations, Dene, Métis
and Inuit communities shows the extent of use of these foods on a regular basis (Table 7.10). 
In the Yukon, country food consumption contributed 50% or more of important nutrients such as
protein, iron, zinc and vitamin B12 to First Nations residents’ diets (Receveur et al., 1997).
Recently, the Regional Health Survey (CYFN, 2006) reported similar results with most
respondents (81% of adults, 72% of youth and 65% of children). Similar results were obtained
in Dene and Métis communities in the NWT where country food consumption was found to
contribute 144g/day to the total diet among women and 235g/day among men (Kuhnlein and
Receveur, 2001). As well, on days that country foods were consumed, individuals’ diets were
healthier in terms of saturated fat, sugar and carbohydrate intake. Among Inuit residents in 
the NWT, Nunavut and Nunatsiavut, similar levels of intake and contribution to nutrient and
energy intake were reported. The contribution of these foods to total energy intake ranges
from 6% in communities close to regional centres up to 40% in more remote communities
(Kuhnlein and Receveur, 2001). However, despite their significant importance, northern 
populations are shifting away from country foods and increasing the amount of store-bought
food stuffs in their diet, as is being experienced in many other Aboriginal populations
(Kuhnlein, 1992; Wein and Freeman, 1992). This is especially the case for younger people
and in those communities with greater access to store-bought foods (Receveur et al., 1997). 
This shift is resulting in an increased intake of carbohydrates and saturated fats, and is projected
to change the incidence of western-type diseases among this population in the future 
(e.g. increased incidence of obesity, diabetes and heart disease).
Table 7.10 Five country food items most often consumed (yearly average 
of days per week)
* For each population, food items are listed in decreasing order of frequency of consumption 
from left to right.
Source: Adapted from Kuhnlein et al., 2002.
Climate change poses a threat to country food security in northern regions because it influences
animal availability, human ability to access wildlife, and the safety and quality of wildlife for
consumption. Decreased access to winter forage (lichen and other vegetation) as a result of harsh
winter weather—including heavy snow events and increased icing associated with temperature
variability, and winter occurrence of freezing rain—is reported to be associated with significant
animal die-offs and a steep decline in the populations of some central and western Arctic caribou
herds (Miller and Gunn, 2003; Harding, 2004; Gunn et al., 2006; Tesar, 2007). Declines have
been so severe in recent years that managers are contemplating limiting the non-resident and
non-Aboriginal harvest, to protect herds and support recoveries (Tesar, 2007). Residents from
Chapter 7
Trout 0.1
Scoter 0.2
Cisco 0.3
Walleye 0.2
Pike 0.3
Ptarmigan 0.2
Muskox 0.1
Eider Duck 0.2
Trout 0.1
Beluga Muktuk 0.1
Char 0.2
Yukon
Dene and Métis
Gwich’in
Sahtu
Dogrib
Deh-cho
South-Slave
Inuit
Inuvialuit
Kitikmeot
Kivalliq
Baffin
Labrador (Nunatsiavut)
Population*
Food item and yearly average of days consumed per week
Grayling 0.4
Moose 0.3
Whitefish 0.7
Moose 0.2
Spruce Hen 0.4
Trout 0.4
Whitefish 0.2
Trout 0.3
Beluga Muktuk 0.2
Narwal Muktuk 0.2
Cloudberry 0.3
Salmon 0.6
Coney 0.5
Trout 0.8
Trout 0.2
Caribou 0.8
Whitefish 1.8
Goose 0.2
Muskox 0.3
Crowberry 0.2
Char 0.9
Partridge 0.3
Caribou 0.7
Whitefish 1.3
Moose 1.0
Whitefish 1.2
Whitefish 0.9
Caribou 1.9
Char 0.5
Char 0.9
Char 0.4
Seal 1.0
Trout 0.5
Moose 1.6
Caribou 3.2
Caribou 2.5
Caribou 3.9
Moose 2.7
Moose 2.2
Caribou 1.8
Caribou 1.2
Caribou 1.9
Caribou 1.3
Caribou 1.3
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
332
both the Yukon (Beaver Creek) and the NWT (Deh Gah Got’ie First Nation, Fort Providence)
communities are witnessing changes in climate that are affecting the availability of species and
residents’ ability to access and harvest them, and hence likely their nutrient intake from these
traditional foods (Guyot et al., 2006). In some cases, residents are already having to shift or adapt
harvesting activities and reduce their consumption of some species, and in other cases, they are
able to increase their take of other animals that are moving into their region and becoming more
common. Work conducted by Riedlinger (1999), Furgal et al. (2002), Ford et al. (2006), Nickels
et al. (2006) and others, with Inuit residents throughout the North, report similar results.
Lower water levels in rivers and ponds in Labrador were reported to negatively impact access 
to and health of fish species (Furgal et al., 2002; Communities of Labrador et al., 2005).
Higher winds around Nunavut and Nunavik communities were reported to make travel and
hunting more difficult and dangerous by boat in the summer; therefore, opportunities for 
hunting seals and whales in open water were limited (Ford et al., 2006; Nickels et al., 2006).
In the ISR, Nunavut and Nunavik, the increased length of the ice-free season and decreased 
ice thickness resulting from warming winter temperatures was reported to reduce, and make
more dangerous, access to ice-dependent wildlife species (e.g. ringed seal and polar bear) 
and other species commonly hunted from the ice (e.g. narwhal) (Ford et al., 2006; Nickels 
et al., 2006). What these and other climate-related impacts to food availability and accessibility
mean in terms of shifts in per capita consumption of wildlife species nutrient intake throughout
Arctic communities is currently a topic of significant study.
In addition to providing significant health benefits, country food species are the most significant
source of exposure to environmental contaminants, such as polychlorinated biphenyls, 
mercury and lead, for northern residents (Van Oostdam et al., 2005). The uptake, transport 
and deposition of many of these contaminants are influenced by temperature. Therefore, 
climate warming is likely to indirectly influence human exposure to these contaminants which,
among other effects, are known to adversely affect immune and neuromotor functioning in
children (AMAP, 2003; Després et al., 2005; Kraemer et al., 2005). Booth and Zeller (2005)
reported that projected climate warming in the North Atlantic (0.4–1.0°C) over the current
century will increase rates of mercury methylation and hence concentrations in marine species
between 1.7% and 4.4%. These increases could have implications for human exposure via
consumption of some fish and marine mammals in these regions. Developing fetuses and young
mothers are those most vulnerable to contaminant exposure (Van Oostdam et al., 2005).
Currently, levels of exposure to mercury and other contaminants among some segments of the
population in Nunavik and Nunavut exceed Canadian and international safety guidelines;
advisories or consumption advice attempt to limit exposure (Van Oostdam et al., 2005).
Market foods
The consumption of market foods
varies among and within regions,
communities and households. 
For example, in Nunavik, the 
NWT and the Yukon, market foods
contribute a lower proportion 
of the total diet among Aboriginal
residents, older age groups, and
those residents living further from 
a regional centre (e.g. Yellowknife,
Whitehorse or Kuujjuaq) (Blanchet
et al., 2000; Kuhnlein et al., 
2000; Van Oostdam et al., 2005).
Currently, the consumption of 
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
333
recommended levels of market items such as fruit and vegetables is considerably lower 
among northern residents than the national average, and is lowest among residents of 
Nunavut (Statistics Canada, 2005). In the NWT, males and older individuals were less 
likely to “eat well,” as defined by Canada’s Food Guide to Healthy Eating, than 
others (GNWT, 2005). However, a significant portion of total daily energy intake still 
comes from market food items in both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal diets across 
the North, and access to safe, healthy and nutritious market foods are important for 
growth and development.
Changes in critical transportation infrastructure throughout the North may influence the 
transportation of market food, and thus affect its access and affordability in small, remote
communities where many items are already prohibitively expensive (Table 7.7). Climate
warming and warming of permafrost have negative implications for ice roads, all-season
roads, and airstrip security and accessibility. Regional representatives to a Transport Canada
(2003) workshop on climate change and transportation reported that some significant 
impacts to transportation infrastructure were already present. Work by Allard et al. (2002) 
in Nunavik, which has no road network, reports the instability of airstrips as a result of 
current permafrost warming. Conversely, a longer open-water season with decreasing sea ice 
coverage and extent will provide greater boat access to coastal communities throughout 
the year, and make ship and barge transportation more viable. Additionally, warming 
temperatures may increase opportunities for local food production in some regions, 
alleviating the potential stress of relying on transportation networks with the south. Increased 
summer temperatures and growing periods in regions such as the western Arctic may 
enhance opportunities for small-scale northern agriculture; these may provide an additional 
and potentially more cost-efficient local source of foods than other sources that 
are often expensive and difficult to access in these northern regions. Mills (cited 
in IPCC, 2001), for example, identified significant areas (39–57 million hectares) 
of potentially viable land for northern agriculture in the western Arctic under future 
climate scenarios.
As a result of the complexities in understanding trends and potential climate influences 
on changes in total diet (both traditional and market foods), the combined effects of climate
change on food security and health are difficult to predict. They are influenced by local 
availability and access factors, including economic, technological and political forces. 
They also presuppose a strong understanding of what the local environment can provide 
and sustain in the way of wildlife and other food resources.
7.3.2.5 Water security
Although the Arctic is dominated by water either as ice, precipitation or in its many bodies 
of surface water, there is significant evidence that climate change is affecting and will 
continue to impact the quantity and quality of freshwater resources in the North (Walsh 
et al., 2005). Northern residents have already expressed concern about the quality of 
water in their communities during the 2001 Aboriginal Peoples Survey. The number of 
Inuit residents who feel their drinking water at home is unsafe to consume ranged 
from 9% (Labrador) to 43% (Nunavik). In the Yukon, 25% of First Nations residents 
reported that their water was unsafe for consumption (CYFN, 2006). In the Sierra Legal
Defence Fund’s (2006) drinking water report card for Canada, the northern territories 
ranked with some of the lowest regions in the country in terms of adoption and 
implementation of standards, testing criteria, certification requirements for water plant 
operators and public communication protocols. However, the incidence of Giardia
in the NWT appears to be decreasing (from 4.7 cases per 10,000 in 1991 to 2.9 cases per 
10,000 in 2002) whereas the incidence of Escherichia coli has remained comparatively 
the same over this period (GNWT, 2005).
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
334
In northern communities, water is transported and stored for household use through a number
of different means. Water is taken from a local lake or reservoir at higher elevation than the town
site and delivered by gravity to homes; delivered through an above-ground piping system (utilidor
system) to and from a treatment facility (a few NWT and Nunavut communities); delivered 
by truck to individual households and stored in tanks (as in most northern villages); or collected
and brought to the house using an individual bucket-haul system (Fandrick, 2005). In one of the
few studies of drinking water in northern communities and their vulnerability to environmental
change to date, Martin (2005) reported that approximately 30% of the Nunavik population chooses
to use raw or untreated water directly from a natural source, such as a local stream or brook, for
daily household use. In the Yukon, this number is 2% of the First Nations population (CYFN,
2006). In their examination of various water sources in and around 14 Nunavik communities,
Martin et al. (2005b) reported that water currently held in household tanks was of good micro-
biological quality and safe to drink. On the other hand, samples of untreated water taken from
natural local sources, which are then often stored in plastic containers inside many homes, were
frequently contaminated. Plastic containers used to hold water inside the house were contaminated
more frequently than proper household reservoirs. Commonly used natural sources for drinking
water around the community were tested and found to have had counts of both Escherichia coli
and Enterococcus that exceeded limits for safe drinking (≥1 per 100 ml). Martin et al. (2005b)
reviewed the history of potential water-borne diseases in Nunavik (Table 7.11) and outlined the
possible impacts that a changing climate may have on water sources, distribution and storage
methods. Climate-related changes influence the quantity, quality and accessibility of drinking
water resources, predominantly in smaller remote northern communities (Moquin, 2005).
Prioritization of water use is required when the availability of safe, uncontaminated water is
limited. Clean water is essential for drinking and cooking; if supplies are limited, water for
maintaining a hygienic environment may not be available, thus providing a situation that is
conducive to the spread of infectious illness.
Table 7.11 Oberved and likely water-borne diseases in Nunavik (1990–2002)
Note: P, protozoan; B, bacteria; V, virus; x, disease is declarable.
Source: Martin et al., 2005a.
Chapter 7
Declarable
Disease
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Agent
Giardia duodenalis (P)
Salmonella spp. (B)
Entamoeba histolytica (P)
Campylobacter spp. (B)
Several enteroviruses (V)
Enterotoxigenic E. coli (B)
Enterohaemorrhagic E.coli (B)
Hepatitis A (V)
Shigella spp. (B)
Salmonella typhi (B)
Norwalk virus (V)
Cryptosporidium parvum (P)
Helicobacter pylori (B)
Toxoplasma gondii (P)
Disease
Giardiasis
Salmonellosis
Amebiasis
Campylobacteriosis
Enterovirus meningitis
Gastroenteritis 
(Escherichia coli)
Hepatitis A
Shigellosis
Typhoid fever
Norwalk virus infection
Cryptosporidiosis
Helicobacter gastritis
Toxoplasmosis
Total Number of 
Cases 1990–2002
52
18
2
14
12
2
1
240
1
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
335
Researchers collecting local observational accounts from northern community members 
have described reports of increasing temperatures in the western Arctic that are 
supporting increased algal and plant growth in waterways, which in turn impacts 
drinking water quality and quantity (Barron, 2006; Nickels et al., 2006). Residents 
in the eastern Arctic have observed shifts in precipitation regimes that are reported 
to impact water quality. In some regions, communities have reported impacts to 
the availability and quality of water used for specific purposes and at certain times 
of the year.
7.3.2.6 Permafrost, coastal erosion and community infrastructure
Permafrost underlies more than 40% of Canada’s land surface. Half of this area contains 
permafrost that is warmer than -2°C and therefore is sensitive to fluctuations in 
average temperatures; as a result, this permafrost is expected to be impacted under current 
climate model projections (Smith et al., 2003) (Figure 7.5). The northwest Canadian 
Arctic is particularly sensitive because significant warming has already occurred in 
upper layers of permafrost in that region (Burn, cited in Couture et al., 2003). Brown 
et al. (2000) and Allard et al. (2002) reported that upper layers in the Ungava region 
of Nunavik have now also increased in temperature by up to 2°C
since the mid-1990s. Because of the combined forces of sea level
rise and coastal erosion, as well as permafrost melting and 
ground instability—infrastructures in communities located in 
low-lying coastal areas, and constructed in high permafrost 
risk thaw zones, are most vulnerable to climate change. Nelson 
et al. (2002) identified communities in the northwestern 
Canadian Arctic (Mackenzie Delta) as being most “at risk” for
impacts to infrastructure. The implications are significant for 
infrastructure, such as wastewater treatment and distribution 
networks, water distribution systems relying on pipe systems,
basic housing, and emergency transportation access routes 
for remote isolated communities; the effects of climate change 
on infrastructure will have impacts on human health (Warren 
et al., 2005).
Chapter 7
“Freshwater is not as good anymore.
It tastes swampy because it is not
moving as it should. The water flow
in creeks is much less now...Some
drinking water sources are not
there now.”
(Resident, Community of
Tuktoyaktuk et al., 2005)
“When it does rain, and it rains a lot, 
then the water quality is affected 
by bacteria etc. The water quality
is getting worse and worse every
year and there are more and more
boil water warnings.”
(Resident, Community of
Kangiqsujuaq et al., 2005)
“The glaciers, which used to reach
right into the sea, have all receded,
some to the point that you can 
no longer see them. Permanent
snow, which used to remain in the
shady areas has started to melt
and is no longer available for water
in the summer...the Inuit really
depend on this water for their tea.”
(Pijamini, NTI Elders’
Conference, 2001)
Photo Credits: Eric Loring
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
336
Figure 7.5 Spatial variation in mean annual near-surface ground temperature 
for the Canadian permafrost zone
Note: Within the zone classified as having temperatures >-2°C, regions with 
permafrost will have ground temperatures <0°C (Smith et al., 2003).
Source: Smith and Burgess, 2004 unless otherwise indicated.
Some communities in the western Arctic have already begun to report impacts to community
buildings from these combined forces of erosion and permafrost melting (Communities 
of the ISR et al., 2005). Residents have reported concern and distress related to impacts to
important cultural sites, housing and the potential relocation of communities in the future
(Barrow et al., 2004). In the eastern Arctic, concerns about high water and erosion have 
also been recorded to date (Furgal and Prowse, 2008).
Bradley (2005) argues that many northern communities are 
more vulnerable to the acute impacts of climate change because
they are isolated and lack transportation and an emergency
response infrastructure. The degradation of permafrost has
impacted key transportation infrastructure, which is an important 
part of emergency response capacity (Warren et al., 2005). 
This is particularly important in remote locations with few 
access routes and available means of transportation, such 
as communities that are accessible only by air or water for 
medical evacuations (e.g. all communities in Nunavik, 
Labrador north coast, Nunavut). Deformation of an airstrip
because of permafrost warming, documented in Tasiujak,
Nunavik, is more important than it would be in less isolated 
communities (Allard et al., 2002). Continued warming, 
combined with permafrost melting and sea-level rise, are expected to continue to impact 
infrastructure in the Arctic.
Chapter 7
“People watch for erosion and have
to move their cabins back from 
the river.”
(Aklavik resident, Community of
Aklavik et al., 2005)
“Long spits and points around 
the community are gone and it is
predicted that the Hamlet office 
we are in now will be an island 
in 40 years.”
(Tuktoyaktuk resident, Community 
of Tuktoyaktuk et al., 2005)
0
km 500
> -0.5
-0.5 to -1
-1 to -2
-2 to -5
< -5
Southern Limit
of Permafrost
Mean Annual Near Surface
Ground Temperature (°C)
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
337
7.3.2.7 Mental, social and cultural well-being
Many of the impacts described earlier in the text, on their own, or in concert with one another,
represent forces of change to many northern residents for whom the connection with the local
environment is a strong component of their mental health, culture and identity. Berner et al.
(2005) and Curtis et al. (2005) described climate change and other forms of environmental
change in northern communities as a force involved in the acculturation process of Aboriginal
residents. For many remote northern communities, environmental change interacts with overall
socio-cultural and economic processes that influence psychosocial, mental and social distress,
such as alcohol abuse, violence and suicide. Rates of suicide are significantly higher in northern
regions that have a higher Aboriginal population, and these numbers are particularly influenced
by rates among Aboriginal youth, which in some regions have continued to rise (Government
of Canada, 2006) (Table 7.2).
The impacts of climate change already being observed in some northern communities include
the disruption of traditional hunting cycles and patterns in Arctic Bay (Ford et al., 2006;
Nickels et al., 2006), loss of the ability of Elders to predict weather and provide information
to hunters and other community residents (e.g. Community of Kangiqsujuaq et al., 2005), 
coastal erosion and damage to and loss of sacred sites and infrastructure (e.g. cemeteries and
homes) (Community of Tuktoyaktuk et al., 2005). These impacts have implications for cultural,
social and mental health, mainly among northern Aboriginal residents for whom the connection
to the local environment is so important. As Owens (2005) reported from work conducted with
Inuit women in Nunatsiavut, the ability to go on the land, travel, hunt, fish or collect berries
and be safe outside of the community is a critical determinant of health for Inuit. This is
because it provides the connection with the land, is an important source of physical activity, brings
individuals together and is an important part of reconnecting with Inuit identity, transmitting 
language and knowledge, and relieving physical and mental stress associated with community-
based jobs. Currently, little work has been done throughout the regions of the Canadian North
examining the importance of environmental accessibility and stability, and its relationship 
to health status.
7.3.3
Multiple Stressors, and Health and Well-Being: Climate, 
Culture and Socio-Economic Change
Health is a multi-faceted concept, influenced by a variety of determinants, one of which being
the physical environment; climate change is one of many environmental factors that make up the
physical environment. The relative importance of different factors in determining health in 
the North is still not well understood. Climate change and variability may interact in one of 
a number of ways with other key driving forces present in a region. For example, a driving
force (e.g. cultural change and shifts away from the consumption of country foods) may be
enhanced by climate change (e.g. climate variability is making access to country foods more
difficult and enhancing the existing decline in consumption of these foods). Climate change may
act synergistically with other determinants as in the example of the impact of water temperatures
on Greenland shrimp and cod fishing and resultant changes in mental and social health in
Greenland communities (Hamilton et al., 2003; Curtis et al., 2005). Finally, climate and other
factors or determinants may interact in a way that lessens the potential impacts of climate on
health or provides new opportunities to improve health and well-being (e.g. increasing access
to new wildlife species moving further north). Aboriginal residents recognize and have reported
these links between aspects of climate change, shifts in environmental components, and 
implications for their health and well-being; most report a net negative effect on an individual
scale (Figure 7.6). In recognizing these relationships, it is important to consider climate as one 
of many determinants in northern regions influencing human health and to try to understand
the complexity of the context within which it is acting.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
338
Figure 7.6 Relationships among increasingly uncharacteristic weather conditions, human impacts and responses as reported by Inuit participants
at community workshops on climate and environmental change in the Canadian North
Chapter 7
Key concern
Impact on humans
Adaptation/
Need for adaptation to occur/
Recommendation
Observation of
environmental change
Environment and
weather have become
more unpredictable.
Knowledge on weather
prediction is no longer
shared as frequently
between generations.
Elders and others are
no longer predicting
weather as often.
Use of GPS and
satellite imagery.
Youth no longer have
traditional weather
knowledge.
Over-reliance on
modern technologies
without pairing it with
traditional knowledge.
Need to also
maintain reliance
on traditional weather
prediction skills.
Need to create venue
for Elders to advise/
teach youth.
Generational exchange
of information regarding
the environment.
Use of science forecasting
and need for mainstream
weather forecast inclusion.
Travel has become
more dangerous and
more uncertain.
People are travelling
on land less.
Travel routes have
changed and are
often longer.
Increased cost for
fuel because of
longer travel.
Loss of physical,
emotional and mental
well-being benefits
from time on land.
Increase in cases of
“spring fever” from
being stuck in
communities.
Country food exchanges
between and within
communities.
Increased communication
within and between
communities.
Fewer hunting
opportunities.
Decrease in revenue
from loss of hunting
opportunities.
Less available
country foods.
Health impacts.
Increased reliance on
store-bought foods.
Increased cost to
buy those foods.
There are more
cases of people being
stranded on land and
more casualties.
People are bringing
extra supplies for
these cases.
Source: Adapted from Nickels et al., 2006.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
339
Chapin et al. (2005) stressed the importance of considering the synergies and trade-offs among
the many forces at play within the context of climate, culture, development and health and
well-being in polar regions when looking at the impacts of any factor or determinant. The
increased growth of the wage economy in regions of the NWT associated with mining, for
example, reduces the necessity and time available to participate in hunting and fishing activities
on the land. This in turn reduces the transmission of traditional knowledge and environmental
respect to younger generations, as well as the health benefits from the consumption of local
foods. However, at the same time, access to the cash economy can also provide resources 
for the purchase of hunting equipment (e.g. boat, all-terrain vehicle, skidoo), supporting the
ability to hunt more species and access a larger area. The purchase and adoption of newer
technologies, such as global positioning systems (GPS), used for travel and hunting increases
safety in some circumstances, but may also lead to individuals taking greater risks on the 
land and increasing exposure to otherwise avoided hazards (Ford et al., 2006).
Climate warming in the central Arctic and the resulting decrease in sea ice cover and extent are
projected to increase access to, and navigability of, the Northwest Passage over the coming decades
(Furgal and Prowse, 2008). If, as expected, marine traffic increases, new threats will be 
introduced to northern regions (e.g. spread of new and exotic species and diseases, increased risk
of marine accidents such as oil spills) (Kelmelis et al., 2005). Traditional lifestyles of northern
residents are likely to be significantly affected by both the loss of ice and increased shipping
activity. The development of a deep-sea port at Bathurst Inlet, which is more economically feasible
under a reduced ice scenario, will mean enhanced opportunities for mineral exploration and
development throughout the interior regions of mainland Nunavut and the eastern NWT (Slave
Geological Province). This could have both positive and negative impacts on health in those
regions, as has been experienced in the NWT in association with the development of diamond
and other mineral projects (GNWT, 2005).
After reviewing key determinants of health and their interactions in the circumpolar North,
Chapin et al. (2005) reported that the deterioration of cultural ties to traditional and subsistence
activities (and all that they represent) is the most serious cause of decline in health and well-being
among Aboriginal people in Arctic regions. The disassociation of people from the land related to
changes in lifestyle, loss of language, and dominance of non-Aboriginal education systems is
impacting health and well-being in numerous and long-lasting ways. Similarly, significant and
rapid changes due to large-scale industrial develop-
ments (e.g. establishment or closing down of a
mine (GNWT, 2004)), the establishment of a new 
public administrative structure and organization
(e.g. establishment of the territory of Nunavut) 
or the introduction of new telecommunications
technology increasing access to outside regions
(e.g. introduction of broadband Internet, or 
television) can play significant roles in the lives
and livelihoods of all northern residents.
Because climate change is taking place in the context of a number of rapidly changing social,
cultural and natural conditions, more knowledge is needed about the interactions among climate and
other major factors of change in the Canadian North and how Northerners and, in particular,
Aboriginal populations, are able to adapt to these changes. In Northern Canada, climate change,
contaminants, remoteness, economic development, the capacity of the health system, and the
training and retention of health care professionals all impact health outcomes (Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC), 2006). A vulnerability framework recognizing multiple factors can
help explore these interactions and help the understanding of impacts on and abilities of individuals
and groups to adapt (WHO, 2003) (see Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and Adaptive
Capacity in Canada).
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
340
7.4
NORTHERN HEALTH AND WELL-BEING:
ADAPTATIONS AND ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
7.4.1
Adaptations
Many climate-related changes have the potential to influence human health and well-being,
and to place new stresses on the northern health sector. However, some of the resulting
impacts on human health are avoidable—as shown by existing adaptation strategies employed 
at individual and collective scales in northern communities to minimize exposures to and
impacts of environmental changes that are already taking place (Ford et al., 2006; Nickels 
et al., 2006). Although many countries are taking actions to immediately reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions, the trend toward a changing climate in the short term is already unavoidable.
Therefore, it is necessary to consider strategies to adapt, especially in rapidly changing 
and vulnerable regions such as the Canadian North. Within the context of human health, 
the process of adaptation consists of the actions taken (including public health actions, 
policies and strategies) to minimize the negative health impacts of climate change (Health
Canada, 2002). These actions can take a variety of forms (e.g. behavioural, institutional, 
technological, economic) and be primary, secondary or tertiary in nature (McMichael and
Kovats, 2000). The ability to adapt, or the adaptive capacity of individuals or collective
groups, is influenced by factors such as access to economic resources, technology, information
and skills, institutional arrangements, public health infrastructure, equity among members 
of a group, and the existing burden of disease (see Chapter 8, Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and
Adaptive Capacity in Canada).
The uncertainties associated with the potential effects of climate change, and the interactions
with and influences of other forces of change in the North, make the development of 
possible adaptation strategies particularly challenging. Understanding of the magnitude 
and scope of the changes ahead, and impacts to health and well-being these changes 
represent at the local and individual scales, is still developing. The geographic size and 
ecological, cultural, socio-economic and demographic diversity (see Section 7.2) of the
Canadian North mean that the nature and severity of projected impacts differ significantly
among locations (Government of Canada, 2001). As a result, a diverse range of adaptive 
strategies may be required to best respond to the exposures and potential impacts from 
one region to another.
Adaptation can occur at the individual, collective, institutional or systems level, locally,
regionally or nationally (Government of Canada, 2001). Currently, there are few examples 
of documented adaptations to the health impacts of climate change in the Canadian 
North. As well, there is some debate about whether changes in response to local environmental
changes are in fact specifically
“adaptations to climate change” 
or rather coping strategies for 
variable environmental changes 
that have been part of successful
social and human evolution in 
this region for hundreds if not 
thousands of years (Berkes and
Jolly, 2001). The few studies 
done to date on climate change
impacts and individual and 
collective responses have focussed
predominantly on remote
Aboriginal populations.
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
341
Consequently, there is more information about adaptation among these segments of the 
population and in these locations than there is about people living in larger population centres 
in the North or among non-Aboriginal residents. Currently, knowledge of current or 
future adaptations and adaptive capacity of northern non-Aboriginal residents is very limited,
although there are some examples of adaptation strategies at the community and municipal
scales (Government of Nunavut, 2006). Workshops and research projects conducted 
with Aboriginal residents (Riedlinger and Berkes, 2001; Nickels et al., 2002; Parlee et al., 
2005; Ford et al., 2006) report that individuals are already, primarily in a reactive sense,
adapting to minimize health-related impacts of climate change in the Canadian North. 
For example, workshops in the ISR of the NWT identified a number of actions individuals 
are taking in response to observed changes, and how these actions are affecting their 
livelihoods in their coastal communities (Table 7.12). A review of reported adaptive 
actions relevant to the health impacts of climate change are summarized in Table 7.13, 
and discussed briefly in the text that follows.
Table 7.12 Examples of environmental changes, effects and coping strategies/adaptations
reported by community residents in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region 
to minimize negative health impacts of climate change 
Source: Adapted from Nickels et al., 2002.
Chapter 7
Effect
Not able to store country food properly while
hunting, food spoils faster, less country
food consumed
Can no longer prepare dried and/or smoked
fish in the same way (“it gets cooked in 
the heat”)
Less dried and smoked fish eaten
Decrease in sources of good natural (raw)
drinking water available while on the land
Increased risk of water-borne illness
Individuals are bitten more
Increasing public concern of health effects
of new biting insects not seen before
Hunting more difficult (requires more fuel,
gear and time)
Some residents (e.g. Elders) cannot afford
to go hunting and have less access to
country foods
Observation
Warmer temperatures 
in summer
Warmer temperatures 
in summer
Lower water levels 
in some waterways
More mosquitoes 
and other new biting
insects
Changing animal 
migration routes 
and times
Adaptation
Travel back to community more often 
in summer while hunting to store food
safely (freezers)
Need: Investment for hunting activities
Decrease amount and frequency of hunting
Need: Reinvestment in support for 
community freezer programs
Alter construction of smoke houses: 
build thicker roofs to regulate temperature
Adapt drying and smoking techniques
Bottled water now purchased and taken 
on hunting trips
Use insect repellent, lotion or sprays
Use netting and screens for windows 
and entrances to homes
Need: Public education on insects and biting
flies to address perceptions and fears
Initiation of community country food support
programs for storage and distribution
Need: Financial and institutional support
to establish and manage these programs
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
342
Table 7.13 Summary of current responses taken by individuals and communities 
in the North, as reported in the literature, assisting in their adaptation 
to climate change and variability
Chapter 7
Environmental Change and Impacts 
and Threats to Health and Well-Being
Precipitation extremes and natural disasters
• Property damage, injuries and death, increased
travel risks
Unpredictability of weather
• Limitations on hunting and travelling
• Increased travel risks and injuries
• Increased damage to equipment
• Decreased access to traditional foods
Temperature-related injuries
• Changes in incidence of cold-related injuries
• Increased heat stress
Warming temperatures and changing ice conditions
• Increased travel risks
• Increased injuries and deaths (e.g. drowning)
associated with uncharacteristic and dangerous
ice conditions
• Impacts to equipment and household economies
• Decreased access to traditional food
• Disruption of traditional cycles and impacts 
on social cohesion and mental well-being
Increased exposure to UV radiation
• Increased incidence of sun burns, rashes 
and blisters
New and emerging diseases
• Increased incidence and exposure to zoonotic
diseases
• Increased exposure to new vectors
Environmental changes and food security
• Decreases in traditional food availability (wildlife
health and numbers), accessibility (changes 
in ice and snow conditions impacting routes to
hunting grounds) and quality (safety of meat 
for consumption)
• Appearance of new species
• Increased potential for local-scale northern 
agriculture
Water security
• Decrease in availability and accessibility to safe
natural drinking water sources
Permafrost, coastal erosion and community
infrastructure
• Loss of land along shorelines near buildings
• Destabilization of foundations and threats 
to buildings and other public health structures
Existing Responses
• Relocation of buildings in avalanche hazard zones
• Increased needs for local search and rescue teams
• Increased use and dependence on built (shelters) 
and natural (protected bays) refuges from storms
• Increased communication among hunters
• Increased preparations for travel and hunting
• Decreasing outings during variable times
• Use of technology (e.g. GPS)
• Reduce physical activity
• Increasing house ventilation and accessing cool areas
• Shifting hunting patterns (e.g. times)
• Using multiple means of transportation for same trip
• Increasing community monitoring and communication 
of ice conditions
• Use of new or alternate routes of travel
• Use of technology (GPS, satellite imagery)
• Increased use of protective creams
• Stay out of sun and indoors
• Increased use of insect repellents and bug nets
• Increased selectivity of animal meat consumed (to screen
for parasites and other abnormalities)
• Changes in times of hunting (to match shifts in availability)
• Shifting species hunted (to match changes in availability)
• Purchase of new transportation equipment to access 
animals harder to reach
• Return to community in summer more often from 
hunting trips to store fresh meat
• Carry bottled water on trips from the community
• Use snow more often for water in winter than multi-year ice
• Travel further from community for good natural water
sources
• Reinforcing shorelines
• Relocate buildings away from shorelines
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
343
7.4.1.1 Precipitation extremes and natural hazards
In response to the 1999 New Years’ Day avalanche in Kangiqsualujuaq, Nunavik, the 
community, regional and provincial governments took action to minimize the risk of a future
disaster of this nature (George, 1999). Several homes and community buildings were 
moved and reconstructed away from the danger zone at the base of the mountain, and the
municipality extended the danger zone to 90 m on the basis of expert advice (Lied, 2000).
Residents of the Labrador north coast (Nunatsiavut) stress the increasing importance of their
search and rescue teams, in communities where they do exist, because of the possibility 
of such events in their mountainous locations (e.g. the northern-most community of Nain)
(Table 7.13).
7.4.1.2 Unpredictability of weather conditions
Increasingly uncharacteristic weather patterns and events have had a significant impact on
northern communities in terms of travel safety, and access to and participation in traditional
land-based and subsistence activities. Northern residents have begun to cope or adapt in 
a variety of ways (Furgal et al., 2002; Lafortune et al., 2004; Huntington et al., 2005; Ford 
et al., 2006; Nickels et al., 2006; Tremblay et al., 2006) (Table 7.13). Changes in personal
behaviours—and an increased reliance on some safety measures in view of the increased land
and sea-based risks associated with uncharacteristic weather conditions—have been reported
across the North. For example, communities in Nunavik report increasing their use and
dependence on cabins out on the land while travelling, communicating weather conditions 
and observations among hunters more frequently while on the land by short-wave radio, and 
verifying conditions more vigilantly before setting out from the community (Communities of
Nunavik et al., 2005). Residents of Arctic Bay, Nunavut report taking increased supplies 
on trips, identifying refuge areas from high winds during the summer boating season before
setting out from the community, becoming more risk averse, and choosing not to go out 
on the water or land when conditions appear to be potentially shifting (Ford et al., 2006). 
As well, some residents report increased use of technologies such as GPS units to minimize
chances of getting lost in bad weather conditions.
Residents across the North also 
recommend additional changes 
to further minimize risks associated
with weather unpredictability. 
They include a return to the use 
of dog teams because of their
greater dependability and innate
navigation abilities in storms 
compared with snowmobiles 
and humans. They also include
improvements in local analysis 
and dissemination of weather 
forecasting information from 
installations such as drilling camps
and increased communications infrastructure (Communities of Nunavik et al., 2005; Communities
of the ISR et al., 2005). However, it is important to note that many existing adaptation 
strategies or those recommended by northern residents, while increasing capacity to forecast
conditions, may also create a false sense of security among hunters and other travellers by 
supporting an increase in travel that they would not otherwise undertake because of quickly
changing or dangerous conditions. Currently, there are no data on the effectiveness of 
behavioural and technological adaptations in reducing the number of lost individuals, 
accidents or injuries in the North.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
344
7.4.1.3 Temperature extremes
The majority of cold-related injuries are possible to prevent through appropriate protective
actions although rapid unpredictable temperature changes present challenges. This is 
primarily because of a lack of experience (affecting attitude and skills), preparedness 
(e.g. vehicles, garments, supplies, logistics) and/or acclimatization (Hassi et al., 2005). 
A reduction in cold-related injuries is likely, however, assuming that the standard of cold 
protection, including individual behavioural factors or other adaptations, does not decline
(Nayha, 2005).
Individual adaptive behaviours in the North are already being reported in response to 
heat extremes being experienced in some regions. Responses or adaptations such as 
ensuring access to cool areas in homes and altering physical activities outdoors (Furgal 
et al., 2002), installing screens in windows to increase ventilation in homes while 
protecting against the entry of flies and biting insects (Communities of the ISR et al., 
2005), and/or increasing access to cooling areas (e.g. local swimming areas) have 
been reported. These have been reported mainly by older residents in response to 
respiratory stress and discomfort associated with heat extremes during the summer 
months (Communities of Labrador et al., 2005; Communities of the ISR et al., 2005) 
(Table 7.13).
7.4.1.4 Warming temperatures and changing ice conditions
Arctic coastal communities have reported changes in sea ice regimes and dynamics
(Riedlinger and Berkes, 2001; Thorpe et al., 2002; Huntington et al., 2005; Ford et al., 
2006; Nickels et al., 2006; Tremblay et al., 2006). Adaptations to these changes have 
taken a variety of forms; these have been primarily behavioural in nature (Table 7.13). 
For example, shifting the timing of hunting activities to compensate for reduced access 
to resources as a result of later sea ice consolidation and earlier breakup is commonly 
reported. In Arctic Bay, Nunavut, a portion of the overall narwhal quota for that community, 
an important traditional and economic species, has been shifted from the spring to the 
summer hunt in response to increasingly risky spring ice conditions; this shift increases 
both human safety and the chances of hunting success (Armitage, 2005; Community 
of Arctic Bay et al., 2005). Hunters in that community also reported taking supporting 
or alternate transportation (e.g. small boat) with them when travelling into uncertain 
ice areas (e.g. floe edge) where greater transportation flexibility is required.
In Nunavik, the regional government, communities and outside researchers have established 
a community-based ice-monitoring program in response to local concerns about ice 
safety and access to resources (Communities of Nunavik et al., 2005; Tremblay et al., 
2006). Ice conditions are currently monitored, and information is communicated in three
coastal communities in this region and one inland Naskapi community. This information 
is a collection of quantitative data on ice and weather conditions and qualitative descriptions
on ice safety (Tremblay et al., 2006). Additionally, hunters in coastal communities of 
Nunavik report using new land-based or near-shore routes to access areas regularly reached 
by sea ice trails because of changes in ice stability (Lafortune et al., 2004). Some Nunavut 
communities now access satellite imagery of local sea ice conditions through the Internet
before travelling to the ice edge, and use GPS to detect ice flow and movement to increase 
safety, and travel and hunting efficacy (Communities of Nunavut et al., 2005). Many communities
are using similar adaptations for the same reasons in response to changes in lake- or 
river-ice conditions.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
345
7.4.1.5 Increased exposure to UV radiation
Residents in a number of regions throughout the Canadian North have reported increased 
incidence of sun rashes and burns associated with a perceived increase in the intensity 
of the sun in recent decades (Furgal et al., 2002; Huntington et al., 2005; Nickels et al., 
2006). In response, some individuals 
participating in community workshops 
on climate and environmental change
have stated that they have begun to 
use protective creams more frequently. 
In some instances, they have stayed 
out of the sun (e.g. in a tent) while 
on the land in the summer when 
the sun’s rays have felt particularly 
“hot” or increased their use of 
protective creams and clothing 
(Barron, 2006; Nickels et al., 2006).
7.4.1.6 New and emerging diseases
Northern residents are taking some protective measures to minimize their possible exposure 
to new diseases moving northward with warming temperatures. In response to the observation
of more and new biting insects in the region due to warmer summer temperatures, and 
concerns about the potential spread of disease, ISR residents in the western Arctic report 
an increased use of insect repellents and bug nets. More residents are installing screens 
to protect themselves against insect bites while increasing ventilation in their homes. In
response to shifts in the number of animals found with visible abnormalities (e.g. worms 
in the liver of caribou), Aboriginal hunters have reported being more selective about the 
animals kept for human consumption. In Nunavik, current screening of trichinosis in 
walrus meat is done within 24 to 48 hours from the time of the kill, and communities are
informed of the safety of the meat for raw consumption. Nearly all walrus-hunting 
communities in the region participate in the screening process and comply with the resulting 
public health advice.
Community leaders recommend public health education on potential new insect-transmitted
and other zoonotic diseases that may emerge in the North with a warming climate. The 
purpose of this education is to alleviate concerns, and provide residents with information 
they can act upon to minimize their exposure to these emerging hazards (e.g. Communities 
of the ISR et al., 2005).
7.4.1.7 Threats to food security
The accessibility and availability of animals in many regions has changed, and not all 
individuals have been able to respond in a way that has ensured their regular access to traditional
foods (e.g. elderly, those without the technological or financial means). Individuals have
responded by changing the times of hunting activities to match changes in prey availability
(both marine and terrestrial) (Ford et al., 2006; Guyot et al., 2006) (Table 7.13). Increased 
purchases of different marine and terrestrial transportation (e.g. faster or more powerful 
transportation vehicles, different kinds of vehicles) are also reported (Communities 
of the ISR et al., 2005; Ford et al., 2006). These purchases are being made to access 
hard-to-reach locations for fishing, hunting and gathering because of decreased water 
levels, increased storms or changes in route conditions (e.g. using an all-terrain vehicle 
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
346
more often than a skidoo because of an increased snow-free season). As well, more flexibility
appears to be required by some communities for hunting and gathering activities. In the 
community of Kugaaruk, Nunavut, residents typically rely on fishing when the ice is not safe
for hunting. Fishing has now become more common, even at times of the year when, in 
the past, the ice conditions used to support travelling and hunting opportunities (Community
of Kugaaruk et al., 2005).
The storage of wild foods has become increasingly difficult for hunters out on the land
because of warmer summer temperatures and decreased amounts of permanent ice and 
snow. Consequently, hunters in Nunavut, the ISR and Nunavik report returning to the 
community with their catch more often during the summer hunting season to ensure that 
the meat does not go bad. This increases the need for personal or community freezer 
access to store wild meats (Ford et al., 2006; Nickels et al., 2006). In response to changes 
in accessibility of game, hunters in Nunavik communities have been able to cope. They 
report that they have not yet felt impacts that have changed the amount they harvest, rather
simply how, where and how much they invest to access and harvest the same species
(Lafortune et al., 2004).
However, some of the adaptations to date do not always provide benefits and may have 
indirect negative impacts. For example, there are increased costs associated with more 
powerful means of transportation (e.g. purchase of larger boats, use of more fuel) and hunters
travelling farther and longer to access harder-to-reach species and animals (e.g. caribou)
whose migration routes have changed. The implications for household budgets are not yet
well understood.
7.4.1.8 Changes in drinking water quality and accessibility
Due to decreasing access to freshwater sources for drinking while on the land, northern
Aboriginal residents in Labrador and the ISR report carrying bottled water with them more
frequently when hunting and fishing (Nickels et al., 2006). The availability and accessibility
of large pieces of multi-year ice for drinking water, which are preferred by Elders during 
winter months, is decreasing; consequently, some residents report using snow more often 
or travelling further to collect water (Nickels et al., 2006). Some communities report the 
need for more frequent testing of water from municipal systems and raw water sources 
to ensure safety and increase confidence in drinking water. Water system managers and 
public health professionals discussed the issue of water quality and environmental change 
at a workshop in Nunavik in 2005 (Martin et al., 2005b). Several responses to threats to 
water quality in the region were recommended:
• implementing small disinfection systems (ultraviolet (UV) radiation) at some locations 
in communities to avoid parasitic contamination;
• public education on household tank cleaning and evaluation of water quality (microbiological)
before and after cleaning;
• public education on cleaning of plastic containers (used to store raw water in many 
households); and
• improving the surveillance of gastroenteritis.
Similarly, the Sierra Legal Defence Fund’s (2006) Report Card on drinking water in Canada
makes a series of recommendations to protect the safety of Canadians in the face of threats 
to drinking water, including climate change. For the territories in particular, they identified 
the need to adopt more stringent treatment standards. For Nunavut, they identified the need
for protocols for public communication of water quality issues and the need to increase the 
frequency of testing (Sierra Legal Defence Fund, 2006).
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
347
7.4.1.9 Impacts on community and public health infrastructure
As a result of melting permafrost and increasing ground instability, communities have become
concerned about damage to transportation and housing infrastructure. This is particularly important
in communities where infrastructures are critical elements in the support of public health, such as
drinking water sources, water treatment
facilities, sewage containment areas,
and transportation routes in remote and
isolated communities.
In some regions, communities are
observing impacts of coastal erosion
associated with increased storm surges
and decreased sea ice cover, such 
as in the western Canadian Arctic.
Adaptation to protect shorelines is 
taking place in the form of technological
responses. In Tuktoyaktuk, NWT, the
shoreline is reinforced with materials
to decrease erosion and protect community buildings. An evaluation of the dynamics of coastal
erosion around this community has been conducted, and potential plans for partial or complete
relocation are being considered (Community of Tuktoyaktuk et al., 2005). Additionally, residents
in this community and others in this region report having to move buildings in response to erosion
and loss of shoreline (Communities of the ISR et al., 2005) (Table 7.13). Hoeve et al. (2006)
conducted a scenario-based approach to assess the costs of adaptation to infrastructure (buildings)
for the NWT. Although not exclusive to infrastructure critical to public health, it indicates the
potential costs associated with erosion and permafrost melting. Costs in the NWT to address
the impacts of melting permafrost on foundations ranged from $420 million (“worst-case”
scenario, in which all foundations on permafrost required adaptation) to $200 to $250 million
(“best guess” or conservative scenario, in which the thermal and physical sensitivity of each
community was considered). Because human health and safety are threatened in northern
communities from the combined forces of climate variability and change, a variety of adaptations
are being developed. Their effectiveness and limits with regard to the rate and extent of climate
change projected for northern regions are yet to be determined.
7.4.2
Adaptive Capacity
Adaptive capacities differ within and between regions and communities, as do exposures to
climate variability and change throughout the North. A short review of the basic factors influencing
adaptive capacity for health and climate change is provided in the text that follows.
7.4.2.1 Economic and material resources
The access to economic wealth among regions and communities facilitates the access to and
implementation of various technological adaptive measures. For example, the access to resources
to hire, equip and train search and rescue personnel at the municipal level can have significant
positive impacts on reducing morbidity and mortality associated with strandings, and other events
related to climatic extremes and weather-related natural disasters (e.g. storms, avalanches). The
same can be said for other aspects of emergency management. The regional or municipal access
to financial resources to fund, operate and maintain community freezers in communities can
significantly aid in the adaptation of individuals to stresses related to country food security.
According to community residents, these programs are no longer available in some communities
and regions because of a lack of funds or the reallocation of funds to other priorities (Communities
of the ISR et al., 2005).
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Eric Loring
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
348
The shifting ice seasons have 
significant impacts on ice-road 
networks in the western Arctic.
These roads provide access to 
communities for the shipment of
market foods and other products
important to the health of northern
residents. The construction of 
permanent all-weather roads is 
one potential strategy to adapt 
to the decreased stability of these
roads. However, as Dore and
Burton (2001) estimate, the costs
associated with the construction 
of permanent roads in northern regions are very high (approximately $840,000/km, near
Yellowknife). Based on a scenario in which 350 km of the territory’s 1,400 km of winter/ice
roads require replacement, projected replacement costs by the year 2100 for the NWT are 
in excess of $43 million (Dore and Burton, 2001).
Access to economic resources is as important at the individual level, as it is at the community
level, to adapt to climate impacts on health. As reported by Ford et al. (2006) in Arctic Bay, 
the families of only some hunters were able to purchase critical equipment (e.g. larger boats)
to adapt to changes in weather (e.g. increased storminess) and maintain a high level of 
hunting activity to minimize impacts to household food security. In this regard, household and
individual wealth is critical in terms of adaptive capacity. Little attention has been given to
examining the role of personal wealth in the ability to adapt at the household level, and to the
associated variations in adaptation across regions of the North at this level. A review of basic
socio-economic indicators shows that the economic capacity of individuals in Nunavut and
Nunavik is significantly less than the average resident in other northern regions of the country
(Table 7.6). This is in part associated with a limited number of economic options that renders
these populations more vulnerable to changes in both local resource base (wildlife species)
and global economic trends and markets.
7.4.2.2 Technology
Access to technology aids in the adaptation of individuals and communities to potential climate
change impacts throughout the North. For example, the use of GPS units by younger hunters
in some Nunavik and Nunavut communities has decreased the impacts of changing weather and
ice conditions on the safety and ability to travel and hunt successfully in the Arctic environment
(Communities of Nunavik et al., 2005; Communities of Nunavut et al., 2005; Ford et al., 2006).
The use of larger boats by some hunters in Arctic Bay is an adaptation to the impacts of
increased storminess, and allows them to continue hunting in these conditions. However,
the adoption of such strategies also comes with a cost, in that individuals are increasing their
exposure to these climate variables and therefore the net vulnerability is difficult to assess.
This raises the issue of access to “appropriate technologies” and whether the knowledge base
to use them effectively also exists in northern communities. The adoption of other kinds 
of technology, perhaps considered “basic” in other regions of the country, is often critically
important in the North. For example, the installation of screens in the windows of homes in
ISR communities helps alleviate the stress of extreme indoor temperatures on hot days while
protecting residents from the increased presence of biting flies and other insects (Communities 
of the ISR et al., 2005). Across regions, the access to technology to adapt to currently identified
health impacts associated with climate change appears to be limited by access to economic
resources at household and individual levels.
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
349
7.4.2.3 Information and skills
Access to information and skills influences both individual and collective capacities to cope 
with and respond to the health impacts of climate change and variability. A review of basic
education statistics in the North reveals fewer years of formal education on average in regions with
a higher proportion Aboriginal population, such as Nunavut and Nunavik (Table 7.6). Access to
skilled individuals who provide health services, such as general practitioners and specialists, and
emergency health facilities is limited because of the remoteness of many northern communities.
These issues are particularly evident in eastern Arctic regions where communities are not 
connected by roads; therefore, access to these services is further limited. As well, many northern
regions face a high rate of turnover among local health centre personnel. However, it is important
to note that, in small remote communities of the Canadian North, traditional knowledge and
skills are just as important as the more formal information and skills for individual adaptation.
There is an increasing awareness of the value of Aboriginal knowledge and its role in adaptation
to climate change and other forms of environmental change in the circumpolar North and around
the world (ACIA, 2005). Aboriginal people have demonstrated considerable adaptive capacity
and resilience in the face of change. Adaptive mechanisms such as “prey-switching” in response
to changing animal abundance and distribution, and longer-term adaptation by using new tools
and technologies such as GPS are two such examples (Berkes and Jolly, 2001). The value of local
Aboriginal knowledge in this adaptation is demonstrated by the ability of northern hunters 
to safely navigate new travel and hunting routes in the face of decreasing sea and freshwater-ice
stability and safety (Lafortune et al., 2004), and the ability of many Arctic Aboriginal groups
to locate and hunt species that have shifted their migration times and routes, such as geese or
caribou. The value of this knowledge is also in the foundation it provides for survival skills, and
the ability to monitor ice safety and weather for travel in an environment with increasingly
uncharacteristic weather conditions (Krupnik and Jolly, 2002; Nickels et al., 2002; Huntington
et al., 2005; Guyot et al., 2006). However, there are limits to these adaptive abilities, and the
thresholds at which adaptive capacity is insufficient to mitigate impacts must be identified.
The generation and application of traditional knowledge requires active engagement with the
environment, close social networks in communities, and respect and recognition for the value
of this way of knowing and understanding. Social, economic and cultural trends in some 
communities, and predominantly among the younger generation, indicate adoption of a more
western lifestyle that is less intimately associated with the land. This has the potential to 
erode the cycle of generating and transferring traditional knowledge, and consequently the
contribution of this knowledge to local adaptive capacity. Therefore, there are significant
threats to the future of this element of adaptive capacity.
7.4.2.4 Institutional arrangements
Institutional flexibility enhances adaptive capacity by providing support for appropriate 
decisions to be made at the levels at which impacts are first recognized and response is required.
The establishment of self-government regimes and natural resource co-management boards 
in the North allow for empowerment at local levels, and the orientation of decision making at
the levels where the issues are first experienced and often best understood. For example,
threats to traditional food security associated with increased climate variability require 
strategies to protect both resource numbers, and traditional and subsistence activities 
(Tesar, 2007). Recognizing the need for flexibility in hunting seasons for key food species 
that are adapting to shifts in regional ecology, and hunting new species moving into more
northerly ranges are two such strategies (Chapin et al., 2004; Armitage, 2005; Huntington 
et al., 2005). Properly financed and supported, the devolution of power to flexible, 
local-scale decision-making bodies is more effective in making institutional arrangements 
in the face of climate variability and change.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
350
The development of partnerships between northern communities and outside organizations
provides the opportunity to enhance local adaptability and response, and in turn minimize
health impacts. For example, the increased presence of companies in some sectors in the
North may provide opportunities for communities to develop partnerships and enhance local
search and rescue capabilities. Partnerships with Nunavik regional organizations, university
researchers and the Public Health Agency of Canada are enhancing regional surveillance and
monitoring capacity for food-borne and water-borne diseases that are likely to increase in 
the future with regional climate warming (Furgal et al., 2002; PHAC, 2006).
7.4.2.5 Community and public health infrastructure
Access to effective public health and emergency management services and infrastructure is a
recognized determinant of health, and can support local-scale resilience in the face of projected
health impacts of northern climate change. Although few studies on the status and distribution 
of basic public health infrastructure in the North have been conducted to date, there are some
reports of local-scale challenges concerning drinking water surveillance and security (Sierra
Legal Defence Fund, 2006). Northern regions are serviced with community health centres,
regional hospitals and a medical evacuation system whereby residents are flown when required
to better-equipped southern centres with specialists and emergency health care facilities. The
number of medical doctors and specialists per capita is significantly less in the North. Greater
staff turnover and less access to public health services are also a challenge for many northern
residents, particularly Aboriginal people. Based on their geographic location, the smaller, more
remote communities with no road network depend on air travel to link them to larger northern
centres and southern cities. These communities are perhaps the most vulnerable to some
impacts of climate change, such as those related to weather-associated natural disasters, because
of their limited access to specialists and emergency health care facilities.
7.4.2.6 Disparities in health status
Northern populations in general have lower health status (Table 7.2). Indicators of health status
discussed earlier suggest some health vulnerabilities among Aboriginal populations that can
affect their ability to adapt. Lower life expectancy, higher infant mortality, a higher percentage
of low-weight births (e.g. Nunavut and Nunavik), and a significantly higher number of accidents
compared with the national average
characterize the population today.
Among the general northern 
population, health services and
health status are improving.
However, as noted by the
Government of the Northwest
Territories (GNWT, 2005) and 
others (Statistics Canada, 2005), 
the status of northern Aboriginal
populations continues to be 
poorer for some indicators 
(e.g. lower life expectancy in all
regions, higher rates of accidents 
in communities in the NWT). 
In fact, Aboriginal health status in the country has remained the same or worsened over the
past 10 years (Young, 2003). The disparities in health status, and in particular the significantly
lower status among Aboriginal groups in the North, influences the levels of adaptive capacity and
vulnerability to climate change impacts on health throughout the Arctic. The generally lower
health status among the Aboriginal population, in particular, limits their adaptive capacity and
ability to minimize the health impacts of climate change.
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
351
7.4.2.7 Socio-ecological resilience
There is a growing body of literature on the historical adaptive abilities of Aboriginal groups in the
circumpolar North and the applicability of these strategies today for addressing impacts from 
climate change. The adaptive capacity among Aboriginal groups that lived in the North in the past
was associated with a combination of strong human and social capital, social and cultural
organizational flexibility, the ability to understand and respect human relationships to the land,
and to generate, share and apply locally developed land-based knowledge. This socio-ecological
resilience (which is a function of adaptive capacity) was critical for the survival of Aboriginal
peoples throughout the North over thousands of years (Chapin et al., 2004). Historically, cultural
adaptations and the ability of Arctic Aboriginal people to use their local resources have been
associated with, or affected by, seasonal variations and changing ecological and climatic conditions.
One of the hallmarks of successful adaptation in Arctic resource use has been flexibility in the
application of technologies and social organization, and the knowledge and ability to cope with
change and circumvent some of its negative impacts. Some of these characteristics still exist in
many communities today whereas in other communities they have been eroded by social, cultural
and economic shifts over recent decades. For example, Chapin et al. (2004) report how Aboriginal
groups in the European Arctic have developed resilience by sharing resources, even in the cash
sector of the economy, through kinship networks that link hunters with office workers.
In the past, responses to major climatic and environmental changes included changing group
size or moving to new locations, being flexible with regard to seasonal cycles and harvesting,
and establishing sharing mechanisms and networks for support (Freeman, 1996). Many of
these strategies, with the exception of moving communities, are still employed in various ways
in the Canadian North (Berkes and Jolly, 2001; Nickels et al., 2002; McCarthy et al., 2005; Ford
et al., 2006) (Table 7.13). However, they will likely be constrained in the future by continued
shifts toward a more sedentary, “western” lifestyle and livelihoods that challenge the connection
between people and their local environments.
7.4.2.8 Disparities in adaptive capacity
Disparities in adaptive capacity exist between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people, and between
remote and larger regional centres in the North (Tables 7.3–7.7). The pattern of disparities 
in terms of adaptive capacity differs from location to location, based on a variety of factors.
Residents in larger regional centres closer to north-south transportation connections (e.g. road
networks, regional airports) are more heavily engaged in wage-based employment and are less
dependent on local resources for household sustenance. Their livelihoods are at lower risk from
climate conditions, and they have a greater ability to respond to weather extremes and other
hazards. They often have greater access to economic resources to purchase needed transportation
and hunting equipment, market foods when land-based foods are scarce, and they have easier
access to emergency medical services in the event of accidents. More frequently, these are
communities with proportionately larger non-Aboriginal populations.
In terms of social capital, traditional skills and knowledge, and access to a diversity of 
environmental resources, the more remote, smaller communities are better equipped to adapt to
changes and variability in local environmental conditions. For example, many residents in these
communities have the traditional knowledge to find new hunting locations and routes, the 
traditional survival skills to travel in dangerous weather, and extended social networks to spread
the risk of impacts among a larger number of individuals. However, a number of social and
economic inequities disadvantage Aboriginal populations in terms of their ability to adapt. The
analysis of capacity at the community level is solely based on the qualitative review of data
presented here, and warrants further investigation. A more detailed local-scale understanding 
of climate impacts and the factors that influence adaptation requires further attention in order
to best support the development of skills and abilities that facilitate local response and 
minimize negative impacts.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
352
7.5
KEY VULNERABILITIES
The assessment of vulnerability to the impacts of climate change on health in an area as 
large and diverse as the Canadian North is a challenging exercise. Based on the information
presented in this chapter, some general observations can be made about key vulnerabilities 
to climate change health impacts that exist in Canada’s North. Key vulnerabilities exist where
individuals or groups are already highly exposed and where exposure is increasing or likely 
to increase, and where there is limited or challenged adaptive capacity to respond to these
impacts. In general, many of the vulnerabilities to health risks from climate change in the
Canadian Arctic are the product of a combination of environmental, socio-economic, lifestyle
and political changes. Vulnerabilities are summarized by key climate and health impacts 
in the text that follows.
7.5.1
Precipitation and Natural Hazards
Communities located in mountainous regions (e.g. some subregions of the Yukon, and eastern
communities of Baffin Island, Nunavik and Labrador), which are less accessible by road 
networks and located within avalanche-prone areas, are particularly vulnerable to continued
winter warming and increases in precipitation which can trigger avalanches and landslides.
According to Bradley (2005), communities with established emergency plans and access to
emergency transportation are less vulnerable to the impacts of such environmental disasters 
in Arctic regions. Re-zoning studies, identification of hazard areas and relocation of buildings
away from these areas, as has been done in Nunavik (Lied, 2000), can significantly reduce
future exposure and therefore vulnerability. Similar measures in other at-risk regions will have
similar positive benefits in reducing exposure, increasing adaptive capacity and, as a result,
reducing vulnerability.
7.5.2
Unpredictable Weather, Ice Conditions and Travel Hazards
Aboriginal populations, who spend significant amounts of time on the land and sea away 
from communities, and who have a strong reliance on their local environments for traditions,
culture and subsistence, are the most highly exposed groups in the North to changing and
uncharacteristic weather conditions. Current exposure to these hazards is high, particularly 
in smaller, more remote communities where traditional activities are still a regular part 
of everyday life. With projected changes and fluctuations in the climate system, exposure 
is expected to remain high. Many coastal communities also report a shift in ice seasons 
and an increase in ice instability, and associated travel dangers. As noted previously, 
land-based accidents are more common in small, remote communities and occur 
predominantly among young male Aboriginal residents (GNWT, 2004). However,
according to Elders, traditional cues for predicting environmental variability no longer 
work because of the increasing unpredictability of northern climatic conditions and 
weather. (Chapin et al., 2005; Huntington et al., 2005; Nickels et al., 2006). This strips 
residents of their knowledge, predictive ability and self-confidence in making a living 
from their resources, and may ultimately leave them as “strangers in their own land” 
(Berkes and Jolly, 2001). Social, economic and cultural trends in the North suggest 
an increasingly sedentary population that is more engaged in wage-earning employment. 
With these trends, the current wealth of adaptive capacity that comes from regular, 
frequent and extended, close interactions with the environment is being eroded. 
Consequently, the vulnerability of Aboriginal people, and especially youth and young 
hunters, to these hazards will increase in the future.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
353
7.5.3
Temperature-Related Injuries
Projected winter warming and future improvements in access to preventative medical 
services throughout the North can be expected to decrease vulnerability to cold-related
injuries and mortality. However, increased extreme temperatures in the summer are 
already reported to be creating heat stress among some sensitive groups, such as the 
elderly and those with pre-existing respiratory
conditions, as was reported by Inuit Elders 
in Nunatsiavut and the Inuvialuit regions. 
Current adaptations to extreme warm tempera-
tures seem adequate to date; however, some 
challenges are faced by those who are less 
mobile and have limited access to cool buildings
and appropriate ventilation (Communities 
of the ISR et al., 2005). As hot summer 
temperatures continue to increase in number 
and severity, and the number of elderly 
residents grows (Tables 7.1 and 7.2), there 
is a need to monitor the vulnerability of 
this at-risk group throughout the North.
7.5.4
New and Emerging Diseases
Current levels of exposure to many zoonotic and vector-borne diseases in the North 
are generally not well monitored. Evidence from Nunavik shows the current exposure 
to some diseases that have had an impact on health in that region in recent decades 
(Table 7.11). Residents in the western Arctic have reported increasing numbers and 
species of insects in recent years, indicating a potentially higher level of exposure 
to some potential vectors (Communities of the ISR et al., 2005). Residents of all regions, 
who regularly consume traditional food, will face increased risk of infection by some 
zoonotic diseases that are projected to increase in the North in the future, particularly 
if the wildlife they eat is raw or fermented as per traditional techniques. The greatest 
vulnerabilities are among Aboriginal residents residing in small remote communities 
where these practices are more common. These residents are also the furthest from 
emergency medical services and appropriate treatment in the event of infection. As 
indicated by residents in the western Arctic, public education on the health risks related 
to new and emerging diseases is needed, and would likely strengthen adaptive capacity 
and reduce vulnerability (Community of Tuktoyaktuk et al., 2005). Screening for Trichinella
in Nunavik is one example of a measure to reduce vulnerability in that region (Proulx 
et al., 2000).
7.5.5
Traditional Livelihoods, Food and Water Security
Livelihoods and aspects of health that are dependent on the hunting, fishing and gathering 
of land- and sea-based resources are already being impacted by changes in environmental 
conditions associated with climate change in many regions. According to Duhaime 
et al. (2002), households that are led by a single female have the least access to traditional
foods in Nunavik. According to Nickels et al. (2006), existing community traditional 
food-sharing programs are already under stress, and there is a need for the development 
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
354
of new programs in some communities. Households that are dependent upon and have 
access to only a few species in their local environment, and that have limited access to 
healthy alternatives, are the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change on food 
security (e.g. female-led single-parent households in small communities of Nunavik and
Nunavut) (Tables 7.6 and 7.7). In many instances, these individuals and households 
are already reporting significant stress on household food security. This is likely to increase 
with projected climate change in these regions.
Communities are most vulnerable to the impacts of climate warming and water-borne 
infections where significant amounts of raw and untreated water are used for drinking, 
especially by children and youth. This is particularly the case where access to treated 
water is limited, where warming is experienced, and where there is little surveillance 
and monitoring capacity. Currently, it is difficult to identify specific communities 
and regions where these conditions are present because of the lack of comparable 
local-scale data.
7.5.6
Permafrost, Coastal Erosion and Community Infrastructure
Exposure to the health impacts of permafrost melting and the destabilization of community
infrastructure is highest in the western Arctic where considerable warming has been 
experienced in recent decades. It is significantly pronounced in low-lying coastal 
communities because of the combined effects of permafrost melting and coastal erosion 
(e.g. Tuktoyaktuk, NWT). Current capacity to adapt to these changes, which are 
projected to continue throughout the North where communities are settled on permafrost, 
is limited because of the need for significant capital investment to repair and replace 
damaged or threatened infrastructure.
In general, exposure is much 
higher, and projected to increase,
among individuals living in 
small, remote, northern coastal 
communities with proportionately
higher Aboriginal populations. 
A disproportionate burden of 
risk is being placed on this specific
segment of the population which 
is already considered to be “at 
risk” or vulnerable to a number 
of health effects. Accordingly, 
the social and environmental 
justice dimensions of climate 
change need to be recognized 
for this population in Canada 
(Lambert et al., 2003).
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
355
7.6
KNOWLEDGE GAPS AND CONCLUSIONS
Research on climate change and health among Canadian Arctic populations is still developing
(Berner et al., 2005; Climate Impacts and Adaptation Research Network, North Region 
(C-CIARN North), 2005; Furgal and Séguin, 2006). Knowledge of impacts and adaptations,
and the capacity of Northerners to respond, is growing. To date, most of the research on 
climate change in this region has focussed on the nature of biophysical changes taking place
rather than on the impacts of those changes to human health vulnerabilities. Comparable 
local-scale information is required to provide a clearer indication of the relationships between
climate change and the health of Northerners, and to support the development of appropriate 
and acceptable response strategies in the future (Ford et al., 2006; Nickels et al., 2006). 
This assessment of vulnerabilities revealed some important challenges and gaps in the 
knowledge base. These range from basic data needs to the lack of local and regional studies 
and an understanding of key climate–health relationships in light of projected changes 
at local and regional scales. A summary of key knowledge gaps and recommendations are 
presented in the text that follows.
7.6.1
Knowledge Gaps and Research Recommendations
One of the most important limitations to the study of climate change effects on human 
health in Canada’s North is the lack of comparable health statistics for key health outcomes
which are potentially influenced by climate and environmental change for many regions. 
The paucity of comparable data and its collection over time, at regional and local scales, 
presents a significant challenge 
to the ability to assess the 
vulnerability to climate change.
Because vulnerability to climate
change is influenced by a number
of socio-economic, geographic,
health status and institutional 
factors, the collection of comparable
information on these variables 
is also required. The analysis 
presented in this chapter identifies
key information gaps in the 
following areas:
• water quality and community water infrastructure;
• level of emergency preparedness at the community level;
• incidence of climate-sensitive zoonotic diseases and vectors;
• cause-related injuries data;
• status of traditional food security and the factors that affect it in some regions;
• status of agricultural practices and possibilities for development in the future;
• status of key elements influencing adaptive capacity and their distribution at the household,
community, territorial and regional scales (e.g. income, seasonal income, access to 
employment); and
• data sets across the North for key climate and health indicators.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
356
Much of the knowledge of current
health vulnerabilities in northern
populations is based on very 
few focussed studies within the
health sector. The research
approaches used to collect 
the information required to 
better understand these issues 
(e.g. local workshops, interviews
with local residents) can also 
yield benefits such as the 
immediate enhancement of local
capacities by increasing local
knowledge of impacts and 
stimulating discussions of 
needed solutions. As reported 
by Furgal and Séguin (2006), 
adaptive strategies developed at the local scale appear to be most appropriate and sustainable 
over the long term. Therefore, the processes used to better understand climate change 
and health vulnerability in northern regions must engage local communities and individuals.
To address the key knowledge gaps and enhance local capacities to adapt, the following
research activities are recommended to be undertaken in cooperation with local and regional
bodies throughout the North:
• regional risk assessments to adequately assess the relative importance of certain 
climate exposures on human populations;
• the changing epidemiology of environmentally influenced morbidity and mortality 
in northern populations (e.g. understanding patterns of injuries and diseases and the 
role that many of the factors that influence adaptive capacity play in these diseases);
• the impact of climate change and environmental variability on northern food 
security;
• impact and adaptation studies among the northern non-Aboriginal population;
• local-scale health vulnerability studies including the relative importance of key 
socio-economic factors in the adoption of adaptations or health protection measures;
• documentation and assessment of individual and collective health adaptations to 
climate and environmental change;
• improvement of regional-scale climate scenarios and models for use in health impact
assessment; and
• integrated human, biophysical and natural system climate studies at the local and 
regional scales.
Future research will also benefit from the enhancement of local analytical capacity to 
assess and use climate- and health-related data for policy and program decision making 
and the development of regional monitoring and surveillance capacity to establish 
a northern-wide comparable baseline with regards to climate-influenced northern 
health impacts.
Chapter 7
Photo Credits: Peter Langer
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
357
7.6.2
Conclusions
There are a number of important stressors acting on northern societies today. Climate change
will likely accelerate the effects of some, exacerbate others, and alleviate a few. The demographic
pressures of a young and growing population, as well as unprecedented social, cultural and
economic trends will continue to challenge the capacity of these regions to adapt to climate
change. According to Last and Chiotti (2001), public health education and promotion programs
related to several climate and health topics, the development of new technologies, and 
epidemiological surveillance and monitoring have the ability to minimize the vulnerability 
of northern residents and communities.
While many Aboriginal residents may be more highly
exposed than others to climate-related hazards, they can draw
on strong traditional skills and cultural assets to mobilize
capacity to adapt to change. Strategies to mainstream or
formalize the development of adaptive capacity, in association
with other forms of public health education on these topics,
may prove valuable in enhancing adaptive capacity and
reducing vulnerability in the future (e.g. traditional knowledge
and skills camps on the land; economic support programs
for hunting, fishing and gathering).
There are known gaps in the health monitoring and sur-
veillance capacity; the development of priority indicators
of the health impacts of climate change for the North
could inform necessary efforts to enhance this capacity.
Recent advances in this area include those of Health
Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada in the
area of food- and water-borne disease research activities, 
surveillance and monitoring in northern communities related
to climate change, and in supporting the sustainability of
health in communities through the Aboriginal Head Start program. As well, Gosselin et al. (2006a,
2006b) are currently conducting a comprehensive review of surveillance capacity in Inuit land
claim regions in the context of changing regional climates and potential impacts to health. Current
community-based participation in research activities is also taking place under the International
Polar Year, and initiatives are underway under the ArcticNet (Network Centres of Excellence) and
other programs (e.g. Northern Contaminants Program). They are making important contributions
to the collection of baseline information upon which monitoring can continue, and are helping to
understand the problems and how best to address them. With this information, much more 
will be learned about the existing response capacity across the North and where best to focus
efforts to strengthen abilities and address current and future vulnerabilities.
The assessment of vulnerabilities presented in this chapter represents an early step in the
development of an adequate understanding of complex and interrelated issues in the Canadian
North. Significant efforts are required to increase the knowledge of these issues and the 
capacity of northern populations to respond as the North continues to change. Individuals,
communities and governments need to work together to take proactive steps to develop 
and enhance capacity. Recognizing that the public health system in northern Canada is still 
relatively underdeveloped, improved access to basic health services will contribute to 
reducing the health impacts of climate change. However, the health sector cannot alone
address all the risks faced by Northerners; collective actions across a number of sectors 
are necessary to strengthen community adaptive capacity and provide individuals and 
communities with the needed solutions.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
358
7.7
REFERENCES
Allard, M., Fortier, R., Duguay, C., and Barrette, N. (2002). A trend of fast climate warming in 
northern Quebec since 1993. Impacts on permafrost and man-made infrastructures. 
In American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting 2002 [Abstract #B11E-03]. San Francisco:
American Geophysical Union.
Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA). (2005). Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) 
scientific report. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Arctic Human Development Report (AHDR). (2004). Akureyri, Iceland: Stefansson Arctic Institute.
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program (AMAP). (2002). Arctic pollution 2002: Persistent 
organic pollutants, heavy metals, radioactivity, human health, changing pathways. 
Oslo, Norway: Author.
—–. (2003). Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program (AMAP) assessment 2002: Human 
health in the Arctic. Oslo, Norway: Author.
Armitage, D. (2005). Community-based narwhal management in Nunavut, Canada: Change, 
uncertainty and adaptation. Society and Natural Resources, 18, 715–731.
Barron, M. (2006). A summary of health related effects of climate change in four Arctic regions 
organized by health determinant, based on a synthesis of project and workshop reports.
Report prepared for Health Canada Climate Change and Health Office by Barron Research
Consulting, Dundas, Ont.
Barrow, E., Maxwell, B., and Gachon, P. (2004). Climate variability and change in Canada:
Past, present and future. Ottawa: Environment Canada.
Berkes, F., and Jolly, D. (2001). Adapting to climate change: Socio-ecological resilience in a Canadian
western Arctic community. Conservation Ecology, 5(2), 18.
Berner, J.E. (2005). Climate change and health in the circumpolar north. International Journal 
of Circumpolar Health, 64(5), 435–437.
Berner, J., Furgal, C., Bjerregaard, P., Bradley, M., Curtis, T., et al. (2005). Human health. In Arctic
Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Blanchet, C., Dewailly, E., Ayotte, P., Bruneau, S., Receveur, O., et al. (2000). Contribution of 
selected traditional and market foods to the diet of Nunavik Inuit women. Canadian Journal 
of Dietetic Practice and Research, 61(2), 1–9.
Bogoyavlenskiy, D., and Siggner, A. (2004). Arctic demography. In Arctic Human Development 
Report (AHDR). Akureyri, Iceland: Stefansson Arctic Institute.
Bonsal, B.R., and Prowse, T.D. (2006). Regional assessment of GCM-simulated current climate 
over northern Canada. Arctic, 59, 115–128.
Booth, S., and Zeller, D. (2005). Mercury, food webs and marine mammals: Implications of diet 
and climate change for human health. Environmental Health Perspectives, 113(5), 521–526.
Bradley, M.J. (2005). Climate related events and community preparedness. International Journal 
of Circumpolar Health, 64(5), 438–439.
Bradley, M.J., Kutz, S.J., Jenkins, E., and O’Hara, T.M. (2005). The potential impact of climate 
change on infectious diseases of Arctic fauna. International Journal of Circumpolar 
Health, 64(5), 468–477.
Brown, J., Hinkel, K.M., and Nelson, F.E. (Eds.) (2000). The Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring
(CALM) program: Research designs and initial results. Polar Geography, 24(3), 165–258.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
359
Buell, M. (2005). Backgrounder: Health Sectoral Roundtable. Ottawa: National Aboriginal Health
Organization.
Chabot, M. (2004). Kaagnituurma! As long as I am not hungry. Socio-economic status and food 
security of low income households in Kuujjuaq (Nunavik Regional Board of Health and Social
Services and the Corporation of the Northern Village of Kuujjuaq, Kuujjauq and Pontiac). 
The Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology, 41, 2.
Chapin, F.S. III., Peterson, G., Berkes, F., Callaghan, T.V., Angelstam, P., et al. (2004). Resilience and
vulnerability of northern regions to social and environmental change. Ambio, 33(6), 344–349.
Chapin, F.S. III., Berman, M., Callaghan, T.V, Convey, P., Crépin, A-S., et al. (2005). Polar systems. 
In Millenium ecosystem assessment. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Chin, J. (Ed.). (2000). Control of communicable diseases manual. Washington: American Public 
Health Association.
Christensen, J.H., Hewitson, B., Busuioc, A., Chen, A., Gao, X. et al. (2007). Regional climate 
projections. In Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Cambridge U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Climate Impacts and Adaptation Research Network, North Region (C-CIARN North). (2005). 
Research needs survey. Iqaluit, Nunavut: Author.
Communities of Labrador, Furgal, C., Denniston, M., Murphy, F., Martin, D., et al. (2005).
Unikkaaqatigiit—Putting the human face on climate change: Perspectives from Labrador.
Ottawa: Joint publication of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatimi, Nasivvik Centre for Inuit Health 
and Changing Environments at Université Laval and the Ajunnginiq Centre at the National
Aboriginal Health Organization.
Communities of Nunavik, Furgal, C., Nickels, S., and Kativik Regional Government, Environment
Department. (2005). Unikkaaqatigiit—Putting the human face on climate change: Perspectives
from Nunavik. Ottawa: Joint publication of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatimi, Nasivvik Centre for 
Inuit Health and Changing Environments at Université Laval and the Ajunnginiq Centre 
at the National Aboriginal Health Organization.
Communities of Nunavut, Nickels, S., Furgal, C., Akumilik, J., Barnes, B.J., et al. (2005).
Unikkaaqatigiit – Putting the human face on climate change: Perspectives from communities 
of Nunavut. Ottawa: Joint publication of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatimi, Nasivvik Centre for 
Inuit Health and Changing Environments at Université Laval and the Ajunnginiq Centre 
at the National Aboriginal Health Organization.
Communities of the Inuvialuit Settlement Region (ISR), Nickels, S., Buell, M., Furgal, C. et al. 
(2005). Unikkaaqatigiit—Putting the human face on climate change: Perspectives from 
the Inuvialuit Settlement Region. Ottawa: Joint publication of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 
Nasivvik Centre for Inuit Health and Changing Environments at Université Laval and the
Ajunnginiq Centre at the National Aboriginal Health Organization.
Community of Aklavik, Nickels, S., Furgal, C., Castleden, J., Armstrong, B., et al. (2005).
Unikkaaqatigiit – Putting the human face on climate change: Perspectives from Aklavik,
Inuvialuit Settlement Region. Ottawa: Joint publication of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 
Nasivvik Centre for Inuit Health and Changing Environments at Université Laval and 
the Ajunnginiq Centre at the National Aboriginal Health Organization.
Community of Arctic Bay, Nickels, S., Furgal, C., Akumilik, J., and Barnes, B.J. (2005).
Unikkaaqatigiit – Putting the human face on climate change: Perspectives from Arctic 
Bay, Nunavut. Ottawa: Joint publication of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatimi, Nasivvik Centre 
for Inuit Health and Changing Environments at Université Laval and the Ajunnginiq 
Centre at the National Aboriginal Health Organization.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
360
Community of Kangiqsujuaq, Furgal, C., Qiisiq, M., Etidloie, B., and Moss-Davies, P. (2005).
Unikkaaqatigiit – Putting the human face on climate change: Perspectives from Kangiqsujuaq,
Nunavik. Ottawa: Joint publication of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatimi, Nasivvik Centre for Inuit 
Health and Changing Environments at Université Laval and the Ajunnginiq Centre at the
National Aboriginal Health Organization.
Community of Kugaaruk, Nickels, S., Furgal, C., Buell, M., Moquin, H., et al. (2005). Unikkaaqatigiit –
Putting the human face on climate change: Perspectives from Kugaaruk, Nunavut. Ottawa:
Joint publication of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, Nasivvik Centre for Inuit Health and Changing
Environments at Université Laval and the Ajunnginiq Centre at the National Aboriginal 
Health Organization.
Community of Tuktoyaktuk, Nickels, S., Furgal, C., Castleden, J., Armstrong, B., et al. (2005).
Unikkaaqatigiit – Putting the human face on climate change: Perspectives from Tuktoyaktuk,
Inuvialuit Settlement Region. Ottawa: Joint publication of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, Nasivvik 
Centre for Inuit Health and Changing Environments at Université Laval and the Ajunnginiq
Centre at the National Aboriginal Health Organization.
Council of Yukon First Nations (CYFN). (2006). Health status of Yukon First Nations. Whitehorse: Author.
Couture, R., Smith, S., Robinson, S.D., Burgess, M.M. and Solomon, S. (2003). On the hazards 
to infrastructure in the Canadian north associated with thawing of permafrost. Proceedings 
of Geohazards 2003: Third Canadian Conference on Geotechnique and Natural Hazards
(pp. 97–104). The Canadian Geotechnical Society.
Curtis, T., Kvernmo, S., and Bjerregaard, P. (2005). Changing living conditions, lifestyle and health.
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 64(5), 442–450.
De Fabo, E.C. (2005). Arctic stratospheric ozone depletion and increased UVB radiation: Potential
impacts to human health. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 64(5), 509–521.
Després C., Beuter, A., Richer, F., Poitras, K., Veilleux, A., et al. (2005). Neuromotor functions 
in Inuit preschool children exposed to Pb, PCBs, and Hg. Neurotoxicology and 
Teratology, 27(2), 245–257.
Dietrich, R.A. (Ed.). (1981). Alaskan wildlife diseases. Fairbanks: Institute of Arctic Biology,
University of Alaska Fairbanks.
Dore, M.H.I., and Burton, I. (2001). The costs of adaptation to climate change in Canada:
A stratified estimate by sectors and regions social infrastructure. Final report. Ottawa: 
Natural Resources Canada, Canadian Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Office.
Downey, D.L., and Fenge, T. (2003). Northern lights against POPs: Combatting toxic threats 
in the Arctic. Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Duhaime, G., Fréchette, P., and Robichaud, V. (1999). The economic structure of Nunavik 
Region (Canada): Changes and stability. Québec: GÉTIC, Université Laval.
Duhaime, G., Chabot, M., and Gaudreault, A. (2002). Food consumption patterns and socioeconomic 
factors among the Inuit of Nunavik. Ecology of Food and Nutrition, 41, 91–118.
Duhaime, G., Lemelin, A., Didyk, V., Goldsmith, O., Winther, G., et al. (2004). Arctic economies. In 
Arctic Human Development Report (AHDR). Akureyri, Iceland: Stefansson Arctic Institute.
Ebi, K.L., Kovats, S., and Menne, B. (2006). An approach for assessing human health vulnerability 
and public health interventions to adapt to climate change. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 114(12), 1930–1934.
Fandrick, B. (2005). Water management issues in Inuit communities. Inuit Tapiriit Kantami (ITK)
Environment Bulletin, 3, 9–11.
Farmer, T., Robinson, K., Elliott, S.J., and Eyles, J. (2006). Developing and implementing a triangulation
protocol for qualitative health research. Qualitative Health Research, 16(3), 377–394.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
361
Flato, G., and Brown, G., (1996). Variability and climate sensitivity of landfast Arctic sea ice. Journal
of Geophysical Research, 101(C11), 25767–25778.
Ford J.D., and Smit, B. (2004). A framework for assessing the vulnerability of communities in the
Canadian Arctic to risks associated with climate change. Arctic, 57(4), 389–400.
Ford, J.D., Smit, B., and Wandel, J. (2006). Vulnerability to climate change in the Arctic: A case study
from Arctic Bay, Nunavut. Global Environmental Change, 16(2), 145–160.
Freeman, M.M.R. (1996). Identity, health and social order. In M.L. Foler, and L.O. Hansson (Eds.),
Human ecology and health: Adaptation to a changing world (pp. 57–71). Gothenburg,
Sweden: Gothenburg University.
French, H.M., and Slaymaker, O. (1993). Canada’s cold landmass. In H.M. French, and O. Slaymaker
(Eds.), Canada’s cold environments (pp. 3–27). Montreal: McGill University Press.
Fulton, R.J. (Ed.). (1989). Quaternary geology of Canada and Greenland. Volume K-1 of the 
Geological Society of North America’s Geology of North America Series, Geology of Canada
No. 1. Ottawa: Geological Survey of Canada.
Furgal, C., and Prowse, T. (2008). Northern Canada. In D. Lemmen (Ed.), Canadian climate change
impacts and adaptation assessment. Ottawa: Natural Resources Canada.
Furgal, C., and Séguin, J. (2006). Climate change, health and community adaptive capacity: 
Lessons from the Canadian North. Environmental Health Perspectives, 114(12), 1964–1970.
Furgal, C., Martin, D., and Gosselin, P. (2002). Climate change and health in Nunavik and Labrador:
Lessons from Inuit knowledge. In I. Krupnik, and D. Jolly (Eds.), The earth is faster now:
Indigenous observations of Arctic environmental change (pp. 266–299). Fairbanks: Arctic
Research Consortium of the United States in cooperation with the Arctic Studies Center,
Smithsonian Institution.
Furgal, C., Kalhok, S., Loring, E., and Smith, S. (2003). Knowledge in action: Northern contaminants
program structures, processes and products. Canadian Arctic Contaminants Assessment 
Report II. Ottawa: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada.
George, J. (1999, April 29). Village plans mass relocation of homes away from mountain. Nunatsiaq News.
Gosselin P., Owens, S., Furgal, C., Château-Degat, L., and Proulx, J-F. (2006a). Public health 
surveillance and climate change case study results in Nunavik [Poster]. Annual ArcticNet 
NCE scientific meeting held at Victoria, B.C., December 12–15, 2006.
Gosselin, P., Owens, S., Furgal, C., Martin, D., and Turner, G. (2006b). Public health surveillance 
and climate change case study results in Nunatsiavut [Poster]. Annual ArcticNet NCE 
scientific meeting held at Victoria, B.C., December 12–15, 2006.
Government of Canada. (2001). Canada’s third national report on climate change: Actions to 
meet commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2006). The human face of mental health and mental illness in Canada. Ottawa: Minister 
of Public Works and Government Services Canada.
Government of Nunavut. (2006). Nunavut climate change workshop: Adaptation action in arctic 
communities. Final Report. Iqaluit: Department of Environment, Environmental 
Protection Division.
Northwest Territories (GNWT). Health and Social Services. (2004). Injury in the Northwest 
Territories: A descriptive report. Yellowknife: Department of Health and Social Services.
—–. (2005). The NWT health status report: 2005. Yellowknife: Department of Health and Social Services.
Gunn, A., Miller, F., Barry, S.L., and Buchan, A. (2006). A near-total decline in caribou on Prince 
of Wales, Somerset, and Russell Islands, Canadian Arctic. Arctic, 59(1), 1–13.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
362
Guyot, M., Dickson, C., Macguire, K., Paci, C., Furgal, C., et al. (2006). Local observations of climate
change and impacts on traditional food security in two northern Aboriginal communities.
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 65(5), 403–415.
Hamilton, L.C., Brown, B.C., and Rasmussen, R.O. (2003). West Greenland’s cod-to-shrimp transition:
Local dimensions of climatic change. Arctic, 56(3), 271–282.
Harding, L.E. (2004). The future of Peary Caribou (Rangifer tarandus pearyi) in a changing climate. In
T.D. Hooper (Ed.), Proceedings of the Species at Risk 2004 Pathways to Recovery Conference,
March 2–6, 2004, Victoria, British Columbia. Victoria: Species at Risk 2004 Pathways to
Recovery Conference Organizing Committee.
Hassi, J., Rytkonen, M., Kotaniemi, J., and Rintamaki, H. (2005). Impacts of cold climate on human
heat balance, performance and health in circumpolar areas. International Journal of
Circumpolar Health, 64(5), 459–476.
Health Canada. (2002). Climate change and health & well-being: A policy primer for Canada’s North.
Ottawa: Climate Change and Health Office.
Hoeve, T.E., Zhou, F., Zhang , A., and Cihlar, J. (2006). Assessment of building foundation sensitivity 
to climate change in the Northwest Territories. Ottawa: Natural Resources Canada.
Huntington, H.P. (2000). Using traditional ecological knowledge in science: Methods and applications.
Ecological Applications, 10(5), 1270–1274.
Huntington, H., Fox, S., Berkes, F., Krupnik, I., Whiting, A., et al. (2005). The changing Arctic:
Indigenous perspectives. In Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) (pp. 61–98). Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC). (2007). Northern Food Basket (NFB). Retrieved 
March 15, 2007, from http://www.ainc-inac.gc.ca/ps/nap/air/Fruijui/NFB/nfb_e.html
Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ). (2006). Portrait de santé du Québec et ses
régions 2006: Les statistiques – Deuxième rapport national sur l’état de santé de la population 
du Québec [2006 health portrait of Quebec and its regions – Second national report on 
the state of health of the population of Quebec]. Québec: Gouvernement du Quebec.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2001). Climate change 2001: The scientific 
basis. J.T. Houghton, Y. Ding, D.J. Griggs, M. Noguer, P.J. van der Linden, et al. (Eds.).
Contribution of working Group II to the Third assessment report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007). Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution
to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Geneva: IPCC Secretariat.
Kattsov, V.M., Kallen, E., Cattle, H., Christensen, J., Drange, H., et al. (2005). Future climate 
change: Modeling and scenarios for the Arctic. In Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA)
(pp. 100–150). London, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Kelmelis, J., Becker, E., and Kirtland, S. (2005). Workshop on the foreign policy implications 
of Arctic warming: Notes from an international workshop. U.S. Geological Survey, Open-File
Report, 2005–1447.
Kovesi, T., Creery, D., Gilbert, N.L., Dales, R., Fugler, D., et al. (2006). Indoor air quality risk factors 
for severe lower respiratory tract infections in Inuit infants in Baffin Region, Nunavut: 
A pilot study. Indoor Air, 16(4), 266–275.
Kraemer, L.D., Berner, J., and Furgal, C. (2005). The potential impact of climate on human exposure 
to contaminants in the Arctic. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 64(5), 498–509.
Krupnik, I., and Jolly, D. (Eds.). (2002). The earth is faster now: Indigenous observations of Arctic
environmental change. Washington, D.C. Arctic Research Consortium of the United States,
Arctic Studies Centre, Smithsonian Institution.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
363
Kuhnlein, H.V. (1992). Change in the use of traditional foods by the Nuxalk native people of British
Columbia. Ecology of Food and Nutrition, 27(3–4), 259–282.
Kuhnlein, H.V., and Receveur, O. (2001). Energy, fat, and calcium in bannock consumed by Canadian
Inuit. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 101(5), 580–581.
Kuhnlein, H.V., Receveur, O., Chan, H.M., and Loring, E. (2000). Assessment of dietary benefit:
Risk in Inuit communities. Québec: Centre for Indigenous Peoples’ Nutrition and Environment
(CINE), McGill University.
Kuhnlein, H.V., Chan, H.M., Leggee, D., and Barthet, V. (2002). Macronutrient, mineral and fatty 
acid composition of Canadian Arctic traditional food. Journal of Food Composition and
Analysis, 15, 545–566.
Kutz, S.J., Hoberg, E.P., Nagy, J., Polley, L., and Elkin, B. (2004). “Emerging” parasitic infections 
in Arctic ungulates. Integrative and Comparative Biology 2004, 44(2), 109–118.
Lafortune, V., Furgal, C., Drouin, J., Annanack, T., Einish, N., et al. (2004). Climate change in northern
Québec: Access to land and resource issues. Kuujjuaq, Nunavik: Kativik Regional Government.
Lambert, T.W., Soskolne, C.L., Bergum, V., Howell, J., and Dossetor, J.B. (2003). Ethical perspectives
for public and environmental health: Fostering autonomy and the right to know. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 111(2), 133–137.
Last, J.M., and Chiotti, Q.P. (2001). Climate change and human health. ISUMA, 2, 62–69.
Ledrou, I., and Gervais, J. (2005). Food insecurity. Statistics Canada, Catalogue 82-003 XIE, 
Health Reports, 16(3).
Lied, K. (2000). Évaluation des risques d’avalanche au Nunavik et sur la Côté-Nord du Québec,
Canada [Evaluation of avalanche risk in Nunavik and the North Coast of Quebec, Canada].
Québec: Ministère de la Sécurité publique du Québec.
Martin, D. (2005). Quality of drinking water in Nunavik: How a changing climate affects disease.
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK) Environment Bulletin, 3, 13–15.
Martin, D., Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., Brazeau, J., Furgal, C. et al. (2005a). Climate change, drinking
water and human health in Nunavik: Adaptation strategies. Report prepared for submission 
to the Climate Change Action Fund Impact and Adaptation Sub-component, Human Health.
Natural Resources Canada. Retrieved March 3, 2008, from www.itk.ca/environment/
water-nunavik-report.pdf
Martin, D., Levesque, B., Maguire, J.S., Maheux, A., Furgal, C.M., et al. (2005b). Drinking water 
quality in Nunavik: Health impacts in a climate change context, final report. Project funded 
by ArcticNet and ACADRE (Nasivvik).
McBean, G., Alekseev, G., Chen, D., Førland, E., Fyfe, J., et al. (2005). Arctic climate: Past and 
present. In Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) (pp. 22–60). London, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
McCarthy, J.J., Long Martello, M., Corell, R., Selin, N.E., Fox, S., et al. (2005). Climate change in the
context of multiple stressors and resilience. In Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA).
London, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
McIntyre, L., Glanville, N.T., Raine, K.D., Dayle, J.B., Anderson, B., et al. (2003). Do low-income 
lone mothers compromise their nutrition to feed their children? Canadian Medical Association
Journal, 168(6), 686–691.
McMichael, A.J., and Kovats, S. (2000). Climate change and climate variability: Adaptations to reduce
adverse health impacts. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 61, 49–64.
Messner, T. (2005). Environmental variables and the risk of disease. International Journal of Circumpolar
Health, 64(5), 523–533.
Miller, F.L., and Gunn, A. (2003). Catastrophic die-off of Peary caribou on the Western Queen Elizabeth
Islands, Canadian High Arctic. Arctic, 56(4), 381–390.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
364
Ministre de l’Environnement du Québec. (2000). Étude d’impact du projet de modification réglementaire
sur l’eau potable en regard des communautés autochtones, direction des politiques du secteur
municipal, service de l’expertise technique en eau. [Impact study of the regulatory change
project pertaining to drinking water on Aboriginal communities, the municipal sector policy
branch, the water technology experts service]. Québec: Author.
Moquin, H. (2005). Freshwater and climate change. Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK) Environment
Bulletin, 3, 4–9.
Nayha, S. (2005). Environmental temperature and mortality. International Journal of Circumpolar
Health, 64(5), 451–458.
Nelson, F.E., Anisimov, O.A., and Shiklamonov, N.I. (2002). Climate change and hazard zonation 
in the circum-Arctic permafrost regions. Natural Hazards, 26(3), 203–225.
Nickels, S., Furgal, C., Castelden, J., Moss-Davies, P., Buell, M., et al. (2002). Putting the human face
on climate change through community workshops. In I. Krupnik, and D. Jolly (Eds.), The
earth is faster now: Indigenous observations of Arctic environmental change (pp. 301–333).
Washington, D.C.: Arctic Research Consortium of the United States, Arctic Studies Centre,
Smithsonian Institution.
Nickels, S., Furgal, C., Buell, M., and Moquin, H. (2006). Unikkaaqatigiit – Putting the human face 
on climate change: Perspectives from Inuit in Canada. Ottawa: Joint publication of Inuit
Tapiriit Kanatami, Nasivvik Centre for Inuit Health and Changing Environments at Université
Laval and the Ajunnginiq Centre at the National Aboriginal Health Organization.
Noonan, G., Weatherhead, E.C., Gearheard, S., and Barry, R.G. (2005). Arctic weather change: Linking
indigenous (Inuit) observations with the surface temperature record [Poster A33D-0938].
American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting 2005, abstract #A33D-0938.
Nunavut Tunngavik Incorporated (NTI). (2001). Elders’ conference on climate change. Cambridge Bay
and Iqaluit: Nunavut Tunngavik Inc.
Nuttall, M., Berkes, F., Forbes, B., Kofinas, G., Vlassova, T., et al. (2005). Hunting, herding, fishing
and gathering: Indigenous peoples and renewable resource use in the Arctic. In Arctic 
Climate Impact Assessment. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Ogden, N.H., Maarouf, A., Barker, I.K., Bigras-Poulin, M., Lindsay, L.R., et al. (2006). Climate 
change and the potential for range expansion of the Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis 
in Canada. International Journal for Parasitology, 36(1), 63–70.
Ouranos. (2005). Adapting to climate change. Montréal: Ouranos Climate Change Consortium.
Owens, S. (2005). Climate change and health among women of Labrador. M.Sc. Thesis, Faculty 
of Medicine, Laval University, Québec.
Parkinson, A.J., and Butler, J.C. (2005). Potential impacts of climate change on infectious diseases 
in the Arctic. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 64(5), 478–486.
Parlee, B., Manseau, M., and Lutsël K’é Dene First Nation. (2005). Using traditional knowledge to
adapt to ecological change: Denésoliné monitoring of caribou movements. Arctic, 58(1), 26–37.
Proulx, J.F., Leclair, D., and Gordon, S. (2000). Trichinellosis and its prevention in Nunavik, Quebec,
Canada. Beauport, Que.: Santé Nunavik, Ministère de la Santé et des Services sociaux (MSSS).
Prowse, T.D. (1990). An overview. In T.D. Prowse, and C.S.L. Ommanney (Eds.), Northern hydrology:
Canadian perspectives (pp. 1–36). Saskatoon: Environment Canada, National Hydrology
Research Institute.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2006). Public Health Agency of Canada: Report on plans
and priorities, 2007–2008. Ottawa: Author.
Receveur, O., Boulay, M, and Kuhnlein, H.V. (1997). Decreasing traditional food use affects diet 
quality for adult Dene/Métis in 16 communities of the Canadian Northwest Territories. 
Journal of Nutrition, 127(11), 2179–2186.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
365
Riedlinger, D. (1999). Climate change and the Inuvialuit of Banks Island, NWT: Using traditional 
environmental knowledge to complement western science. InfoNorth (Arctic), 430–431.
Riedlinger, D., and Berkes, F. (2001). Contributions of traditional knowledge to understanding 
climate change in the Canadian Arctic. Polar Record, 37(203), 315–328.
Rogers, D.J., and Randolph, S.E. (2006). Climate change and vector-borne diseases. Advances in
Parasitology, 62, 345–381.
Sierra Legal Defence Fund. (2006). Waterproof II. Canada’s drinking water report card. Retrieved 
July 2, 2007, from http://www.sierralegal.org/reports/waterproof.II.report.pdf
Smith, S.L., Burgess, M.M., and Taylor, A.E. (2003). High Arctic permafrost observatory at Alert,
Nunavut—Analysis of a 23-year data set. In M. Phillips, S.M. Springman, and L.U. Arenson (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Permafrost (pp. 1073–1078). Zurich,
Switzerland and Lisse, the Netherlands: A.A. Balkema.
Smith, S.L. and Burgess, M.M. (2004). Sensitivity of permafrost in Canada to climate warming.
Geological Survey of Canada Bulletin 579.
Smith, T.G., and Wright, H. (1989). Economic status and role of hunters in a modern Inuit village.
Polar Record, 25, 93–98.
Statistics Canada. (1998). The health of northern residents. Catalogue 82-003-XPB, Health Reports, 9(4).
—–. (2001a). 2001 Census. Retrieved July 2, 2007, from http://www12.statcan.ca/english/census01/
home/index.cfm
—–. (2001b). Health indicators 2001, chronological index. Catalogue No. 82-221-XWE. Retrieved 
July 2, 2007, from http://www.statcan.ca/bsolc/english/bsolc?catno=82-221-X&CHROPG=1
—–. (2002). The health of Canada’s communities. Catalogue 82-003. Health Reports, 13 (Suppl.).
—–. (2003). Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) 2000/01. Retrieved July 2, 2007, from
http://www.statcan.ca/english/concepts/health
—–. (2004a) Annual demographic statistics. Retrieved July 2, 2007, from http://www.statcan.ca/bsolc/
english/bsolc?catno=91-213-X&CHROPG=1
—–. (2004b). Health indicators 2004, chronological index. Catalogue No. 82-221-XWE. Retrieved 
July 2, 2007, from http://www.statcan.ca/bsolc/english/bsolc?catno=82-221-X&CHROPG=1
—–. (2005). Food insecurity. Catalogue 82-033 XIE. Health Reports, 16(3).
—–. (2006a). Mortality, summary list of causes, 2003. Health Statistics Division. Catalogue 
no. 84F0209XIE.
—–. (2006b). Population projections for Canada, provinces and territories, 2005–2031. 
Catalogue 91-520-XIE.
Tesar, C. (2007). What price the caribou? Northern Perspectives, 31(1), 1–3.
The Conference Board of Canada. (2005). Economic outlook for Nunavut. Ottawa: Author,
Economic Services.
Thorpe, N., Eyegetok, S., Hakongak, N., and Kitikmeot Elders. (2002). Nowadays it is not 
the same: Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit, climate and caribou in the Kitikmeot Region 
of Nunavut, Canada. In I. Krupnik, and D. Jolly (Eds.), The earth is faster now:
Indigenous observations of Arctic environmental change (pp. 198–239). Fairbanks: 
Arctic Research Consortium of the United States in cooperation with the Arctic 
Studies Center, Smithsonian Institution.
Transport Canada. (2003, March). Impacts of climate change on transportation in Canada.
Workshop report, Canmore, Alta., Report prepared by Marbek Resource Consultants 
for Transport Canada, Ottawa.
Chapter 7
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
366
Tremblay, M., Furgal, C., Lafortune, V., Larrivée, C., Savard, J.P., et al. (2006). Climate change, 
communities and ice: Bringing together traditional and scientific knowledge for adaptation 
in the North. In R. Riewe, and J. Oakes (Eds.), Climate change: Linking traditional 
and scientific knowledge. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba, Aboriginal Issues Press.
Usher, P.J., and Wenzel, G. (1989). Socioeconomic aspects of harvesting. In R. Ames, D. Axford, P.J.
Usher, E. Weick, and G. Wenzel (Eds.), Keeping on the land: A study of the feasibility of a
comprehensive wildlife support programme in the Northwest Territories. Ottawa: Canadian Arctic
Resources Committee.
Van Oostdam, J., Donaldson, S.G., Feeley, M., Arnold, D., Ayotte, P., et al. (2005). Human health
implications of environmental contaminants in Arctic Canada: A review. Science of the 
Total Environment, 351–352, 165–246.
Walsh, J.E., Anisimov, O., Hagen, J.O.M., Jakobsson, T., Oerlemans, J., et al. (2005). Cryosphere 
and hydrology. In Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) (pp. 183–242). Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
Warren, J., Berner, J., and Curtis, J. (2005). Climate change and human health: Infrastructure 
impacts to small remote communities in the North. International Journal of Circumpolar
Health, 64(5), 487–497.
Weatherhead, B., Tanskanen, A., Stevermer, A., Andersen, S.B., Arola, A., et al. (2005). Ozone 
and ultraviolet radiation. In Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA). Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
Wein, E.E., and Freeman, M.M.R. (1992). Inuvialuit food use and food preferences in Aklavik,
Northwest Territories, Canada. Arctic Medical Research, 51(4), 159–172.
Weller, G., Bush, E., Callaghan, T.V., Corell, R., Fox, S., et al. (2005). Summary and synthesis 
of the ACIA. In Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
Wigle, D., Gilman, A., McAllister, K., and Gibbons, T. (2005). Analysis of Arctic children and 
youth health indicators. Report prepared for the Arctic Council’s Sustainable Development
Working Group. Retrieved August 20, 2006, from http://www.sdwg.org
World Health Organization (WHO). (2003). Climate change and human health-Risks and responses.
Geneva: Author.
—–. (2006). The Constitution of the World Health Organization. Retrieved January 10, 2008, 
from http://www.who.int/governance/eb/constitution/en/index.html
Yaro, J.A. (2004). Theorizing food insecurity: Building a livelihood vulnerability framework 
for researching food insecurity. Norwegian Journal of Geography, 58, 23–37.
Young, T.K. (2003). Review of research on aboriginal populations in Canada: Relevance to their 
health needs. British Medical Journal, 327, 419–422.
Zhang, X., Vincent, L.A., Hogg,W.D. and Niitsoo, A. (2000). Temperature and precipitation 
trends in Canada during the 20th century. Atmosphere-Ocean, 38(3), 395–429.
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Vulnerabilities, Adaptation
and Adaptive Capacity
in Canada
Peter Berry
Contributors:
Quentin Chiotti
Kaila-Lea Clarke
Gylda Fry
Christopher Furgal
Dieter Riedel
Jacinthe Séguin
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
369
CONTENTS
8.1
Introduction .............................................................................................................. 371
8.2
Vulnerability .............................................................................................................. 373
8.3
Vulnerability Assessment Approach ........................................................................ 375
8.4
Methods ...................................................................................................................... 376
8.5
Assessing Adaptive Capacity .................................................................................... 377
8.6
Adaptive Capacity in Canada .................................................................................. 380
8.6.1 Adapting to Health Risks from Natural Hazards ............................................ 381
8.6.1.1 Emergency management .................................................................... 382
8.6.1.2 Research, education and training ...................................................... 384
8.6.1.3 Critical infrastructure ........................................................................ 384
8.6.1.4 Rural–urban divide ............................................................................ 386
8.6.1.5 Risk perception and attitudes of individual Canadians ...................... 387
8.6.1.6 Recent actions to improve adaptive capacity .................................... 388
8.6.2 Adapting to Health Risks from Water-, Food-, Vector- and
Rodent-Borne Diseases .................................................................................... 389
8.6.2.1 Institutional coordination and planning ............................................ 390
8.6.2.2 Health system and public health resources ........................................ 390
8.6.2.3 Information sharing and exchange .................................................... 390
8.6.2.4 Human resource planning and training .............................................. 391
8.6.2.5 Recent actions to improve adaptive capacity .................................... 391
8.6.3 Adapting to Health Risks from Air Pollution and Heat Waves ...................... 392
8.6.3.1 Air quality indices .............................................................................. 393
8.6.3.2 Smog response plans .......................................................................... 393
8.6.3.3 Other actions ...................................................................................... 394
8.6.3.4 Heat alert systems .............................................................................. 394
8.6.3.5 Recent actions to improve adaptive capacity .................................... 398
8.6.4 Cross-Cutting Capacity to Adapt to Climate Change Health Risks ................ 399
8.6.5 Key Findings .................................................................................................... 400
8.7
Exposure to Climate-Related Health Risks ............................................................ 402
8.7.1 Natural Hazards ................................................................................................ 402
8.7.1.1 Flooding .............................................................................................. 404
8.7.1.2 Forest fires .......................................................................................... 404
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
370
8.7.2 Water-, Food-, Vector- and Rodent-Borne Diseases ........................................ 405
8.7.3 Air Pollution and Extreme Heat Events .......................................................... 406
8.7.3.1 Air pollution ...................................................................................... 406
8.7.3.2 Extreme heat events .......................................................................... 408
8.7.4 Increasing Population ...................................................................................... 409
8.8
Population Sensitivity ................................................................................................ 410
8.8.1 Seniors .............................................................................................................. 410
8.8.2 Children ............................................................................................................ 411
8.8.3 People with Pre-existing Illnesses .................................................................... 412
8.9
Key Findings: The Vulnerability of Canadians ...................................................... 414
8.10 Addressing Climate Change Health Risks and Vulnerabilities ............................ 415
8.10.1 Proactive Adaptation ........................................................................................ 416
8.10.2 Roles and Responsibilities for Adaptation in Canada ...................................... 418
8.10.3 Adaptation Strategy Development and Implementation .................................. 423
8.10.3.1 Considerations for strategy development
and implementation ............................................................................ 424
8.10.4 Barriers to Adaptation ...................................................................................... 428
8.10.5 Opportunities for Future Actions ...................................................................... 429
8.11 Knowledge Gaps and Research Needs .................................................................... 430
8.12 Conclusions and Recommendations ........................................................................ 432
8.12.1 Conclusions ...................................................................................................... 432
8.12.2 Recommendations ............................................................................................ 433
8.13 Annexes ...................................................................................................................... 435
Annex 1: Types of Weather Alerts Issued by Environment Canada .......................... 435
Annex 2: Heat Alert Response Plans in Canada ........................................................ 435
Annex 3: Examples of Municipal Climate Change Programs in Canada .................. 435
8.14 References .................................................................................................................. 436
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
371
8.1
INTRODUCTION
Global climate change is one of many large-scale environmental changes that reflect the increasing
impacts of human activities on the environment. Other large-scale changes include stratospheric
ozone depletion, biodiversity loss, worldwide land degradation, freshwater depletion and the global
dissemination of persistent organic pollutants. Combined, they have important consequences
for the sustainability of ecological systems, food production, economic activities and human
population health (McMichael et al., 2003).1
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), “Warming of the climate
system is unequivocal, as is now evident from
observations of increases in global average air
and ocean temperatures, widespread melting
of snow and ice, and rising global mean sea level”
(IPCC, 2007b, p. 5). The rate of climatic change
and its impacts will likely create new stresses
on individual and community health and well-
being, and increase vulnerability to already
existing environmental and social pressures.
The health effects of climate change are diverse
and of varying importance but according to the
IPCC “... are projected to progressively increase
in all countries and regions” (IPCC, 2007a,
p. 393). There is substantial evidence worldwide
on the association between specific climate
conditions and mortality, illnesses and discomfort
(McMichael et al., 2003; Riedel, 2004; IPCC,
2007a). Previous chapters in this Assessment documented the health risks many Canadians
and communities face across the country and how these may evolve as the climate changes.
These include illnesses and deaths related to poor air quality, heat waves, water- and
food-borne contamination, changing patterns of diseases spread by animals, ticks, and insects,
and extreme weather events. Key segments of our population such as seniors and children,
are often more vulnerable because of specific physiological sensitivities and reduced ability
to cope by themselves with climate-related risks.
The extent to which climate change will disrupt society, affect the economy and reduce
Canadians’ quality of life and health will largely depend on the strength of existing systems
to protect people from hazards, the willingness to adapt to short- and long-term changes
and existing capacity to increase our efforts to adapt. Canadians identify climate change
as an important threat to health; 81% of people surveyed in 2007 were concerned about
climate change risks to health (Canadian Medical Association (CMA), 2007). This awareness
is important for successfully implementing adaptation measures at the individual and
institutional level.
Climate change may bring some benefits to the health and well-being of Canadians through
reduced cold snaps (Gosselin, 2004; Riedel, 2004; Stern, 2006); however, Chapter 6, Health
Impacts of Climate Change in Quebec, suggests that such benefits might be limited given that
Chapter 8
1
The World Economic Forum ranked climate change to be the highest global environmental risk on the basis of severity
of economic losses and number of possible deaths (World Economic Forum, 2007).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
372
people in that province are generally already well adapted to cold conditions. Potentially longer
growing seasons for agriculture might also benefit Canadians economically, although this
will depend on many factors, including future levels of heat stress, water availability and pest
problems (Lemmen et al., 2008; IPCC, 2007a).
Adaptation2 is not a new concept; many actions are being taken in Canada to reduce the health
risks associated with weather extremes and longer-term climate variability. Health authorities
within all levels of government, voluntary organizations and private organizations are responsible
for a range of functions and services that may be affected by climate change. However,
the existing systems vary in
their effectiveness, and may not
be fully protecting the populations
most at risk. Severe weather-
related hazards may be so over-
whelming that current risk
management efforts to protect
human health and well-being may
not be adequate or effective. And
if newly developed policies and
plans do not take into account
the hazards associated with future
climate change and the increased
risks to human health and
well-being, people will not be
adequately protected.
The public health community advocates for preventative interventions to manage risks related
to climate variability and change (Kovats et al., 2003). However, preventing the onset of
disease before it occurs requires an adequate knowledge of potential impacts and existing
vulnerabilities, as well as sufficient capacity to act so that the necessary interventions can be
developed. The capacity of individuals, governments and communities in Canada to adapt
to the health risks associated with current climate variability and future climate change
has rarely been subjected to rigorous analysis. Sparse information exists about individual
adaptations and the effectiveness of protective measures used by Canadians and their
communities; consequently, our understanding of vulnerabilities is incomplete.
This chapter examines the capacity of governments and communities to respond to climate
change through an assessment of measures and systems that are in place to manage current
climate-related health risks. It reviews results from new research, findings from other chapters
of this Assessment and literature to draw conclusions about the sensitivity and exposure of
Canadians to climate-related risks, and ultimately to provide insights about vulnerability. To
support future adaptation efforts, it identifies current roles and responsibilities for managing
climate-related health risks and provides an adaptation framework that offers guidance for
developing needed measures to protect Canadians. It concludes by suggesting areas where
adaptation efforts should focus and potential options for consideration by public health and
emergency management officials.
Chapter 8
2
“Adapting” means changing individual behaviours, and government policies and programs to help avoid the negative impacts
of climate change, and to position Canadians to exploit its opportunities (Health Canada, 2005a). See section 8.10 for a more
detailed discussion.
Kelowna, British Columbia, 2003
Photo Credits: British Columbia Ministry
of Foresta and Range
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
373
8.2
VULNERABILITY
There are many different definitions of vulnerability that arise from the use of this term in the
natural hazards, risk management, poverty, public health and development literatures (Downing
and Patwardhan, 2005). In the climate change impacts and adaptation field, vulnerability refers
to “the degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of
climate change, including climate variability and extremes” (IPCC, 2007a, p. 21). The vulnerability
of a population or region to the impacts of climate change is a function of (IPCC, 2001; Smit
and Wandel, 2006):
1. Exposure to climate hazards
2. Sensitivity to those impacts
3. Adaptive capacity
For any given social and economic system, exposure is the probability of the occurrence of
an ecosystem impact or effect (e.g. extreme weather event, emerging disease, smog episode)
whose influence extends over a particular area (Adger, 2003). For human health, exposure
refers to “the amount of a factor to which a group or individual was exposed; sometimes
contrasted with dose, the amount that enters or interacts with the organism” (McMichael
et al., 2003, p. 291).
Sensitivity is the “degree to which a system is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by
climate-related stimuli” (Adger et al., 2003, p. 28). Sensitivity of individuals and populations
can be influenced by a range of important determinants of health, such as socio-economic
status, biology and genetic endowment, availability of health services, gender and personal
health practices. Sensitivity to the impacts of current climate change and variability is also
directly related to the effectiveness of current adaptations or
measures to reduce the exposure to the impacts or mitigate
the health risks.
Adaptive capacity provides an indication of the ability of a system
to manage change successfully. Levels of adaptive capacity
among individuals, communities and governments are often
linked (Smit and Wandel, 2006). Individuals are better able to
safeguard their own health when they reside in communities that
possess high adaptive capacity, and communities benefit from
comprehensive plans and responses put in place by regional and
national governments. This chapter focuses on adaptive capacity
as a key component of vulnerability.
It should be noted that “vulnerability” is used somewhat
differently by emergency management practitioners and
researchers. It is defined by this community in terms of
“...conditions determined by physical, social, economic and
environmental factors or processes, which increase the
susceptibility of a community to the impact of hazards. It is
a measure of how well prepared and equipped a community
is to minimize the impact of or cope with hazards” (Public
Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC),
n.d. p.12). The level of vulnerability is not directly associated
with the potential hazard; it is associated with other factors
such as a person’s age, education, income, disability, or a
community’s level of disaster preparedness.
Chapter 8
Definition of adaptive capacity
Adaptive capacity is the “ability of a
system to adjust to climate change
(including climate variability and
extremes) to moderate potential
damages, to take advantage of
opportunities, or to cope with the
consequences.”
Source: IPCC, 2007a, p. 21.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
374
Significant differences in vulnerability to the impacts of climate change exist among countries,
particularly between developed and developing ones (McMichael et al., 2003). Developed
countries have a significantly higher capacity to prepare for and respond to weather extremes
and health emergencies. For example, between 1994 and 2003, 40,981 people in high human
development countries were killed by hydro-meteorological disasters whereas 293,345 people
in low human development countries were killed (International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, 2004).3 It should be noted that an estimated 33,000 of
the deaths in high human development countries are accounted for by a single event, the
extreme heat wave in Europe in 2003. The importance of strong public health systems
is also demonstrated by the striking contrast in disease incidence among some neighbouring
countries. From 1980 to 1999, there were 64 reported cases of dengue fever in Texas but
62,514 cases over this same time period in three bordering states in Mexico (U.S. Department
of State, 2002).
Differences in vulnerability also occur within countries because of disparities in resources.
For example, some remote communities in Canada’s North currently face greater adaptation
challenges to climate change than most of their southern counterparts. Rapidly melting
permafrost, which is used as the
base for ice roads, makes it difficult
to resupply communities such as
Tuktoyaktuk with food, medicines and
other necessities (Munro, 2006).
This is occurring at the same time
that changes in the health of animals
(e.g. caribou) and in their migration
routes and distribution are occurring.
Consequently, several communities
no longer have safe or consistent
access to country foods for long
periods (Nickels et al., 2006). As
well, gaps in some public health
services and systems exist in many
northern communities.
Chapter 8
3
The classification of countries as high, medium or low human development in World Disasters Report 2004: Focus on
Community Resilience is based on the United Nations Development Programme’s 2003 Human Development Index (International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2004).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
375
8.3
VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT APPROACH
The main objective of vulnerability assessments is to identify feasible adaptation options
to reduce the effects of climate change (Smit and Wandel, 2006). An initial assessment
of the vulnerability of a population or community can be made without detailed information
about how the climate will change in the future. Such analysis draws from information
about the sensitivity and exposure of populations to past climate variability, as well as
from information about the current capacity of systems to adapt to changing conditions
(Lemmen and Warren, 2004).
Current levels of vulnerability are related to the adaptive measures in place and the
effectiveness of a range of traditional public health activities (IPCC, 2007a). Existing
measures for reducing climate-related health risks and emergencies may increase or
decrease future vulnerability; this information can be used to identify gaps that need
to be addressed.
Several conceptual and analytical frameworks for assessing vulnerability and adaptive
capacity related to climate change have been developed and published (Smit and
Pilifisova, 2001; Downing and Patwardhan, 2005; Ford and Smit, 2005). As discussed
in Chapter 2, Assessment Methods, the best guidance document for the assessment of
adaptation to climate change, in relation to human health, has been identified by Füssel
and Klein (2004) as Methods of Assessing Human Health Vulnerability and Public
Health Adaptation to Climate Change (Kovats et al., 2003). However, this document
provides limited guidance for the exploration and assessment of adaptive capacity
as a key factor in determining vulnerability. For this reason, the approach followed
here also draws upon the Framework for Assessing Vulnerability for Climate Adaptation
developed by Downing and Patwardhan (2005). This framework emphasizes key
activities, including assessing the exposure to climate hazards, particularly for vulnerable
populations; assessing sensitivity; gauging adaptive capacity; examining future
vulnerability; and linking the vulnerability assessment outputs with adaptation
policy options.
The approach used here to examine adaptive capacity in Canada therefore included
the following steps:
• Identify determinants of adaptive capacity to guide analysis.
• Identify concerns about current adaptation efforts and the capacity of public health
and emergency management systems to reduce health risks, based on analysis of
current adaptations and measures.
• Integrate information about sensitivity and exposure of Canadians to hazards associated
with climate variability and change to provide preliminary insights about the vulnerability
of Canadians.
• Identify roles and responsibilities, and current adaptations in Canada for safeguarding
human health and well-being.
• Identify possible adaptation measures that can be employed to reduce risks to health
and to build adaptive capacity and reduce vulnerabilities.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
376
8.4
METHODS
Adaptation options and the capacity of Canadian communities and governments to address
climate-related health risks were investigated according to the key health issues that are
the focus of this Assessment.4 It should be noted that the analysis of adaptive capacity is not
specific to any province or region of Canada, unless so indicated. For this reason, estimates
are not provided on relative levels of existing capacity among specific regions or communities.
The adaptive capacity of communities in northern Canada and in the province of Quebec is
discussed in Chapter 7, Health Impacts of Climate Change in Canada’s North and Chapter 6,
Health Impacts of Climate Change in Quebec, respectively.5 The analysis in this chapter
also focuses on the capacity of existing institutions and organizations to adapt rather than
the capacity of individual Canadians.
Various sources of data were used for analysis in this chapter. Information on roles and
responsibilities for adaptation was obtained through the Internet: websites of government and
non-governmental sources, and in particular, the websites of the agencies responsible for
the provision of health care, public health, safe drinking water and emergency management
services. The inventory is not comprehensive but, for the purpose of examining adaptive
capacity in Canada, it provides a synopsis of the key differences in responsibilities among
jurisdictions and organizations.
A literature review and expert informant interviews with public health and emergency
management officials were used to identify existing concerns about the capacity of
governments and communities to address the health risks related to climate variability,
including those expected to increase because of climate change. The literature review
used information available from international agencies (e.g. World Health Organization
(WHO)) and from national, regional and local authorities (e.g. Health Canada). Some
information on the capacity of public health systems to plan for and respond to health
emergencies is available because of recent events such as the severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) outbreak in Toronto, and the illnesses and deaths in Walkerton, Ontario,
caused by the contamination of the water supply by E. coli 0157:H7 and Campylobacter
jejuni. Analysis of these events provided information about levels of capacity for protecting
Canadians during public health emergencies. It also provided information about measures
to strengthen public health systems—measures that could be applied to better protect
the health of Canadians under conditions of climate change. This information, along
with recent actions to improve capacity, such as creation of the Public Health Agency
of Canada in 2004 and the position of Chief Public Health Officer for Canada, is drawn
upon for the analysis in this chapter.
There is a paucity of peer-reviewed studies on climate change and health adaptation
and adaptive capacity in Canada. Therefore, this chapter partially draws upon the grey
literature, including unpublished workshop reports and working papers, memoranda,
public health protection procedures, and guidelines from health and emergency management
agencies and other relevant sources. Inferences made from the international literature,
which has grown substantially over the last few years, are presented with care and in
a manner that respects the specific circumstances of Canadian governments and
communities.
Chapter 8
4
Adaptation measures and adaptive capacity related to risks from increased exposure to ultraviolet radiation due to stratospheric
ozone depletion are not examined in this chapter.
5
See Chapter 2, Assessment Methods, for the rationale for including these regions in this Assessment.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
377
Health and emergency management experts and practitioners from academia, government and
non-governmental organizations at municipal, provincial and federal levels were consulted
through health emergency management simulation exercises (i.e. a heat wave in Montreal
and two storm surge simulations in Atlantic Canada) and through surveys. Workshops
organized by Health Canada were also held to obtain information on current adaptations and
key determinants of adaptive capacity. These consultations highlighted the need to examine
the capacity of a wide range of decision makers and organizations (such as governmental
authorities and practitioners), and the need to examine both current and future vulnerabilities
(Health Canada, 2003a).
Relatively few climate change
and health assessments have been
conducted, and few of these include
systematic and comprehensive
assessments of adaptation measures
and adaptive capacity. Approaches
and methods for assessing adaptive
capacity and vulnerability are
still being refined. Conceptual
frameworks and methods do
not exist to allow for precise
quantification of existing adaptive
capacity, including that of decision
makers within non-governmental
and governmental organizations.
As well, uncertainty about future
changes in risks and the diversity
of health impacts across areas
and regions are key challenges faced by such assessments (Füssel and Klein, 2004; Lemmen
and Warren, 2004). For these reasons, this chapter constructs a snapshot of current adaptations
in Canada, and identifies key concerns and trends regarding current adaptive capacity from
a variety of available sources. Health and emergency management officials routinely make
decisions under conditions of uncertainty about how to best address threats to public health
by using risk-based approaches that are designed for this purpose (Health Canada, 2000).
It is therefore expected that the findings of this chapter will be useful in deliberations about
how to most effectively address future health risks associated with climate change.
8.5
ASSESSING ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
Adaptive capacity is generally assessed by examining the current state of the system or
region, and its ability to deal with current stresses, such as climate variability. A measure
of the effectiveness of current policies and programs is key to understanding existing
capacity (Spanger-Siegfried and Dougherty, 2003). Well documented research on the
key determinants of capacity and the existing levels of capacity to adapt to health risks
related to climate change in Canada is lacking. In support of this Assessment, Health Canada
consulted with experts and practitioners to identify determinants important for managing
health risks and contributing to adaptive capacity (Health Canada, 2003a). The determinants
Chapter 8
Calls being made during storm surge table-top
simulation exercise in Port-aux-Basques, Newfoundland
and Labrador, 2005
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
378
that were highlighted correspond to those identified by WHO, which are described in the
following text. These included access to material resources (i.e. economic wealth), technology,
information and skills, institutional arrangements, public health infrastructure, equity and
the existing burden of disease (Grambsch and Menne, 2003).
Economic resources
Wealthy nations and wealthy communities within nations are better able to adapt because
they have the economic resources to invest and to offset the costs of adaptation. For
example, over the past decade, disasters in developed countries resulted in an average
of 44 deaths per event whereas disasters in less developed countries killed an average
of 300 people per event (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, 2004).
Technology
Access to technology in key sectors and settings (e.g. agriculture, water resources, health
care, urban design) is an important determinant of adaptive capacity. Many adaptive
strategies, such as the development of vaccines to combat infectious diseases, involve
new technological developments. Storm prediction and warning services by Doppler
radar and communications systems (e.g. television, weather radio) are technologies that
are important for warning citizens and preparing communities for threats from extreme
weather events.
Information and skills
Information sharing and awareness-raising activities are important for communicating
health risks associated with climate variability and change, and the adaptive actions that
can be taken to protect people (WHO, 2005). Countries with more “human capital” or
knowledge also have greater adaptive capacity. As well, health systems are labour-intensive,
and require skilled and experienced staff such as those trained in the operation, quality
control and maintenance of public health infrastructure.
Institutions
Strong and effective institutional arrangements are an important determinant of adaptive
capacity (Grambsch and Menne, 2003). Ineffective or maladaptive public health
policies and programs, and a lack of collaboration among relevant agencies and
organizations can create an inability to meet health needs. Collaboration between
public and private sectors, such as the Ouranos Consortium in Quebec or the Prairie
Adaptation Research Collaborative in Alberta, can greatly facilitate research on
climate change impacts and the development of the needed adaptations to address
health risks.
Infrastructure
Roads, railways, bridges,
water systems, power plants,
telecommunications facilities,
mass transit, ports and air-
ports are all fundamental for
maintaining the quality
of life and health of people
living in a community.
Infrastructure specifically
designed to increase
resiliency and reduce risks
Chapter 8
Photo Credits: Alberta Government
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
379
from climate extremes (e.g. flood control structures, air conditioning, building insulation),
and general public health infrastructure (e.g. sanitation facilities, wastewater treatment
systems, laboratory buildings) reduce vulnerability by enhancing adaptive capacity
(Grambsch and Menne, 2003).
Equity
Adaptive capacity is likely to be greater when access to resources within a community,
nation or the world is equitably distributed. Under-resourced populations and jurisdictions
may lack the means to plan for climate change impacts.6
Existing burden of disease
Population health and well-being is an important determinant of adaptive capacity
(McMichael et al., 2003; IPCC, 2007a) because it contributes to the ability to regain
a state of physical, mental and social well-being in the face of significant challenges
and changes (e.g. loss of a job for an individual or loss of an industry for a community).
Some populations and regions in Canada have significantly lower health status than
others (e.g. the North),7 and therefore may be more vulnerable to the health impacts
of climate change and have less capacity to adapt.
There is no guiding framework or consensus on the criteria required for evaluating
the determinants of adaptive capacity and on the indicators that should be used
(Lemmen et al., 2008). Few of the proposed methods and procedures for assessing
the adaptive capacity of communities clearly identify specific measures for gauging the
ability to address expected impacts. Using indicators to measure adaptive capacity
also presents significant challenges; this is because indicators say little about the
processes that make systems and populations vulnerable and that determine whether
these systems and populations can adapt to new climate hazards (Brooks and Adger,
2004). Therefore, this chapter does not develop and use indicators to measure capacity.
Rather, it highlights key concerns about the capacity of governments and communities
in Canada to address climate-related health risks that have been raised in recent
reports, audits, research projects, expert interviews, workshops and surveys during
this study. These concerns are based on important findings about limitations
in the effectiveness of current adaptations that are aimed at reducing climate-related
health risks.
Chapter 8
6
Internationally, the obligation of developed countries to provide assistance to less developed ones for their adaptation
efforts is included in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
7
Detailed discussion of the adaptive capacity of Canada’s northern communities can be found in Chapter 7, Health
Impacts of Climate Change in Canada’s North.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
380
8.6
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY IN CANADA
Our ability to adapt to the health impacts of climate change depends on the rate and
magnitude of the changes in the future (U.S. Department of State, 2002). More rapid
climate change or warming, creating greater ecosystem changes and extreme weather
events, could result in health risks that would increasingly challenge our existing capacity
to respond. The cumulative impacts of a number of extreme events or health emergencies
test the capacity of a community or region to respond as well as their resiliency (i.e. ability
to return to normal) (Smit and Wandel, 2006). For example, many Prairie communities,
particularly those located in river valleys and along floodplains, are subject to cumulative
natural and other hazards. These include floods, droughts, heat waves, hailstorms,
blizzards, tornadoes, chemical spills during transport and power outages (Haque, 2002).
If these were to occur in quick succession, health and social service providers could
be overwhelmed.
Extreme weather events are incurring increasing economic costs to individuals, communities,
businesses and governments in Canada. Between 1900 and 1970 the estimated direct
damage costs of weather-related disasters in Canada was $4.8 billion while from 1990 to
2000 the estimated cost was $13.7 billion (PSEPC, 2005). Significant numbers of Canadians
have concerns about the ability of their governments to deal with health emergencies.
A survey in 2006 revealed that 39% of Canadians and 34% of doctors feel that the health
care system is not well prepared for a public health emergency, such as flooding or a
disease outbreak (e.g. SARS). Only 6% of Canadians think the health system is “very
prepared” (POLLARA, 2006).
Current adaptations may not be sufficient to reduce exposures and address sensitivities
to protect Canadians from the more severe hazards (e.g. more intense extreme weather
events) and longer-term changes expected with climate change (Lemmen et al., 2008; Health
Canada, 2005a; Roberts et al., 2006). As indicated in other chapters of this Assessment,
risks to human health and well-being will likely increase, particularly as the rate of change
quickens. Projections of increased risks related to climate change suggest that greater
adaptation efforts and enhanced capacity in Canada will be required to prepare and plan
for the expected climate-related hazards (Chiotti et al., 2002). A key step in enhancing
our efforts to protect Canadians from climate-related health risks is to gain understanding
of the effectiveness of current adaptations and of areas where gaps exist in adaptive
capacity (Kovats et al., 2003). Such information can inform future adaptations and help
decision makers track progress toward strengthening institutions, programs, policies
and human resources to protect health from the effects of climate change.
Canadians have engaged in a wide range of activities aimed at enhancing health and
well-being in the face of weather patterns and extremes associated with the Canadian
climate (Riedel, 2004). The scope of public health interventions that could be classified
as adaptations to climate-related health risks is enormous. A formal cataloguing of
current activities in Canada was therefore not conducted in this chapter. The following
sections discuss key adaptations in Canada and concerns that have been identified
regarding such measures and our current capacity to cope with climate-related hazards
and associated health risks. The discussion is organized according to health issue and
includes information on recent actions by federal, provincial and municipal governments
to enhance capacity.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
381
8.6.1
Adapting to Health Risks from Natural Hazards
IPCC indicates that the rate of climate warming will increase over the coming decades
and that it is very likely that heat waves and heavy precipitation events will become more
frequent (IPCC, 2007b). It is also likely that tropical cyclones (i.e. hurricanes) will become
more intense (IPCC, 2007b).
Past adaptation efforts in Canada have limited to a large extent the impacts of natural disasters
and other health emergencies. Disaster trends in developed countries, such as Canada, show
a decline in fatalities during this century due to factors such as improved warning systems,
building codes and safety knowledge (Kovacs, 2006). Among the current measures to reduce
risks to human health and personal property from extreme weather, the Meteorological Service
at Environment Canada issues over 30 types of weather alerts, including weather watches,
warnings and special statements.8 Approximately 14,000 severe weather warnings are
issued to communities across Canada annually (Environment Canada, 2003). As well, some
communities have built specially designed infrastructures (e.g. Winnipeg floodway) to
reduce risks from natural hazards.
However, weather-related disasters
such as prolonged droughts, floods,
hurricanes and wildfires continue
to pose health risks for Canadians.
For example, Hurricane Juan,9 which
was a Category 2 hurricane that hit
Nova Scotia on September 29, 2003,
resulted in extensive damage to
central Nova Scotia and Prince
Edward Island, and was responsible
for eight deaths. More than
300,000 people were without
power for up to a week and
a half and it was the most costly
hurricane in Canadian history
(McBean, 2006).10 In addition, such
events may have significant long-term psycho-social health impacts on individuals, such as
depression, post-traumatic stress disorder and anxiety. Currently, there is little information
about the prevalence of such impacts associated with past weather-related emergencies
and disasters in Canada (Hutton, 2005), but it is generally acknowledged that they are
significant (Gutman, 2007).
Critics have suggested that current capacity to respond to health emergencies in Canada is
limited (Street et al., 2005). Recent reports and audits conducted in response to a number of
emergencies in Canada (e.g. floods in Manitoba; 1998 Ice Storm in eastern Canada; wildfires
in British Columbia; water safety issues in Walkerton, Ontario, and Battleford, Saskatchewan;
SARS; Creutzfelt-Jacob disease; 2003 Ontario blackout) have examined the ability of the
health sector and others to respond to unpredictable events and other emergencies.
Chapter 8
8
See Annex 1 for a list of the different types of weather alerts issued by Environment Canada.
9
See Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards and Extreme Weather, for detailed information on the impacts of Hurricane
Juan and the community response.
10 Other recent weather events in Canada have seriously impacted individuals and disrupted communities. For example,
the 1998 Ice Storm caused massive power outages that affected 4.7 million people in eastern Ontario, Quebec and New
Brunswick. Over 600,000 had to be evacuated, and 28 deaths and 945 injuries occurred. Total damages were estimated
at $5.4 billion (Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC), 2007a). In July 2000, a tornado hit Pine Lake,
Alberta, causing 27 deaths and 600 injuries, and displaced close to 1,700 people (PSC, 2007c). See Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities
to Natural Hazards and Extreme Weather, for a more detailed discussion of such impacts.
Hurricane Juan damage at Prospect, Nova Scotia, 2003
Photo Credits: Environment Canada – Canadian Hurricane Centre
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
382
8.6.1.1 Emergency management
There is broad recognition in Canada that there is a need to enhance our efforts to
plan, prepare for and mitigate the more frequent and intense extreme weather events
that are projected to occur because of climate change (Health Canada, 2001; Lemmen
and Warren, 2004; The Conference Board of Canada, 2007). A recent parliamentary
review of emergency preparedness in Canada (Standing Senate Committee on
National Security and Defence, 2004) identified a number of concerns that need
to be addressed to ensure Canadians are adequately prepared to face future hazards
and extremes. Recommendations in the report called for several measures such as:
• improved leadership and coordination by the federal government on emergency
preparedness matters;
• improved funding assistance mechanisms that allow provinces and municipalities
to undertake preparedness activities;
• improved communications and coordination among response agencies, communications
with the public, access to critical supplies and training;
• improved information about emergency health stockpiles and access to them for
municipalities;
• more capacity within the Canadian Forces to provide support to municipalities in
large emergencies; and
• improved linkages on emergency preparedness matters among municipal, provincial
and federal governments.
The need to make Canadian communities safer in the face
of increasing emergencies and disasters has also been
recognized as a federal/provincial/territorial priority in both
the public health and health emergency management sectors
in Canada (Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Network
for Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
National voluntary organizations with their networks,
experience and expertise are well positioned to play an
effective role in assisting communities to prepare for and
respond to the challenges of climate change. However,
with certain exceptions, neither government agencies
nor voluntary organizations have the mature systems,
plans or networks required to facilitate voluntary sector
involvement in activities related to adaptation to the
health risks associated with climate change. A recent
survey conducted by the Canadian Red Cross (2005) indicated that 64% of voluntary
sector organizations with a specific mandate in emergency preparedness did not have
a service continuity plan. The same survey revealed that over 75% of responding
organizations without a clear mandate in emergency preparedness, but willing to mobilize
their volunteer resources on this issue, did not have an up-to-date service continuity
plan. Consequently, the voluntary sector may have difficulty responding to increasing
pressures to aid in preparing for and responding to greater risks to Canadians from
climate-related hazards.
Chapter 8
“....accumulating risks associated
with factors such as increased
urbanization, critical infrastructure
dependencies and interdepen-
dencies, terrorism, climate variability
and change, animal and human
health diseases and the heightened
movement of people and goods
around the world have increased
the potential for various types
of catastrophes. Such events could
transcend geographic boundaries
to challenge FPT emergency
management, including response”
(PSEPC, n.d., p. 3).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
383
Chapter 8
Case study: Storm surge simulations in Atlantic Canada
In 2005, two coastal communities in Atlantic Canada,
Shediac–Cap–Pelé, New Brunswick, and Channel-Port aux
Basques, Newfoundland and Labrador, tested their emergency
response plans to better prepare for storm surges, which
are expected to become more frequent and intense due to
climate change. Representatives of municipalities, police and fire departments, health
centres, hospitals, provincial governments, federal government and non-profit organizations
actively participated in the simulation exercises. The exercises proved to be an effective
research method to identify capacity and gaps. They also met training objectives by
enabling participants to better understand the potential impacts of such an event, identify the
vulnerable geographical areas and populations, identify shortcomings in the emergency
management plans and improve future collaboration among stakeholders.
Several recommendations, which correspond closely to determinants of capacity analyzed
in this chapter, were proposed to enhance the effectiveness of response capabilities and
protect the communities. These include (Health Canada, 2006b):
Institutions
• Ensure an annual update of emergency response plans (e.g. names, telephones, procedures).
• Coordinate actions within the municipal emergency plan with the needs of surrounding
communities.
• Establish a coordination process between municipal emergency planners and other organi-
zations involved (e.g. hospitals, community services, coast guard, provincial ministries).
• Update emergency response plans for local health services.
• Ensure coordination between local health centres and community organizations.
• Include procedures to follow in case of a sudden, severe outbreak of a disease (epidemic)
and/or terrorism act in the municipal emergency plans.
• Be prepared for the possibility of multiple and simultaneous public health crises
(e.g. storm surges, epidemics).
Information sharing and skills
• Clearly define the criteria for declaring a state of emergency.
• Better define roles and responsibilities of people involved in response.
• Identify communication alternatives (e.g. satellite phone, very high frequency (VHF) radio).
• Offer training in emergency response for key municipal personnel.
• Include community organizations (e.g. Red Cross, churches, Salvation Army, seniors’
clubs) in all emergency planning steps.
• Create a regional list of public health services available in an emergency situation.
• Make available an emergency medical telephone line to the public.
Infrastructure
• Identify needed human resources and equipment (e.g. generators) locally and regionally
available.
• Ensure the municipality has the necessary tools to facilitate the exchange of information
during an emergency (e.g. meeting room, maps, boards for logistic information such
as weather conditions, record of decisions, contact information).
• Do not depend extensively on regional resources (human and equipment) because
they are often solicited by all affected communities in an emergency.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
384
8.6.1.2 Research, education and training
The increasingly “risky” environment faced by municipalities, including the potential impacts
of climate change, has demanded more risk assessments, a more rigorous approach to the
development of emergency management plans, and more training for emergency services personnel
and public health officials. Several municipalities and senior-level government departments
have undertaken risk analyses to support their emergency planning, but these have been done
mostly on an informal and ad hoc basis. Except in a few cases, these analyses have not factored
in climate change within a systematic risk management approach. A divergence between
emergency management and adaptation to climate change exists across all levels of government
in Canada (Noble et al., 2005).
As well, Canada significantly lags behind countries such as Australia and the United States
in establishing emergency management education programs, and consequently suffers from
a lack of educated professionals and researchers working in this field (Bruce et al., 2005).
There is a shortage of qualified Canadian educators to develop and deliver courses, to supervise
post-graduate students and to conduct research (Bellisario et al., 2007). As well, few provinces
require certification for emergency management professionals in Canada (Bruce et al., 2005).
However, significant strides have recently been made in the development of Canadian course
materials and programs for practitioners, and the development of certificate programs across
the country is well underway (Bellisario et al., 2007).
A key informant survey of public health officials in cities of various sizes across Canada
revealed a broad awareness of climate change and related health issues. All respondents indicated
that weather and climate do have a significant impact on health and most (76%) stated that
climate change will increase risks to health in their respective jurisdictions (Health Canada,
2006d).11 However, more than half of those in the survey indicated that climate change had not
been identified as a priority public health issue in their geographic jurisdictions; the reasons most
often cited were a lack of funding and, particularly, a lack of information or understanding
of whether, and why, climate change is a pertinent issue for the public health sector (Health
Canada, 2006d). Respondents who did report that climate change was considered an important
public health issue in their jurisdiction also indicated that it was not considered a high priority
(Health Canada, 2006d). The need for better understanding of health risks associated with
climate change is reflected in a resolution passed by the Canadian Public Health Association
in 2001 calling for more research into the health impacts of climate change (Canadian Public
Health Association (CPHA), 2001b).
8.6.1.3 Critical infrastructure
“Extreme events such as floods, droughts and heat waves are likely to increase under
global warming and will challenge our ability to manage health risks and test the
resilience of our infrastructures in many areas, including health service delivery.”
(Kovats and Haines, 2005, p. 501)
Physical infrastructure plays a vital role in sustaining the health of Canadians. Weather extremes
and events can debilitate key infrastructure, posing significant direct (e.g. drownings) and
indirect (e.g. mental stress from economic dislocation) health impacts.12 Public capital investment
to maintain and improve infrastructure in Canada has not kept pace with the growing economy
and the demands of its population (Harchaoui et al., 2003). Much of Canada’s infrastructure
is nearing the end of its designated life (Haque, 2002). Almost 30% of the nation’s public
infrastructure is over 80 years old; only 40% is under 40 years old. Canadians have used on
Chapter 8
11 Results of a survey of public health and municipal decision makers, as discussed in Chapter 6, Health Impacts of Climate
Change in Quebec, also revealed a high level of awareness about potential risks to health from climate change. As well,
a resolution from the Ontario Public Health Association in 2004 recommended the development of programs to address the
health impacts of extreme weather events related to climate change (Ontario Public Health Association, 2004).
12 For example, Hurricane Juan (2003) and the Ice Storm (1998).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
385
average almost 80% of the useful life of all public infrastructure in the country (Zuker, 2004).13
While a recent report shows that the average age of some categories of infrastructure has
decreased, overall significant challenges remain and require sustained action (Statistics
Canada, 2008). Definitions of public infrastructure vary, as do estimates regarding the extent
of infrastructure needs. There is however, consensus on the need to take action.
The current state of infrastructure in Canada could make Canadians more vulnerable to future
weather extremes and hazards because the capacity to withstand extreme environmental events is
reduced (Haque, 2002; Office of the Auditor General of Canada (OAG), 2006). Damage to
buildings from weather can be caused by storm winds, rain penetration, poor durability of
construction materials, flood damage, coastal erosion and foundation movement (City of Hamilton,
2006). Extreme weather events associated with climate change are of concern because even small
increases in weather and climate extremes have the potential to bring large increases in damage to
existing infrastructure. As Auld and MacIver stated, “the damage from extreme weather events
tends to increase dramatically above critical thresholds—the high impact storms associated with
damages may not be much more severe than the type of storm intensity that occurs regularly each
year” (Infrastructure Canada, 2006, p.1). In response, disaster mitigation, including climate change
adaptation, has been incorporated into recent federal infrastructure programming as an eligible
funding category and climate change impacts are examined during the project assessment process.
A 1995 survey by the Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM) found that 59% of the water
distribution networks in Canada and 43% of water supply systems were in unsatisfactory
condition. Breaks and leaks plague the water mains in older cities, and over 50% of water
distribution networks were noted to perform unsatisfactorily. It was also found that 68% of
sanitary and combined sewers, 58% of sewage treatment systems and 53% of storm sewers did
not operate at an acceptable level and needed some type of repair. The FCM survey also noted
that wastewater treatment and conveyance crises have emerged in communities of all sizes
throughout Canada (Infrastructure Canada, 2003).
Greater action is needed to implement adaptation measures to make Canada’s infrastructure more
resilient and to facilitate adaptation in other jurisdictions (OAG, 2006). More resilient infrastruc-
ture means lower health risks through reduced risk of structural failure that can accompany
extreme events. Recent impacts of climatic events on key infrastructures in Canadian communities
demonstrate the need to develop new infrastructure designs that can resist larger and potentially
more damaging events expected under climate change (City of Hamilton, 2006). As current
infrastructures are upgraded and replaced, engineers need new and updated design values,
revised codes and standards, and new methodologies to incorporate climate change considerations
into engineering procedures (McBean and Henstra, 2003; Infrastructure Canada, 2006).
Infrastructure failure in Toronto
A severe thunderstorm event with rainfall intensity greater than that experienced during
Hurricane Hazel (1954) hit northern Toronto on August 19, 2005. It resulted in the failure
of a culvert under Finch Avenue. The entire roadbed of Finch Avenue West at Black Creek
was washed away affecting all of the city and utility infrastructure within the road
allowance. The storm cost $500 million in insured losses due to flooding, collapsed roadways
and lost “buried” infrastructure. It also resulted in significant traffic disruptions caused
by the loss of the roadbed.
Source: Infrastructure Canada, 2006.
Chapter 8
13 The expected life cycle of bridges, housing, commercial buildings, seaports and rail infrastructure is 50 to 100 years; that of dams,
water supply infrastructure, sewers and airports is 50 years; and that of roads and waste management facilities is 20 to 30 years
(Infrastructure Canada, 2006).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
386
Infrastructure that provides health services to a population needs to have the capacity
to cope with extreme weather events (IPCC, 2007a). Hospitals are key to Canada’s health
services infrastructure. An emergency that cripples a community or region’s hospital
services can become a disaster claiming hundreds of lives and affecting thousands of
people. Improved emergency management measures for Canada’s hospitals are needed.
Important shortcomings have been identified in emergency communications strategies
in general hospitals (Ferrier, 2002). Many hospitals require better plans for acquiring
surge capacity during times of emergencies (e.g. sharing of staff). Limited coordination
between hospital plans and those of the community, and limited testing of emergency
protocols (e.g. evacuation procedures) have been identified as factors that increase the
vulnerability of these institutions, and of patients, to the impacts of emergencies and
disasters. Finally, there is a lack of training of those responsible for emergency planning
in hospitals. Only 37% of officials had completed an emergency preparedness course in
a recent survey of Canadian hospitals (Ferrier, 2002).
8.6.1.4 Rural–urban divide
An examination of emergency preparedness in Canada revealed differences in capacities
between cities and smaller communities, or rural areas of Canada, to plan and prepare
for emergencies and disasters. Small communities and rural areas14 are less prepared
than large cities (Haque, 2002). Communities not served by adequate transportation or
communications infrastructures
may be isolated for extended
periods of time, compounding
hardship. A key informant survey
of community emergency pre-
paredness officials found that
smaller centres face significant
problems with emergency plan-
ning and preparedness functions
(e.g. training and testing plans)
because of insufficient financial
and human resources. Most
of these smaller centres did not
employ specialized emergency
planners. In comparison, almost
all medium and large communities had designated a full-time official to be responsible
for emergency preparedness and coordination (Egener, 2005). Another study (Haque, 2002)
comparing rural and urban communities identified the following key challenges facing
rural communities in their efforts to improve preparedness:
• reliance on volunteers for emergency personnel;
• lack of economic resources to cope with hazards;
• an underestimation of the frequency of events and hazards because of a lack of knowledge
and risk assessments; and
• inadequately trained or organized emergency personnel.
Chapter 8
14 Rural communities are defined here as communities with fewer than 1,000 inhabitants. This is consistent with the definition
used by Statistics Canada.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
387
Costs to Canadian municipalities are of particular concern. Costs for security and emergency
management are increasing rapidly because of many factors, such as increasing urbanization
and concentration of populations and increasing climate variability (Egener, 2005). In
addition, assistance with emergency preparedness training has been reduced by federal
and, in some cases, provincial governments, leaving municipalities to develop and deliver
this training or else contract it out. Ultimately, less than half of the smaller centres
indicated that their response in the event of an emergency would be effective (Egener, 2005).
Important differences between rural and urban communities concerning their ability
to implement a range of programs exist. A survey of public health officials in cities
of different sizes across Canada revealed that although most communities consider
climate-related information in planning and program development (e.g. air and water
quality advisories), the largest cities have the broadest range of initiatives to protect
health from weather- and climate-related hazards (e.g. monitoring of West Nile virus
and/or Lyme disease, air quality levels, ultraviolet (UV) levels, water quality). They
also engage in more research on the health impacts of air pollution, issue extreme weather
warnings, and have action or outreach plans on climate change (CPHA, 2006).
8.6.1.5 Risk perception and attitudes of individual Canadians
A primary responsibility for preparing for extreme weather events and reducing the risks
they pose to protect health and well-being falls to individual Canadians and households
(Murphy et al., 2005; Remedios, 2005). Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada
(2007b) advises that Canadians should know what disaster risks they face, develop an
emergency plan, have a kit on hand that provides provisions to last three days and know what
to do in the event of an emergency. Actions to prepare for emergencies could also include
doing home repairs to reduce hazards, purchasing disaster insurance and obtaining first aid
training (Murphy et al., 2005).
Many residents in the North, a region in Canada currently experiencing
particularly severe impacts from climate change,15 are changing their
behaviours to adapt to weather-related risks. For example, communities
in Nain, Labrador, are taking many actions to minimize the dangers
associated with unpredictable weather. This includes performing
ice-track tests before travelling, notifying people about the safety of
travel routes and forming search-and-rescue teams (Furgal, 2002).
However, most individuals are largely unprepared for emergencies
(Murphy, 2004). Citizens generally plan only for the immediate
future, overestimate their ability to cope when disaster strikes and rely heavily on emergency
relief (Tierney et al., 2001). A survey of 576 households was conducted in Kingston,
Ontario, in 2001 to determine levels of emergency preparedness for extended winter power
outages, fires and medical emergencies. It indicated a generally low level of preparedness
among respondents and highlighted a number of areas where improvement was necessary
(Falkiner, n.d.). Many Canadians do not view themselves as being at risk from extreme
weather. A national survey of Canadians in 2001 found that 60% of Canadians either
somewhat disagreed (34%) or strongly disagreed (26%) with the statement that extreme
weather in their area posed a risk to themselves, their family or their property (Ipsos-Reid
Corporation, 2001).
Chapter 8
15 See Chapter 7, Health Impacts of Climate Change in Canada’s North, for more information.
“Experience has shown us that
household emergency preparedness
is one of the most effective means
of mitigating the personal effects
of a disaster. By preparing emer-
gency provisions, members of
a household can turn what could
be a life-threatening situation
into a manageable problem”
(Falkiner, n.d. p. 14).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
388
8.6.1.6 Recent actions to improve adaptive capacity
In recent years, considerable progress has been achieved towards developing a more integrated
and robust emergency preparedness and response capacity in the health sector (Health Canada,
2005a). Many provinces have taken actions to strengthen emergency planning in their
respective jurisdictions. Several now require that municipalities conduct hazard assessments
and have emergency preparedness plans (McBean and Henstra, 2003; Egener, 2005).
For example, Ontario’s Emergency Management and Civil Protection Act (2006) requires
communities and the provincial government to establish emergency management programs,
based on hazards and risks that the people of Ontario may face. The Act provides emergency
powers to the premier and to the lieutenant governor-in-council to ensure that the provincial
government has the necessary power to react quickly to an emergency (e.g. evacuations,
closing public places, disposing of environmental or animal waste) (Government of Ontario,
2006). In October 2006, Emergency Management Ontario launched a one-year all-hazards
warning system pilot that warns citizens of imminent threats to life and property from
man-made and natural hazardous events such as floods, forest fires, unsafe drinking water
or chemical spills. Public safety warnings are broadcast across two cable channels, The
Weather Network and its French counterpart, MétéoMédia (Ontario Ministry of Community
Safety and Correctional Services, 2006).
Following the 1998 Ice Storm that debilitated Quebec, eastern Ontario, New Brunswick
and Nova Scotia for a number of weeks, the province of Quebec took important steps
to strengthen emergency preparedness and response capacity; the province is now much
better able to cope with future extreme events (Lemmen et al., 2008). For example,
during the crisis it purchased 57,000 cots and blankets from the Red Cross; this has provided
the province with the ability to open many more emergency shelters if confronted with
other large-scale disasters (D. Shropshire, pers. comm., October 15, 2005). The province
also created Ouranos, a consortium initiative of Hydro-Quebec, the Quebec Government
and other partners, to build an understanding of regional climate change and its environmental,
social and economic impacts. The Ouranos Consortium is developing the research tools
necessary to provide decision makers with detailed climate change scenarios on a regional
scale. In fall 2006, the Consortium adopted a research component on climate change
impacts on human health.
Health measures under Quebec’s climate change action plan
• Setting up an alert system for intense heat and for monitoring, in real time, related health
problems in all regions of Quebec likely to be affected.
• Supporting health services building managers in analysis of the ventilation/air conditioning/
dehumidification needs of care institutions, taking into account climate change.
• Improving systems for monitoring infectious diseases to allow for quickly detecting
pathogens and diseases whose development is accelerated by climate change.
• Developing training, to be offered to workers in the public health, clinical services
and civil protection sectors, on diseases and emerging health problems related to
climate change and their treatment.
• Introducing a short- and long-term epidemiological monitoring system for physical
and psychological health problems related to extreme climate events.
• Financial support for the creation of cool areas (e.g. tree planting, creation of parks,
installation of municipal pools) in urban communities and cooling for strategic
infrastructures (e.g. hospitals, homes for the elderly, schools) to mitigate the impact
of summer heat waves on the population.
Source: Government of Quebec, 2006.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
389
National Framework for Health Emergency Management
In 2001, the federal, provincial and territorial Ministers of Health acknowledged the need
for a comprehensive, integrated and coordinated strategic plan for managing health
emergencies in Canada (Health Canada, 2005a). In response, the National Framework for
Health Emergency Management was developed to provide a consistent, inter-operational
approach to health emergencies at a pan-Canadian level (F/P/T Network for Emergency
Preparedness and Response, 2004). This framework aims to enhance the capacity of local,
provincial and federal authorities to prepare for and respond to emergencies by fostering
operational bridges based on shared principles, guidelines and operating procedures.
Key principles of the National Framework include an all-hazards and consequences
approach, resiliency and sustainability of programs and planning, and comprehensive
management practices that balance mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
This all-hazards approach examines the full range of threats and their implications
for Canadians—in terms of their individual and public health impacts, as well as com-
munity and societal effects. Although controlling infectious diseases and other health
emergencies continues to be a priority, this new approach begins to bridge the gap
between climate change and health emergency management policy and decision
making (Health Canada, 2005a).
8.6.2
Adapting to Health Risks from Water-, Food-, Vector- and
Rodent-Borne Diseases
To prepare for the expected health impacts of climate change, WHO has advocated for a general
strengthening of public health and health care services. In particular, “The maintenance of
national public health infrastructure is a crucial element in determining levels of vulnerability
and adaptive capacity” (McMichael et al., 2003, p. 14). Public health authorities play a critical
role in monitoring and taking action to maintain health and well-being within the whole com-
munity. This is accomplished by the following three primary activities (Carty et al., 2004):
• health protection—reducing or preventing risks through a
variety of activities (e.g. food and water safety, immunization,
handling of toxins);
• health screening and surveillance—the early detection
of disease to facilitate treatment; and
• health promotion—education and outreach activities on a
variety of issues to reduce or prevent risks (e.g. smoking,
injury prevention, nutrition, reproductive health).
Among other activities, local, provincial and federal health
departments in Canada maintain registries of health data on certain
diseases, infections, hospitalizations and injuries; WHO monitors
similar data at a global level. These data, which are collected by
recording events as they occur, contribute to passive surveillance
and may be enhanced by active surveillance programs that obtain
data on particular health problems (e.g. emerging infections) (Pinner et al., 2003). The national
Notifiable Diseases On-Line and Canada Communicable Disease Report allow access to
information on case reports and surveillance results of infectious diseases.
The effectiveness of policies and programs for responding to disease outbreaks and emergencies
in Canada has recently been examined following outbreaks and other events that have taken
place during the past decade. These outbreaks and events have tested the capacity of public
health and emergency systems. Several of the key areas for improvement highlighted in
these reports are discussed in sections 8.6.2.1 to 8.6.2.5.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
390
8.6.2.1 Institutional coordination and planning
A common gap in dealing with health emergencies and infectious disease outbreaks at
a pan-Canadian level was the absence of a common approach to provide consistent and
inter-operational procedures. A national legislative and policy framework for a measured,
harmonized and unified response to pan-Canadian health emergencies was highlighted
as a critical need (Health Canada, 2003b; F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness and
Response, 2004). More generally, population health strategies that address the health
outcomes of the full range of determinants of health—encompassing social, environmental,
cultural and economic factors—have been called for (Standing Senate Committee on
Social Affairs, Science and Technology, 2003). This includes programs and services
that recognize different health care needs of men and women, visible minorities, people
with disabilities and new Canadians (Commission on the Future of Health Care in
Canada, 2002).
8.6.2.2 Health system and public health resources
Past funding levels for health system and public health functions, including those dedicated
to the prevention and control of infectious diseases, have been identified as insufficient
to meet existing service needs (Commission on the Future of Health Care in Canada,
2002). Other studies highlighted the need to bolster public health infrastructure (CPHA,
2001a; Health Canada, 2003b) and ensure that emergency departments have the physical
facilities and equipment to achieve minimal facility standards for emergency situations.
Capacity is needed to ensure that
hospitals that serve as regional
centres can be equipped with the
appropriate infrastructure to allow
their participation in surveillance
networks—including the receipt of
necessary national and international
alerts (Health Canada, 2003b).
Greater resources are required to
support provincial, territorial
and regional capacity for infectious
disease surveillance, outbreak
management and related infection
control activities (Health
Canada, 2003b).
8.6.2.3 Information sharing and exchange
The ability of Canadian health officials to exchange and share data and information on
disease outbreaks and emergencies in a timely and accurate manner across jurisdictions is
critical to their ability to respond effectively and adapt to new situations (e.g. inter-provincial
surveillance reporting). Several studies have reported a need to improve the ability of
officials to share information (CPHA, 2001a, 2001b; Health Canada, 2003b; Standing
Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology, 2003). A report by Health
Canada in 1999 found that some of the information about the health of Canadians is not
organized to meet the needs of health professionals and policy makers (Health Canada,
1999). To address these concerns, more timely access to laboratory testing and results,
using common technology platforms and typing procedures, has been recommended,
as well as the development of management protocols for infectious disease outbreaks
(Health Canada, 2003b; Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and
Technology, 2003).
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
391
8.6.2.4 Human resource planning and training
Several studies have recommended that greater attention needs to be paid to human
resource planning and training to buttress the ability of communities to respond to infectious
disease outbreaks and public health emergencies, particularly at a time when many
health service facilities are overtaxed. Health care delivery services in Canada currently
experience high demand. Although 87.7% of Canadians had a regular family physician
in 2001 (Health Canada, 2002b) and, in 2003, 84.9% of Canadians were satisfied with the
health services they received (Health Canada, 2004b), one in 10 Canadians reported unmet
needs for health care in 2003 and 32% of those named waiting for care as a barrier (Canadian
Institute for Health Information (CIHI), 2006b). As well, in 2004, 48% of Canadians reported
waiting more than two hours to be treated in an emergency room (CIHI, 2005).
Improved human resource planning is needed to create a reserve or “surge” capacity to
deal with public health emergencies (CPHA, 2001a, 2001b; Commission on the Future
of Health Care in Canada, 2002; Health Canada, 2003b; Senate Standing Committee
on Social Affairs, Science and Technology, 2003). A recent survey of health practitioners
in Ottawa indicated that family physicians in that city perceive their offices as unprepared
to address serious health crises (Hogg et al., 2006). Only 18% thought their offices were
prepared to respond to a serious respiratory epidemic and 50% believed they were not
prepared (Hogg et al., 2006).
Several studies recommended a comprehensive plan be developed for addressing issues related
to supply, distribution, education and training, remuneration, skills, and patterns of practice
for health professionals in this country (CPHA, 2001a, 2001b; Commission on the Future
of Health Care in Canada 2002; Health Canada, 2003b; Standing Senate Committee on Social
Affairs, Science and Technology, 2003). Improving surge capacity to protect health in times
of emergency is particularly important given that Canadians are at increased risk to the
health impacts from more frequent and intense extreme weather events.16 Improving crisis
communication activities has also been identified as a pressing need; further training of
health professionals to facilitate the sharing of information with the public during health
emergencies is required (Health Canada, 2003b).
8.6.2.5 Recent actions to improve adaptive capacity
In the wake of the SARS outbreak in 2003 and the many calls to bolster the public health
system, a new Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and the position of a Chief Public Health
Officer for the country were created in 2004. Increased investments in public health functions
created and strengthened a variety of programs: the International Centre for Infectious Diseases,
which focuses on research, training, commercialization and innovation in addressing the threat and
impacts of infectious diseases; a Skills Enhancement for Public Health program; a Pan-Canadian
Framework for Public Health Human Resources Planning; and a Public Health Scholarship and
Fellowship Grant Program. Increased investments have also targeted the development or appli-
cation of leading-edge technologies, such as the Public Health Map
Generator that PHAC makes available to public health professionals
across Canada. This program enables them to quickly and easily
visualize their local health data by using web-based map applications
(PHAC, 2006). PHAC is also contributing to the building of an
International Vaccine Centre at the University of Saskatchewan. This
facility will be the first of its kind in the world, unique in its focus
on vaccine development for both animal and human pathogens. It will
be a level three high-containment testing facility that will develop
vaccines to stop the spread of infections such as West Nile virus,
Creutzfelt-Jacob disease and SARS (PHAC, 2007a).
Chapter 8
16 See Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards and Extreme Weather, for more information.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
392
The capacity of health officials to undertake needed surveillance activities to detect and then
effectively manage a host of risks to human health has been enhanced in Canada. Infectious
diseases, including those that pose increased risks to Canadians and people worldwide due to
climate change, require rapid and early detection. Early detection of outbreaks provides public
health officials in Canada, other countries and international bodies, such as WHO, early warnings
for preventative and remedial actions. PHAC operates the Global Public Health Intelligence
Network, an Internet-based early warning system. The system gathers preliminary reports of public
health significance from around the world 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and disseminates
relevant information on disease outbreaks and other public health events to users in the public
health community within and outside of Canada (PHAC, 2004). This system has been credited
with recognizing the outbreak of SARS in China in 2002 and contributing to limiting the spread
of the disease (Sommer, 2006). Additionally, the Canadian Integrated Public Health Surveillance
program at PHAC provides an integrated suite of computer and database tools to Canadian public
health professionals to support needed surveillance activities (PHAC, 2007b).
The contamination of drinking water with E. coli 0157:H7 and Campylobacter jejuni in Walkerton
in 2000—the most serious water-borne disease outbreak in Canadian history (seven deaths and
2,300 illnesses)—initiated a review and improvement of water supply regulation in Canada. After
this event, many provinces revised their standards to align with the Canadian Drinking Water
Quality Guidelines developed by Health Canada. To support provincial and territorial partners in
efforts to protect the health of Canadians from health risks associated with contaminated drinking
water supplies, Health Canada and PHAC are undertaking a number of actions. These include
the development of a web-based system designed to report boil water advisories and notify
stakeholders across Canada, the development of the technical document From Source to Tap:
Guidance on the Multi-barrier Approach to Safe Drinking Water, and facilitating the sharing
of information through the Federal/Provincial/Territorial Committee on Drinking Water.
Efforts are also being made under the First Nations Water Management Strategy to ensure that clean
and safe drinking water is accessible in First Nations communities in Canada. In May 2003,
the federal government announced $600 million in new funding under this strategy to improve
the delivery of clean and safe water, as well as wastewater treatment services, to First Nations
communities.
New water treatment facility for Walpole Island First Nation
In November 2005, the federal government committed $10 million to replace the current
water treatment facility at Walpole Island First Nation. Walpole Island First Nation has
an on-reserve population of 2,200 and it is located near Wallaceburg, Ontario. There are
approximately 650 homes on-reserve at Walpole Island, most of which are serviced by the
community’s current water treatment facility. The existing facility, which operates at full
capacity, will be replaced by a new water treatment plant in 2008. Through the First
Nations Water Management Strategy, a total of $67.2 million has been provided since
2003 for 54 major plant upgrades or replacements. These projects which are currently
under design, construction or have been completed, will improve water quality in 45 First
Nations communities in Ontario.
Source: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC), 2007.
8.6.3
Adapting to Health Risks from Air Pollution and Heat Waves
It is widely accepted that current global warming trends will continue and that excess mortality is
associated with extreme temperatures and heat waves (IPCC, 2007a).17 Increasing temperatures
can also affect the chemical reactions involved in the creation of air pollution. Concern over
the health risks associated with heat waves and increased smog levels has precipitated calls
for the development of warning and protection systems in Canada (Cheng et al., 2005).
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
393
8.6.3.1 Air quality indices
Timely information about the risks to health from air pollution can play an important
role in changing personal behaviours to minimize these risks. Smog advisories are the
first line of defence in terms of protecting the health of Canadians from exposure to air
pollution. Integral to these advisories is the Air Quality Index that provides information
on a daily basis about local air pollution conditions. Currently, there is no standard air quality
index used across Canada. All provinces except Saskatchewan (and no territories) and,
in some cases, municipalities (e.g. Montreal) have developed their own indexes. They have
done so with support from the federal government in the form of scientific, monitoring
and technical assistance. There is also a lack of consistency in the way that air quality
is calculated and reported, and in the use of health-based messages (Environics Research
Group, 2005). As well, a recent survey of physicians in Canada found that almost none
of those surveyed provide information to their patients about air quality and health as a
regular part of their interactions with patients, although all believe that outdoor air quality
has a negative impact on health and many feel the impact is significant. The physicians
identified a lack of time, a lack of information and an insufficient understanding of the topic
as barriers to addressing the health implications of poor air quality with patients (Environics
Research Group, 2006).
Despite the relative success of the air quality indices, various groups have expressed
concerns about fundamental flaws in the assumptions used in their calculations. These
concerns are largely health-based, reflecting that there are no known thresholds for ozone
and fine particulate matter, that the air standards upon which the index is based are
outdated, and that the majority of health effects occur outside smog advisory periods
(Chiotti, 2006). As well, the current Air Quality Index may be less effective at changing
individual behaviour than desired. Individuals tend to disassociate air quality health
risks from their own situation, either by underestimating their own exposure or assuming
the risks apply primarily to other people they believe are most vulnerable (e.g. seniors).
Most Canadians know that air quality indexes or advisories are provided in their area.
But this information is having a limited impact in attracting attention and prompting
actions to reduce personal exposure, even during poor air quality events (Health Canada,
2005a). Also problematic is that there is no central registry in Canada recording smog
advisories on a national basis, although there are websites that provide provincial
or regional air quality data in varying degrees of detail (Chiotti, 2006).
8.6.3.2 Smog response plans
Municipal smog response plans generally consist of a communications plan, a communications
network and operational actions to reduce emissions of harmful air contaminants.
The plans typically involve four central activities (Chiotti, 2006):
• educating the community about the health effects of air pollution;
• documenting, monitoring and reporting on local air quality;
• developing a management strategy to reduce local emissions contributing to air
pollution; and
• preparing the community to respond appropriately to smog events.
Chapter 8
17 The IPCC stated, “It is more likely than not that anthropogenic forcing through emissions of greenhouse gases has increased the
risk of heat waves” (IPCC, 2007b, p.10) and that “it is very likely that hot extremes, heat waves and heavy precipitation events
will continue to become more frequent.” (IPCC, 2007b, p.15).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
394
Many municipalities in south-central Canada have developed long-term clean air plans,
and most of them have included a smog response plan component. However, there is a spatial
disconnect in smog response plans vis-à-vis regions that use an air quality index, which
could emerge as a serious health problem. Few, if any, municipalities outside of south-central
Canada have smog response plans in place, although several communities across Canada
experience air pollution episodes that pose risks to health. Many of these communities have
developed air management strategies and/or are taking actions to reduce GHGs (Chiotti,
2006). While the current number and distribution of smog advisories suggests that this is not
yet a serious problem, smog conditions could change significantly under climate change
(Chiotti, 2006).18
8.6.3.3 Other actions
Although adaptive actions are important for reducing an individual’s exposure to both air
pollution and extreme temperatures, mitigation actions to reduce emissions of air pollutants
are required to further lessen the health risks associated with such atmospheric conditions
(Health Canada, 2005b). Measures to reduce the emissions of GHGs can have immediate
health benefits by directly reducing the emission of chemical airborne pollutants. Mitigation
actions to reduce both air pollutants and GHGs are in line with the preventative approach to
climate change advocated by the public health community (CPHA, 2001c). The capacity of
individuals, communities and governments to reduce air pollutants and GHG emissions is an
important complement to adaptive actions, but is not investigated in this chapter.
8.6.3.4 Heat alert systems
Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards and Extreme Weather, demonstrates that robust
emergency management policies and programs, including early warning systems and emergency
response plans, constitute key adaptation measures for lowering the risks to human health
from extreme weather events and other natural disasters. Analysis of the health impacts of the
2003 heat wave in Europe underscores the importance of these, and other, risk management
policies and the high costs of not being prepared (WHO, 2005).
Heat alert systems can be effective in reducing heat-related illnesses and deaths (Smoyer-
Tomic and Rainham, 2001; Kovats and Jendritzky, 2006; United States Environmental Protection
Agency (U.S. EPA) et al., 2006). There are several known approaches to determining
the threshold for triggering an alert. To be effective, accurate predictive capabilities must
inform adequate communication and warning strategies and timely response measures
(Ebi, 2005). The widespread introduction of air conditioning, improved emergency and
health care services, improved weather forecasting, and the introduction of heat alert and
response systems in large cities such as Toronto have helped to keep the number of heat
wave-related deaths and illnesses in Canada low (Clean Air Partnership (CAP), 2004;
Dolney and Sheridan, 2005). In the eastern U.S., especially in its southern areas, excess
deaths from high summer temperatures have declined significantly from the 1960s to
the 1990s, apparently for reasons similar to those in Canada (Davis et al., 2002).
Heat alert systems rely upon communication activities and networks as important components
of a response plan. Municipal actions are largely undertaken by community-based partners,
in terms of outreach to vulnerable groups. Few communities in Canada have developed
full heat alert and response plans. Given the relationship between extreme heat and mortality
(McGeehin and Mirabelli, 2001; Basu and Samet, 2002; Kovats and Ebi, 2006; Ebi,
2007), this may constitute a public health concern. The distribution of heat alert systems
Chapter 8
18 See Chapter 4, Air Quality, Climate Change and Health, for more information.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
395
in Canada is largely limited to Ontario and Quebec. A small number of communities in
other regions engage in some sort of awareness-raising, such as the posting of heat-health
information on community websites (Paszkowski, 2007).19 Heat alert systems follow a similar
protocol that has been developed for smog response plans. Advice is generally directed at
individuals to help them reduce their exposure to heat stress. The following are the components
of most systems currently in place in south-central Canada (Chiotti, 2006):
• Monitoring—Health department staff monitor the weather information posted by Environment
Canada, usually from May 15 to September 30 each year.
• Notification—Health department staff are provided an advance five-day weather forecast
from Environment Canada, or information regarding humidex advisories.
• Consultation—When necessary, Health department staff consult with the local weather
office to discuss region-specific forecasts with a trained meteorologist.
• Decision—Based on the weather sources and conditions, the month, the heat pattern at the
particular time of the season, health surveillance information and an assessment of the
capacity of the system to react, the Medical Officer of Health will determine if the Region
will issue a heat alert to the community (T. Kosatsky, pers. comm., November 26, 2005).
• Activation—If a heat alert is declared, Health Department staff will send notification
to the media and community stakeholders that may be affected by extreme temperatures.
Identified stakeholders, including long-term care facilities and hospitals, local shelters,
municipal employees and child care centres, receive the heat alert notice. Each agency
is then responsible for internal notification of its staff. Heat alert information is sent
to the internal communications website contacts for posting on municipality websites.
Other measures include:
- bottled water is distributed to vulnerable people at places where they are likely to gather;
- shelters are asked to ease their curfew rules;
- cooling centres are opened in central locations;
- transit tickets are issued to the homeless so they can reach cooling centres; and
- a 12-hour heat information line is activated to answer heat-related questions.
• Public education—Messages to the general public reinforce individual responsibility as
well as educate people. The public is encouraged to look in on vulnerable neighbours
(e.g. seniors living alone) and are given information about how to provide support for
hot weather illness. People without
shelter and those without air conditioning
are encouraged to go to air-conditioned
public facilities, such as malls and libraries.
Public education occurs in a variety
of ways:
- information is obtained by calling the
municipality or visiting the website;
- agencies post information on bulletin
boards and are prepared to answer
questions; and
- information is provided through
the media.
• Termination—When hot weather is no longer a health threat, the Medical Officer of Health
ends the heat alert by notifying the media and participating agencies.
Chapter 8
19 See Annex 2 for examples of municipalities and industries with heat alert systems.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
396
• Evaluation—An evaluation component to the heat alert system is necessary to determine
changes or additions to the plan for subsequent years.
There are different approaches worldwide and within Canada to setting thresholds for taking
action on heat. For example, Toronto uses a synoptic air masses approach. This approach
considers the health risks posed by a combination of several weather variables, including air
temperature, dew point temperature, visibility, total cloud cover, sea level air pressure, wind
speed and wind direction, in determining when to issue alerts (Angus, 2006).
Table 8.1
Number of alerts issued by Toronto Public Health, 2001–05
Source: Angus, 2006.
In contrast, Montreal’s Heat Watch Warning System is based on minimum and maximum tempera-
ture thresholds defined on the basis of temperature-related mortality for the region. Alerts are
issued when both maximum temperatures are greater than 33°C and minimum temperatures
are greater than 20°C, for three consecutive days (Angus, 2006). Smaller municipalities tend
to rely on temperature thresholds set for larger centres or rely on Environment Canada’s humidex
advisories to provide additional advice to the population or trigger their respective response plan.20
In part, the implementation of response systems in Canada has been influenced by heat-related
deaths caused by well-publicized heat waves in the U.S. (e.g. Chicago in 1995) and Western Europe
(e.g. France, Italy, Germany and England in 2003). However, public health officials in some
Canadian cities have examined temperature-related mortality in their own jurisdiction and identified
vulnerable populations in light of future climate projections. Their concerns are also supported by a
number of statistical studies demonstrating that vulnerable populations are sensitive to different
temperatures and associated weather conditions (Smoyer et al., 1999, 2000). Greater understanding
of temperature and health thresholds is required to inform the development of future heat alert
systems to meet the needs of communities of different sizes and locations, and characterized by dif-
ferent vulnerable populations. The effectiveness of current heat alert systems needs to be evaluated
to ensure maximum protection of populations and guide the decisions of communities in setting
up appropriate systems (Angus, 2006). Key knowledge gaps exist about optimal public health
interventions for reducing deaths and illnesses associated with extreme heat events (Ebi, 2005).
Current responses to increased health risks from extreme heat events have placed emphasis on
adaptation measures that reduce the exposure of vulnerable populations to heat. As an adaptation
option, relying exclusively on air conditioning to cope with heat waves could be risky. Any
large-scale power failure, such as that of August 2003 that hit several U.S. states and much
of Ontario, could leave many people physically unable to cope with unmitigated heat stress.
Furthermore, the “reliance on energy-intensive technologies such as air conditioning is
unsustainable and can be considered a maladaptation” (WHO, 2005).
Chapter 8
Year
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Alerts Issued by Toronto Public Health
9
16
6
2
26
20 A humidex advisory is issued when temperatures are expected to reach or exceed 30°C and the humidex values are expected
to reach or exceed 40°C. Humidex values are intended to represent the effect that high humidity and high temperatures have
on the human body. Comfort levels for humidex readings are: 20–29 (comfortable), 30–39 (varying degrees of discomfort),
40–45 (almost everyone is uncomfortable), and +45 (many types of work and exercise should be restricted) (Environment
Canada, 2006). Although there is no formal definition of a heat wave, Environment Canada considers one to occur when
there are three consecutive days when the maximum temperature is 32°C or higher.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
397
Less common in Canada are actions explicitly aimed at reducing
the heat island effect (Chiotti, 2006; Paszkowski, 2007). This effect
is caused by large surface areas of materials that absorb heat from
the sun, such as asphalt, in combination with little vegetation to
provide shade and cool the air. The urban heat island effect is
responsible for making the temperature in cities 4 to 7°C higher
than surrounding areas (City of Hamilton, 2006). Many measures
that have been introduced to reduce the heat island effect have been
driven by the need to reduce energy use in large urban centres.
More recently, it is understood that these measures can offer impor-
tant health benefits by reducing thermal radiation and ambient
temperature in the city and offering cool shelters during extreme
heat events. Such actions include planting shade trees, installing
reflective roofs, optimum planning of roadways and buildings, and
urban reforestation (City of Hamilton, 2006). The Green Roofs and
Evergreen projects in Canada and the Cool Cities program in the
U.S. indicate that the application of these measures is beginning
to take place (City of Toronto, 2007; Evergreen Canada, 2007).
Case study: Heat wave simulation in Montreal
A heat wave simulation in Montreal was conducted in 2005 to test a new emergency pre-
paredness plan. It also gauged the usefulness of such exercises in identifying gaps in
preparedness and response activities related to extreme heat events. The city demonstrated
an advanced level of preparedness to manage the health impacts of heat waves, and the
simulation confirmed that major strides have been made in recent years in emergency
planning for such events. The introduction of other events that would simulate the
occurrence of cumulative impacts on the systems under evaluation was critical to this
exercise. Several aspects of adaptive capacity were reviewed as part of the simulation
and recommendations for improvement of current systems were made in order to further
enhance the effectiveness of the plan (Rousseau, 2005).
Based upon this and other studies, actions required to ensure that plans are effective are
highlighted below:
Institutions
• Heat wave emergency response plans should be well integrated with the emergency plans
of the city’s emergency preparedness centre and the provincial health agency.
• Community and volunteer organizations’ roles should be well articulated in emergency
response plans.
• A procedure to limit access to drinking water from the aqueduct in the event of water
contamination (e.g. public drinking fountains) and to supply residents with drinking
water should be in place.
Information sharing and skills
• It is important that the roles and responsibilities of communications officials within
the city and relevant agencies are clearly articulated and that mechanisms are in place
to ensure open communication between organizations at all levels (e.g. emergency
preparedness centre, department of public health, provincial health agency, community
organizations, Meteorological Service of Canada).
Infrastructure
• Lists of emergency shelters must be adapted to extended heat wave events and up-to-date.
• Vulnerability of the city’s infrastructure critical to public health during an extended
heat wave must be understood and potential failures addressed ahead of time.
Chapter 8
Example of a sign indicating
that a cooling shelter
has been opened during
an extreme heat event.
Photo Credits: City of Toronto
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
398
8.6.3.5 Recent actions to improve adaptive capacity
To enhance our ability to reduce the health risks from air pollution, Health Canada, Environment
Canada and a variety of stakeholders have been engaged in a process since 2001 to improve the
Air Quality Index. A new health risk-based Air Quality Health Index has been developed. It is
designed to make use of a formula that represents the combined effects of the air pollution mixture
rather than using the concentration of a single pollutant as an indicator of air quality. It therefore
better reflects the overall cumulative health risks associated with a more comprehensive range
of air pollutants. The new index also provides explicit health messages tailored for the general
population and populations at higher risk (people with pre-existing cardiovascular and respiratory
disease, children, seniors). Individuals can use these messages to decide how to adapt their
activities to reduce their exposure to harmful air pollution levels. Messages also include actions
to reduce air pollution on both an individual and society-wide basis (Health Canada, 2006a).
Ontario recently passed legislation on a new Clean Air Plan, which establishes new targets
for sulphur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxide (NOX) emissions from most industrial sectors
by 2015, the introduction of 40 new air standards, and the implementation of a risk assessment
approach to setting standards. Ontario has also made a commitment to close its coal-fired
electricity generation plants; Lakeview, located just west of Toronto, was recently closed.
These initiatives to reduce levels of air pollution are complemented by other actions being
implemented at the regional and municipal levels, most notably the Greater Toronto Area
(Canzi, 2007) and the Greater Vancouver Area (The Sustainable Region Initiative, 2005).
The Green Municipal Funds, which are managed by the Federation of Canadian Municipalities
(FCM), have stimulated municipal investments in innovative environmental infrastructure
projects and practices to promote cleaner air and protect the global climate. Also, 151 Canadian
communities participate in the Partners for Climate Protection Program (FCM, 2007). Participants
include all major urban centres across Canada that have committed to reducing GHGs and acting
on climate change.
Health Canada’s ‘Building Heat Resilient Individuals and Communities
in Canada’ Initiative
In 2007 Health Canada initiated a multi-year project to reduce risks to the health of
Canadians from extreme heat events. In collaboration with provincial and municipal partners,
best practice guidelines for heat and response systems are being developed along with
clinical guidelines for managing heat-related illnesses. Activities will be targeted at ensuring
that populations most vulnerable to extreme heat events such as seniors, children, those
with pre-existing diseases and the socially disadvantaged are protected.
Most major cities across Canada have developed or are developing their own climate change plans.
These plans usually contain objectives and targets for GHG emission reductions for municipal
corporations and the community as a whole (typically a 20 and 6% reduction, respectively, below
1990 levels by 2010). Actions are primarily transportation oriented (e.g. alternative fuels, more
efficient driving practices), but also involve community
plans (e.g. increased funding for cycling and pedestrian
infrastructure), waste management plans (e.g. landfill
recovery and cogeneration) and energy plans (e.g. greater
use of renewables and improved energy efficiency). To
the extent that these initiatives reduce air pollution in the
affected communities and regions, they could act to offset
projected future deterioration in air quality due to rising
temperatures associated with climate change.21
Chapter 8
21 See Chapter 4, Air Quality, Climate Change and Health, for more information, and Annex 3 for a list of Canadian municipalities
with climate change programs.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
399
In addition, in response to new research showing that vulnerable populations are sensitive to
different temperatures and associated weather systems, some municipalities in central Canada
(Kingston, Toronto, Region of Peel, Hamilton, Montreal, Ottawa, Region of Waterloo,
Regional Municipality of Halton) have established or are considering their own heat alert
systems (Chiotti, 2006).
8.6.4
Cross-Cutting Capacity to Adapt to Climate Change Health Risks
In 2005, a federal/provincial/territorial adaptation working group agreed on a National Climate
Change Adaptation Framework. The Framework presents areas of potential collaboration
among jurisdictions to increase Canada’s capacity to adapt to climate change impacts, to recognize
and reduce risks, and to identify and pursue opportunities (Natural Resources Canada (NRCan),
2005). As well, several provinces and territories have made commitments to address climate
change impacts by developing climate change action plans. A number of these, including
Quebec, Yukon, Ontario, Newfoundland and Labrador, and British Columbia, highlight potential
health risks associated with climate change. Those developed by Quebec, Newfoundland
and Labrador, and British Columbia set out specific actions to prepare for actual or expected
health risks through adaptation (Government of British Columbia, 2004; Government of
Newfoundland and Labrador, 2005; Government of Quebec, 2006) At the time of writing,
Nunavut and Saskatchewan were developing their respective plans, both of which are expected
to include a human health component. Such plans are necessary for providing the institutional
foundation and policy focus, along with access to funding and partnership development, to
facilitate efforts to address climate change and health risks.
The Canadian Climate Impacts and Adaptation Program, sponsored by the Government of
Canada, has funded climate change adaptation research in public and private sectors and provided
information to individuals, businesses and communities to assist them in making appropriate
decisions about climate change adaptation (Lemmen and Warren, 2004). Several federal
departments have supported research on adaptation and have participated in national impacts
and adaptation assessments. Results from health research have been used to inform adaptation
initiatives; for example, in the development of the health component of the Quebec climate
change action plan (Government of Quebec, 2006). The health care sector is well organized
with respect to the sharing of climate change adaptation information (e.g. Canadian Climate
Impacts and Adaptation Research Network (C-CIARN) Health Sector) as well as internationally
(collaboration of Le Centre Hospitalier universitaire de Québec with WHO) (Gosselin, 2004),
in part, due to these investments.
Over the past several years, the Government of Canada has worked to enhance partnerships with
national voluntary organizations through increased outreach, engagement, collaboration and
capacity building. The voluntary sector is a key partner in strengthening the health of Canadians
and their communities (Health Canada, 2005a). Voluntary organizations play an important role
through health promotion, the development of social capital by empowering people and
communities to take action, and through the provision of extensive networks of service at the
community level. Organizations such as the Canadian Red Cross and the Salvation Army provide
a wide range of social services to Canadians. These services are a vital component of adaptive
capacity in this country. In 2003, approximately 161,000 non-profit and voluntary organizations
were operating across the country. Approximately 17% of voluntary organizations were in the
health and social services sectors (Statistics Canada, 2003b). In the event of a disaster, relief
organizations provide emergency social services such as clothing, shelter, tracing and reunification
services, and emotional support for affected individuals and communities. During heat alerts,
public health officials can work with many different community-based groups (e.g. Red Cross,
Salvation Army) that reach out to vulnerable populations. In Toronto, for example, more than
1,100 community agencies working with vulnerable populations are advised during a heat
alert (Chiotti, 2006).
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
400
In 2005, a national collaboration among the Canadian Red Cross, the Salvation Army, St. John
Ambulance and other key organizations developed a voluntary sector framework for health
emergencies and a model for developing and sustaining episodic volunteers. This collaboration
of key partners in the voluntary and non-governmental sectors provides opportunities for voluntary
organizations to engage effectively with all levels of government on matters related to climate
change and the needs of communities and vulnerable populations. This successful model is
now being used to increase broader voluntary sector involvement in health emergencies related
to climate change (Canadian Red Cross et al., n.d.(a), n.d.(b)).
Despite efforts in many areas to improve adaptive capacity, the 2006 report of the Commissioner
of the Environment and Sustainable Development noted the absence of overall strategies and
plans in federal departments to guide their work on adaptation to the effects of climate change
(OAG, 2006). It found that the federal government has made limited progress in organizing
its activities to obtain the information needed to identify potential impacts and address
vulnerabilities. A report by The Conference Board of Canada (2007) called for a greater
federal role in adaptation by:
• funding direct physical and economic research on adaptation measures;
• facilitating partnerships with other governments;
• improving data collection about the state of natural capital (e.g. forest cover, water resources)
to determine the magnitude and extent of local impacts; and
• collaborating with provincial governments to review regulatory structures and to ensure that
regulators pay attention to adaptation considerations.
8.6.5
Key Findings
Governments and communities in Canada have taken many actions to adapt to health
risks associated with extreme weather and climate variability.
Analysis in this section demonstrates that many actions have been taken in the past to protect
Canadians from health risks associated with extreme weather and climate variability, water- and
food-borne contamination, air pollution and heat waves. Such actions have contributed to limiting
the number of deaths from weather extremes and other health emergencies in Canada. However,
the economic costs of extreme events in this country are increasing rapidly (Etkin et al., 2004),
and such events continue to pose significant risks to the health and well-being of Canadians and
their communities. Climate change knowledge needs to be integrated into current planning
activities to adapt our current systems to the changes ahead.
Concerns exist about the effectiveness of current adaptations to health risks from current
climate variability.
Gaps have been reported in measures and systems in Canada that can reduce climate-related
health risks. Parliamentary reviews and other reports have raised concerns about emergency
management systems which relate to government leadership, funding arrangements, commu-
nications and coordination, and information-sharing initiatives. The age of infrastructure
integral to the protection of human health—such as roads, sewage treatment, storm sewers,
and water distribution networks—also contributes to the vulnerability of Canadians to a range
of climate-related hazards but its renewal presents opportunities to effectively reduce future
risks. The ability to respond to disease outbreaks and public health emergencies in Canada is
highly influenced by funding for a number of public health functions, the ability to exchange
and share surveillance and monitoring data, and the state of human resource planning and
training. Current efforts to protect Canadians from health risks associated with extreme heat
events are hampered by limited knowledge of effective heat alert and response systems
for the different types of communities in Canada. In addition, measures to mitigate the urban
heat island effect are limited in Canadian communities.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
401
This analysis also found that capacity is not evenly distributed among communities in Canada.
Disparities exist in the ability to plan and prepare for emergencies among cities and smaller
communities and rural areas. Smaller communities and rural areas are generally engaged in fewer
activities and have less capacity to adopt needed measures. This may translate into significantly
less protection from disasters and public health emergencies for people living in these communities.
Recent initiatives and activities have improved the ability of governments and communities
to reduce risks to health from current climate variability.
The ability of governments and communities to mitigate, prepare for and respond to a number of
public health emergencies and other risks to health (e.g. smog episodes) has been improved. This
improvement has taken place in response to calls to strengthen the capacity to address risks to
health from environmental threats. Investments have been made from national to local levels
in a range of public health activities, and government and non-governmental partners are
working to improve coordination, collaboration and information sharing to provide more effective
management of a variety of risks to health.
The creation of PHAC and related investments in several public health functions and services
in Canada has begun to address a number of the identified concerns regarding existing capacity
for addressing public health emergencies. In addition, the new National Framework for Health
Emergency Management and the Voluntary Sector Framework for Health Emergencies have
enhanced adaptive capacity by providing needed coordinating structures to facilitate emergency
planning and response activities within and outside of government.
Although knowledge gaps about risks and vulnerabilities remain, investment in impacts and
adaptation research by all levels of government and partners has built a foundation of knowledge
that is now available to public health decision makers for the development of adaptation
strategies. The health care sector is well organized with respect to the sharing of climate change
adaptation information, but research funding and researchers dedicated to this issue are limited.
Most provinces and territories have either developed a climate change action plan that includes
adaptation, or are in the process of doing so. Quebec is particularly well advanced, and has
developed a slate of activities to address the health risks associated with climate change. Many
provinces and territories have taken important actions to enhance emergency preparedness
in communities, and have strengthened regulations governing drinking water quality. At the
community level, many local authorities have developed climate change or clean air plans
that support and direct programs for reducing air pollution and associated risks to health.
Presently, it is not possible to estimate the extent to which recent improvements in public health
and emergency management services have protected the health of Canadians from climate-related
impacts. Many of the initiatives have only recently been launched, and the very broad scope
of activities makes such analysis prohibitive.
Existing gaps in public health and emergency management activities that are not addressed
in the future have the potential to significantly affect the ability of Canadians to plan for
and respond to climate change impacts in Canada.
Gaps in current adaptations and existing capacity to protect people from the health risks related to
climate change in Canada are of particular concern if there is wide exposure to such risks or if
exposure increases significantly. High exposure in this context suggests greater vulnerability
of individuals and communities and requires increased adaptive efforts to reduce the health risks
related to climate change. Street et al. (2005, p. 173) suggested that “the fact that most public
health systems are currently taxed to their maximum and struggling to deal with emerging health
problems limits their capacity to deal with the added health impacts of extreme weather and
climate events.” The more complex cumulative and long-term effects need to be considered as
well. There is a pressing need for research related to these types of health effects, because
many are indirectly induced or triggered by a number of climatic factors.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
402
8.7
EXPOSURE TO CLIMATE-RELATED HEALTH RISKS
The following sections summarize information from
previous chapters of this Assessment and other sources
to document the potential direct and indirect exposure
of Canadians to a range of climate-related risks.
Information is also provided on how exposure might
increase with climate change, where data permit.
A wide range of environmental and social factors
may influence human exposures and sensitivities
to climate change health risks (Smit and Wandel,
2006). Many of these factors differ from region
to region and even community to community.
Therefore, vulnerability assessments at these levels
will be required to obtain information needed to
more accurately identify priority health risks and
effective adaptations.
8.7.1
Natural Hazards
Many Canadians have been exposed to natural hazards and have suffered effects on their
health (e.g. dislocation). The total number of Canadians affected by natural disasters increased
from 79,066 between 1984 and 1993, to 578,238 between 1994 and 2003. Single events can
expose very large numbers of people to hazards. For example, the 1998 Ice Storm resulted in
4,826,586 people, or 66.9% of the general population of Quebec, being impacted by the storm
(Gutman, 2007). The total number of people affected was 1,243,335 in the Montérégie region
alone, the area most severely affected, and of these, 128,960 or 10.3% were people over 65 years
of age (Gutman, 2007). Figure 8.1 shows the rise in the number of natural disasters in Canada
over the last century.
Figure 8.1 Frequency of Natural Disasters in Canada, 1900–2002
Chapter 8
People are exposed to a range
of climate-related risks
“Climate change currently contributes
to the global burden of disease and
premature deaths (very high confi-
dence). Human beings are exposed
to climate change through changing
weather patterns (for example, more
intense and frequent extreme events)
and indirectly through changes in
water, air, food quality and quantity,
ecosystems, agriculture and
economy. At this early stage the
effects are small, but are projected
to progressively increase in all
countries and regions.”
(IPCC, 2007a, p. 43).
Source: Etkin et al., 2004.
Certain areas of Canada experience specific weather events and hazards much more frequently
than others. Potential exposure to individual hazards therefore varies significantly across
Canada, as one would expect given the size of the country and associated variations in weather
patterns, ecosystem characteristics and physical features. Table 8.2 identifies the regions in
Canada most affected by specific natural hazards and weather-related extreme events.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
403
Table 8.2
Regions in Canada affected by natural hazards
Note: Information for this table is drawn from Chapter 3, Vulnerabilities to Natural Hazards and Extreme
Weather, which analyzed information from the Canadian Disaster Database. The table includes information
from the database to highlight where most of these events have occurred in the past. Risks to health from
natural hazards may exist in regions where “disasters” have not occurred, so this table likely underestimates
current exposure by Canadians across the country to these types of events.
This table illustrates that all provinces and territories in Canada have been affected by hazards
in the past. Some hazards, such as flooding or cold waves, have affected people in communities
across Canada whereas others, such as hurricanes, are a threat in only a few regions. Some
hazards, such as heat waves, have been identified as particular threats for highly populated
urban centres (e.g. Toronto, Montreal) whereas others, such as forest fires and avalanches, tend
to affect communities that are more remote and less densely populated—although the impact
of forest fires on air quality is known to be far reaching. It is also important to note that some
regions and communities can be threatened by more than one hazard. Individuals living in
Prairie communities are potentially exposed to heat waves, cold waves, flooding, drought,
thunderstorms, hailstorms and tornadoes. This is important from a public health perspective,
given the possibility of cumulative risks to health from extreme weather events that can occur
in quick succession. The exposure of Canadians to climate-related hazards from a regional
and population basis is currently high.
Intense rainstorms in British Columbia
In November 2006, British Columbia experienced a number of intense rainstorms. So much
rain fell that rivers in the Lower Mainland, the south coast and the southern half of Vancouver
Island rose close to flood levels. Intense rains triggered mudslides, washouts and flooding.
Eight communities and 200,000 people were left without power when transmission lines were
damaged by a storm. The mudslides triggered by the intense rainfall contaminated drinking
water sources forcing two million residents to boil their water—the widest warning in
Canadian history. The warning remained in effect for 10 days for nearly one million
people (Environment Canada, 2007a).
Chapter 8
Hazard
Avalanches, Rock- Mud- and
Landslides, Debris Flows
Heat Waves
Cold Snaps
Drought
Wildfires and Forest Fires
Thunderstorms, Lightning,
Hail, Tornadoes, Hurricanes
Floods
Most Affected Areas
All regions of Canada—particularly Rocky Mountains in Alberta, British Columbia,
Yukon, southern and northeastern Quebec and Labrador, Atlantic coastline,
Great Lakes, St. Lawrence shorelines
All regions of Canada—particularly Windsor to Quebec corridor, along Lake Erie,
Lake Ontario and St. Lawrence River, Prairies, Atlantic Canada, British Columbia
All regions of Canada
Prairie provinces most affected
Other areas of southern Canada can be at risk
Most provinces and territories of Canada-particularly Ontario, Quebec, Manitoba,
Saskatchewan, British Columbia, Northwest Territories, Yukon
Thunderstorms: Many regions of Canada
Lightning: Low-lying areas in southern Canada
Tornadoes: Nova Scotia, Ontario, Quebec, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba
Hurricanes: Eastern Canada-particularly Atlantic Canada
Hailstorms: Southern Saskatchewan, southern and northwestern Alberta,
southwestern interior British Columbia, less frequently in Ontario and Quebec
Large parts of Canada’s inhabited areas-particularly New Brunswick, southern
Ontario, southern Quebec, Manitoba
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
404
Climate change is projected to increase the frequency and intensity of specific natural hazards in
Canada. More frequent extreme weather events that threaten communities with limited experience
with such events in the past (e.g. greater number of heat waves) will mean increased exposure
to potential health risks in the absence of effective adaptations (e.g. flood mitigation measures,
urban heat island mitigation measures, further reductions in the release of air pollutants). To
illustrate how the exposure of Canadians might change in the future, projections of increased
flooding and forest fires under climate change conditions are described in sections 8.7.1.1
and 8.7.1.2, respectively.
8.7.1.1 Flooding
Floods have been the most commonly reported disasters in Canada (Tudor, 1997). With climate
change, it is very likely that heavy participation events will become more frequent. It is also
likely that future tropical cyclones (typhoons and hurricanes) will become more intense, with larger
peak wind speeds and greater amounts of precipitation (IPCC, 2007b). Increased frequency and
magnitude of flood flows will increase the hazard to structures, buildings and humans (NRCan,
2000). Figure 8.2 highlights the regional sensitivity of rivers to predicted climate change in Canada.
The most sensitive regions include the Atlantic coast and the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence
Valley regions. This is a result of the shift from snowmelt to more intense rainstorms as the main
source of flooding. Small streams in urban areas may pose particular hazards for people and
their communities. Flows are also likely to increase in the southern Cordillera and eastern slopes
of the Rocky Mountains. This will affect large Prairie streams, whereas smaller Prairie streams
risk flooding from increases in thunderstorm activity (Atlas of Canada, 2007b).
Figure 8.2 Sensitivity of river regions to climate change
Chapter 8
Less sensitive
and less vulnerable
Sensitive and
less vulnerable
More sensitive
and vulnerable
Source: Atlas of Canada, 2007b.
8.7.1.2 Forest fires
There are about 9,000 forest fires recorded annually in Canada. An average of 2.1 million hectares
are burned every year, the majority being boreal forests (Nugent, 2002). Using four General
Circulation Models (GCMs) to project forest fire danger levels in Canada under a warming
climate, large increases in the extent of extreme fire danger and a lengthening of the fire
season were found (NRCan, 2000). Figure 8.3 shows projected seasonal severity ratings across
Canada in the period 2050 to 2059, based on a climate with doubled carbon dioxide (CO2)
concentrations (based on the Canadian GCM). Areas with high severity ratings are projected
to expand into the central and northern parts of the Prairies, north-eastern British Columbia
and south-central Yukon (Atlas of Canada, 2007a).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
405
Figure 8.3 Projected forest fire severity level, 2050 to 2059
Chapter 8
Source: Atlas of Canada, 2007a.
8.7.2
Water-, Food-, Vector- and Rodent-Borne Diseases
Canadians are currently exposed to a range of climate-sensitive infectious diseases.
For example, Chapter 5, Impacts of Climate Change on Water-, Food-, Vector- and
Rodent-Borne Diseases, revealed that many Canadians, particularly the young and seniors,
are affected by gastrointestinal disease each year in Canada. This burden of disease
is partly attributable to water sources, but it is not yet possible to determine to what
extent (Charron et al., 2005). Water-borne disease outbreaks have been associated
with E. coli O157: H7, Campylobacter, occasionally Shigella and other pathogens (Levy
et al., 1998; Lee et al., 2002; Oliver et al., 2003; Charron et al., 2004; Schuster et al.,
2005). E. coli, Campylobacter and Salmonella constitute the most common food-borne
pathogens in Canada (PHAC, 2003).
West Nile virus, a mosquito-borne illness, was first documented in Canadian birds in 2001
(Pepperell et al., 2003). Since then, it has spread rapidly, and has been documented in all
Canadian provinces and territories, except for British Columbia, Newfoundland and Labrador,
Yukon, Nunavut and the Northwest Territories. Over 1,800 human cases were reported in
Canada from 2002 to 2005; 46 were fatal. Cases have been concentrated in a number of urban
and semi-urban areas of southern Quebec, southern Ontario and in rural populations in the
Prairies (Pepperell et al., 2003; Gaulin et al., 2004).
Lyme disease currently does not affect many Canadians, although the vector Ixodes pacificus
is widespread in British Columbia. As well, populations of I. scapularis can be found in
southeastern Nova Scotia, southern Ontario and southeastern Manitoba (Barker and Lindsay,
2000; Ogden et al., 2005).
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome is a rare disease in Canada, with only 36 cases being
reported between 1989 and 2001 (Drebot et al., 2000). Cases have been confined to the
western Canadian provinces—British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba,
with only one case being reported in Quebec (Weir, 2005). However, the presence of infected
mice throughout Canada suggests that the potential for exposure to this disease exists
across the country (Drebot et al., 2000).
< 0.01
0.01 - 0.1
0.1 - 1.0
1.0 - 2.0
2.0 - 3.0
3.0 - 4.0
4.0 - 6.0
> 6.0
Note: the Seasonal Severity Rating,
which is a measure of fire danger
conditions over a complete fire
season, has a relative scale with
values above 6 being extreme.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
406
Climate change is expected to increase the exposure of Canadians to a number of climate-
sensitive water-, food-, vector- and rodent-borne diseases. Weather has been linked to a
number of reported water-borne disease outbreaks in Canada.22 Climate change may also
heighten vector-borne disease risks through a variety of mechanisms, such as the development
of new habitats that can support the establishment of vectors where they could not survive
before, and changes in lifestyles and activities of Canadians altering their exposure to
vectors (e.g. camping more often). For example, climate change may bring about higher
ambient temperatures that will shorten tick life cycles, create more favourable conditions
for host-seeking activity and increase tick survival (Ogden et al., 2004, 2005); this in turn
would increase the risk of Lyme disease in Canada.
Climate change-related alterations in the worldwide distribution and intensity of various
diseases could increase the exposure of Canadian travellers to these diseases. Global
increases in endemic malaria, increased resistance to anti-malarial drug therapy, and
a significant increase in global travel have resulted in thousands of cases of malaria
transported into Europe and North America annually, with a few giving rise to transmission
by indigenous mosquitos (Fayer, 2000). Several hundred cases of malaria are imported
into Canada each year (MacLean et al., 2004).
8.7.3
Air Pollution and Extreme Heat Events
8.7.3.1 Air pollution
Many Canadians are exposed to air pollution, particularly smog. The Government of
Canada estimated in 2005 that air pollution causes 5,900 premature deaths in eight Canadian
cities each year (Health Canada, 2005b). The Ontario Medical Association provided
similar mortality estimates, but additionally estimated that air pollution is associated
with approximately 17,000 hospital admissions and 60,000 emergency room visits in
Ontario every year (Ontario Medical Association, 2005). Illnesses caused or exacerbated
by air pollution, such as respiratory and cardiovascular disease, will increase in prevalence
as the Canadian population ages (Health Canada, 2005b). Individuals with diabetes,
asthma, emphysema, heart disease and circulatory disease are at greater risk on days
when air pollution is high (Health Canada, 2005b). Therefore, as the number of Canadians
with pre-existing conditions increases, it can be expected that more air pollution-
related deaths, hospitalizations and emergency room visits will occur. Three regions
in Canada experience more episodes of elevated levels of smog than others: the
southern Atlantic region, the Windsor to Quebec corridor and the Lower Fraser Valley
in British Columbia (Nugent, 2002). Current exposure to smog is significant; these
are highly populated regions and make up a substantial portion of Canada’s total
population.
Figure 8.4 shows the increase in the national seasonal average of ground-level ozone
between 1990 and 2005. There is regional variation; the highest levels and most consistent
increases have occurred in southern Ontario. This region, which is home to 30% of
Canadians, had an increase in ozone concentrations of 17% from 1990 to 2005. Southern
Quebec and Alberta also had higher ozone concentrations. Concentrations in southern Quebec
increased by 15% over this time period (Government of Canada, 2007). Between 1990
and 2004, NOx and volatile organic compound (VOC) levels in urban areas decreased,
likely because of improvements in fuel quality and emission control technologies for
on-road vehicles (Government of Canada, 2006).
Chapter 8
22 See Chapter 5, Impacts of Climate Change on Water-, Food-, Vector- and Rodent-Borne Diseases, for more information.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
407
Figure 8.4 Ground-level ozone exposure indicator, Canada, 1990–2005
Chapter 8
23 See Chapter 4, Air Quality, Climate Change and Health, for more information.
Source: Government of Canada, 2007.
Warming of the global atmosphere will likely lead to regional and global changes in precipitation,
cloud cover, water vapour, wind direction and wind speed, which in turn could influence the
formation of air pollutants in the atmosphere.23 The IPCC (2007a) has reported that concentrations
of ground-level ozone are projected to increase over North America. Modelling results presented
in Chapter 4, Air Quality, Climate Change and Health suggest that a warming of 4°C associated
with climate change, without other changes in the climate or in emissions, would result in
increased ozone concentrations and resulting health effects. Larger increases would be observed
in the Windsor to Quebec corridor, and in the Calgary, Edmonton, Fort McMurray and
Vancouver areas. Figure 8.5 shows the current regional variations in ozone trends.
Figure 8.5 Ground-level ozone indicator by region, 1990–2004
Source: Government of Canada, 2006.
Note: The indicator is a
population weighted estimate.
A trendline represents the
average rate of change based
on the Sen method. It is shown
only for the region with a
statistically significant trend.
Note: The trend line represents an average
rate of change of 0.8% per year. From 1990
to 2005, the indicator shows a statistically
significant increase of 12% (plus or minus
10 percentage points, resulting in a possible
increase ranging from 2 to 22% at a 90%
confidence level). Ambient data collected
from 76 monitoring stations.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
408
8.7.3.2 Extreme heat events
Although heat-related hospital admissions and deaths have not been much studied in
Canada, in recent years there have been frequent news reports of people suffering from
heat waves and smog in cities in southern Canada. This was the case during the summer
of 2005 (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) News, 2005). Based on historical
records, “hot days” (temperatures equal to or above 30°C) occur with some regularity in
most parts of southern Canada. On a regional basis, the highest number of hot days tends
to occur in southern Ontario and southern Quebec, although such events can also occur
in Prairie cities and interior British Columbia. Table 8.3 illustrates the regional pattern
of hot days and the significant increase in observed temperatures in 2002 compared
with the historical norm (1961–91). In early August 2002, a hot spell broke all records
across the eastern Prairies; Winnipeg had 10 hot days, including seven in a row; Regina
had 11 in a row; and Val Marie had 16 consecutive days above 30°C.
Table 8.3
Observed number of above normal “hot days” (temperatures equal
to or above 30°C) for selected cities across Canada, 2002
Chapter 8
Observed
0
10
17
23
34
20
14
7
Location
Vancouver
Calgary
Saskatoon
London
Toronto
Ottawa
Montreal
Moncton
Normal
N/A
5
12
9
14
11
10
5
Source: Environment Canada, 2002.
Although there are uncertainties associated with climate change scenarios, there is a fairly high
confidence level regarding temperature projections. IPCC indicates that it is very likely that hot
extremes and heat waves will continue to become more frequent (IPCC, 2007b). A recent study
by Cheng et al. (2005) estimated that the number of days in south-central Canada with 3:00 p.m.
temperatures ≥30°C could more
than double by 2050 and triple
(in some cases even quadruple)
by 2080. Even larger increases
have been estimated for other
cities across the country by 2050.
Figure 8.6 shows the current
and projected number of hot
days above 30°C for selected
cities across Canada. Exposure
to extreme heat events associated
with climate change is expected
to grow considerably in the future,
entailing greater health risks
for large numbers of Canadians
living in major urban centres.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
409
Figure 8.6 Current and projected number of hot days above 30°C for selected
cities across Canada
Chapter 8
Source: Hengeveld et al., 2005.
8.7.4
Increasing Population
In the absence of increased adaptation actions, exposure to climate-related health risks will
increase as Canada’s population grows over the next 50 years. The population of Canada in 2004
was just under 32 million people, with almost 80% of Canadians living in urban communities
(Statistics Canada, 2006). From 1991 to 2006 urban populations increased by 21% in Canada,
while rural populations decreased by 2% (Government of Canada, 2007). Figure 8.7 shows
the change in rural and urban populations in Canada from 1991 to 2006.
Figure 8.7 Total, urban and rural population, Canada, 1991 to 2006
35 000 000
30 000 000
25 000 000
20 000 000
15 000 000
10 000 000
5 000 000
0
1991
1996
2001
2006
Total population
Urban population
Rural population
Population
Source: Government of Canada, 2007.
Under a medium-growth scenario, the population could exceed 40 million by the late 2030s, with
the trend toward greater urbanization continuing. In this scenario, it would rise to 39 million
in 2031 and around 42.5 million by 2056 (Statistics Canada, 2005c). More people living in large
urban centres could increase exposure to specific risks to health, such as those related to more
intense urban heat.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
410
8.8
POPULATION SENSITIVITY
Gaps in the capacity to protect human health from climate change are also of concern if large
segments of the population display high sensitivity to these impacts. High sensitivity implies
a greater vulnerability of individuals and communities to the impacts of climate change on
health. Increased adaptive efforts to reduce health risks are required in this context.
All Canadians display sensitivity to some health impacts arising from climate change. Natural
disasters, extreme heat, air pollution, and water-, food-, vector- and rodent-borne diseases, all
of which can be exacerbated by climate change, can affect the health of every Canadian and
people living in all regions of the country. However, specific population groups, such as infants
and children, seniors and those with pre-existing health conditions, can be more severely
affected because of their particular physiological characteristics (Health Canada, 2005a).
Sensitivity also depends on the magnitude of the threat posed by the environmental change.
Some people may not be sensitive to mild changes in the environment, but are very sensitive
to severe and repetitive climatic events (Health Canada, 2005a). Sensitivity is also closely
related to exposure; if an individual is frequently exposed, his or her underlying sensitivity
may be exacerbated. This section reviews evidence of the sensitivity of key groups within
our population and examines projections of increases in these population groups, where data
permit.24 The distribution of these populations throughout Canada, along with the various
attributes that underlie vulnerability, can vary widely. Future investigation of the distribution
and characteristics of highly sensitive populations at regional and community levels will
help to reduce climate-related health risks across Canada.
8.8.1
Seniors
Populations considered highly sensitive to climate change health impacts currently make
up a significant portion of the Canadian population. Canadian seniors (age 65 and over)
constituted 13% of the total population in 2005 (Statistics Canada, 2007). This group has
been shown to be more sensitive than the general population to vector-borne diseases
(Health Canada, 2005a), water- and food-borne contamination (Health Canada, 2005b),
air pollution (Health Canada, 2003b) and heat waves (Kovats and Jendritzky, 2006; IPCC,
2007a). Many of the factors that increase sensitivity to heat waves are more pronounced
in this population cohort. Risk factors for heat-related deaths and illnesses relate to (Kovats
and Koppe, 2005):
• age;
• pre-existing disease—primarily chronic respiratory or cardiovascular disease;
• social factors (e.g. living alone);
• use of certain drugs (e.g. phenothiazines, antidepressants, alcohol, diuretics);
• impaired cognition (e.g. dementia);
• housing (e.g. building type, living on high floors);
• presence and use of air conditioning in the home or residential institution; and
• physical activity—over-exertion or inactivity.
During the 2003 extreme heat event in Europe, 70% of the 14,800 excess deaths in France
were persons over 75 years of age (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, 2004).
Chapter 8
24 See Chapter 7, Health Impacts of Climate Change in Canada’s North, for a discussion of factors underlying the sensitivity
and vulnerability of Aboriginal Canadians living in the North to the health impacts of climate change. Analysis of socially
disadvantaged, disabled and immigrant populations in Canada was not conducted in this chapter and is left to further assessments.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
411
Seniors constitute the fastest growing population group in Canada. Population projections
show that population aging, which has already begun, will accelerate in 2011 when
the first baby-boom cohort (born in 1946) reaches the age of 65. This rapid aging is projected
to last until 2031, when seniors would account for between 23 and 25% of the total
population—between 8.9 and 9.4 million people (Statistics Canada, 2007). Figure 8.8 shows
the senior population by age groups, as a percentage of the total population in Canada,
1921–2041. The fastest growth is occurring among the oldest Canadians. In 2001, over
430,000 Canadians were 85 years of age or older—more than twice as many as in 1981
and more than 20 times as many as in 1921 (Health Canada, 2002a). The number of Canadians
aged 85 plus will nearly double from 500,000 in 2006 to approximately 900,000 in 2026
(Statistics Canada, 2007).
Figure 8.8 Seniors by age groups, as % of the total population, Canada 1921–2041
Chapter 8
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
85+
75–84
65–74
2041
2031
2021
2011
2001
1991
1981
1971
1961
1951
1941
1931
1921
Year
Source: Government of Canada, 2002.
In 2003, Canadians made over 14 million visits to emergency departments in Canada. Such
visits were highest for the very young and for the very old; for those over 85 years of age,
44% visited an emergency department in Ontario in 2003–04 (CIHI, 2005). In 2003, seniors
accounted for a third of all acute care hospitalizations and almost 50% of all hospital days
(Rotermann, 2006). Expected increases in illnesses and deaths due to the effects of climate
change will place increasing pressure on the capacity of current facilities, such as hospitals,
shelters and care facilities (Institute for Population Health, 2002; Carty et al., 2004; Riedel,
2004). For example, in the U.S., even with heat alert systems in place, more frequent
extreme heat events are expected to increase the demand for emergency medical services and
visits to emergency room facilities (U.S. EPA et al., 2006). Given projections for increased
extreme heat events in Canadian cities, similar pressures on health and emergency services
in Canadian communities can be expected as well.
8.8.2
Children
The environmental health field usually considers “children” to cover the period from the time
of conception up to 19 years of age. This period includes defined stages during which
key vulnerabilities and sensitivities are related to developmental and/or behavioural stages.
Young children and developing fetuses display higher sensitivity to the many health impacts
of climate variability and change (e.g. heat stress, respiratory illnesses from air pollution,
water-borne diseases) because of their hand-to-mouth behaviour, proximity to the ground
(where dirt and pathogens are concentrated), relatively high intake of air, water and certain
foods, high surface area-to-body mass ratio, and the potential for high cumulative exposures
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
412
over their long life expectancy (Carty et al., 2004; Health Canada, 2005b). Children
age 4 and under constituted 5.3% of the Canadian population in 2005, or almost 1.8 million people
(Statistics Canada, 2005c). However, by 2031 children under 4 years old are expected to
decrease to 4.6% of the popu-
lation (Statistics Canada, 2005c).
It is also important to note that
the proportion of children can
vary significantly in different
population groups. For example,
children under 14 years old repre-
sent one third of the Aboriginal
population compared to 19% in
the non-Aboriginal population
(Statistics Canada, 2003a).
This can influence the type and
delivery of programs that may
be needed to protect children
from climate-related hazards.
It is important to identify how childhood exposures can affect adult health; some effects
may not be immediate and may manifest themselves only later in life. For example, the
effect of exposure to UV radiation is cumulative; studies indicate that people who have
suffered severe and frequent sunburns during childhood are at greater risk of developing
melanoma later in life (Health Canada, 2006c). Prevention of children’s exposure to
climate-related environmental hazards may help alleviate future health care costs for adult
and aging populations.
Children often depend on societal measures and parental protection to prevent exposure to
climate risks. Because children, and infants in particular, must rely on the protection of parents
and/or caregivers, the latter must be aware of the health risks and measures available
to reduce them. Older children must also be made aware of appropriate protective practices
so that they can protect themselves.
8.8.3
People with Pre-existing Illnesses
People who are chronically ill may be more sensitive to water-, food-, vector-, and
rodent-borne diseases, smog and extreme heat events (Health Canada, 2005a). Chronic
diseases that increase the sensitivity of individuals include cancer, cardiovascular
disease (heart disease and stroke), mental illness, diabetes, asthma and chronic obstructive
lung disease.
Chronic diseases are among the most common and costly health problems facing Canadians
(PHAC, 2007c). In 2003, 5.7% of all Canadian adults, and nearly one in four people
over 70 years of age, reported having heart problems (Heart and Stroke Foundation of
Canada, 2003). The prevalence of diabetes among adult Canadians in 2000 was 5.1%
(Health Canada, 2003c). In 2001, 5 serious respiratory diseases (asthma, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, lung cancer, tuberculosis and cystic fibrosis) affected
approximately 3 million Canadians, or 10% of the population (CIHI, 2006a). Asthma
alone afflicted 8.5% of Canadians 12 years of age and over in 2003 (Statistics Canada,
2005a). Many chronic diseases are more prevalent in people age 65 and older in Canada,
and a number of Canadians may suffer from more than one chronic disease at a time.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
413
However, younger Canadians also suffer from chronic diseases which contributes to
the number of individuals sensitive to the impacts of climate variability and change.
For example, while 13% of seniors (65 years and older) had diabetes in 2000, 9% of
people 55 to 64 years of age and 4% of people 45 to 54 years of age also had this disease
(Statistics Canada, 2007).
Since many respiratory diseases affect adults over the age of 65, the number of people
with these conditions will increase as the population ages. The prevalence of self-reported
asthma is increasing (Statistics Canada, 2007). The number of deaths and, by proxy,
the number of Canadians with cardiovascular disease, will also likely increase as the
population ages. Canadians run a high risk of developing cardiovascular diseases:
8 out of 10 individuals have at least one of the following risk factors: smoking, physical
inactivity, being overweight, high blood pressure or diabetes.25 One in 10 has three or
more. Thus, the burden of cardiovascular disease will continue for many more years.
Cancer is expected to be the leading cause of death in Canada in the next several years.
The number of people to be diagnosed with cancer is expected to double between 2004
and 2020 as Canada’s population grows and ages (Health Canada, 2004c). The reduction
in smoking among Canadians over the last quarter century has resulted in important
reductions in lung cancer
in men, but insignificant
time has elapsed for lung
cancer rates to begin
to decline in women. An
improvement in dietary
behaviours—Canadians
are eating more fruits
and vegetables—may have
led to a decrease in cancers
of the gastrointestinal tract.
However, rates of obesity
are increasing among
Canadians (Statistics Canada,
2007) and this is contributing
to increases in other cancers
(Health Canada, 2004c).
The impact of extreme weather and climate variability on the quality of life of people
living with chronic diseases is not yet well defined. Research is needed to better understand
the effects of climate change on some of these diseases and the public health measures
and medical treatments that are available to reduce the impacts on health. Decision makers
responsible for setting standards and practices in care facilities and hospitals will not
only have to plan for demographic changes and the incidence of these diseases, but also
account for climatic factors that may exacerbate symptoms or even cause illnesses
within populations.
Chapter 8
25 A recent study of diabetes rates in Ontario suggested that the percentage of people with this disease is growing more rapidly
than expected. About 8.8% of Ontarians over age 20 had diabetes in 2005-above the rate of 8.4% that the WHO forecasted
for 2030 in industrialized countries such as Canada (CBC News, 2007).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
414
8.9
KEY FINDINGS: THE VULNERABILITY OF CANADIANS
Canadians are currently vulnerable to climate-related health risks.
The analysis in this chapter suggests that Canadians are vulnerable to climate-related health
risks. This is due to the sensitivity of groups within the population, widespread exposure
to climate-related hazards, and gaps in existing adaptations and abilities to cope with
the risks. With respect to natural hazards, Canada has become more vulnerable because
of population growth, urbanization, an aging population and infrastructure, increasing
environmental degradation and over-reliance on technologies (Environment Canada, 2003).
As Etkin et al. (2004, p. i) pointed out, “Canadians are more vulnerable to natural disasters
than they could or should be.”
The combined effects of projected health, demographic and climate trends in Canada
are expected to increase the vulnerability of Canadians in the future to climate-related
health risks in the absence of effective adaptations.
As Canada’s population grows and as climate change expands the geographical range,
frequency and intensity of weather and climate-related hazards, individuals will increasingly
be exposed to heat waves, smog episodes, storms, floods, and water-, food-, vector- and
rodent-borne diseases. In addition, expected population growth and chronic disease trends
indicate that the proportion of Canadians highly sensitive to the health risks of climate
change will grow over the coming decades, although this may vary according to region.
The number of Canadian seniors is growing dramatically. This population cohort is expected
to almost double in size by 2031. The number of Canadians suffering from chronic illnesses
such as heart disease, cancer and respiratory diseases is also on the rise. Consequently, more
illnesses and deaths related to climate change can be expected in the absence of expanded
and improved adaptations.
Climate change impacts on the health of Canadians will increase pressures on health
and social services if effective adaptations are not developed and implemented.
Climate change impacts that arise out of existing vulnerabilities are expected to test the
complex of infrastructures underpinning the delivery of health care and public health
services in Canada (Institute
for Population Health, 2002;
Lemmen and Warren, 2004;
Carty et al., 2004). Without
effective adaptations, the
costs of climate change will
extend beyond the direct
health impacts (e.g. increased
incidence of illness, injury,
and death) to include economic
costs to health care and social
systems (Institute for Population
Health, 2002).26
Chapter 8
26 In 2003, total health expenditure in Canada was $123 billion (current dollars) or $3,884 per Canadian (Statistics
Canada, 2005b).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
415
8.10 ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE HEALTH RISKS
AND VULNERABILITIES
“Without adaptation, a wide range of health impacts can be expected with the projected
changes in temperature and precipitation, including deaths, diseases, and injuries
caused by changes in the distribution of disease vectors and possible increases in
extreme weather events such as droughts and cyclones” (Pachauri, 2005, p. xxii).
The primary objective of adaptation in the public health context is to reduce the burden
of disease, injuries, disabilities, suffering and deaths (Grambsch and Menne, 2003). The
preferred measures for adapting to impacts on health will be based on recognized public
health strategies (Gosselin, 2004). Canada is already engaged in many adaptive actions to
reduce the risks associated with current climate variability and extremes, some with greater
success than others.
To a great extent, protecting Canadians from climate change will not entail the develop-
ment of new programs. It will require revising, reorienting or strengthening current
public health policies and practices to make them more effective and to target particularly
vulnerable populations (McMichael et. al., 2003). Many of the actions that are being
taken now to protect Canadians from health risks associated with air pollution (e.g. smog
alerts), poor water quality (e.g. boil water advisories), infectious diseases (e.g. monitoring
and surveillance), extreme weather events (e.g. preparedness and planning) and heat
waves (e.g. “cooling off” locations) provide the basis for planning for climate change
(Berry, 2005).
Adaptation strategies to reduce the health risks associated with climate change can have
significant near- and long-term “co-benefits.” Many adaptation actions reduce risks to
Canadians posed by air and water pollution, infectious disease outbreaks and disasters
that are not related to climate change and climate variability. In this sense, they can be
considered “no-regrets” actions (Scheraga et al., 2003). For example, improved emergency
management at the community level by using an all-hazards approach could help reduce
health risks from toxic spills, terrorist attacks and earthquakes, in addition to those associated
with extreme weather events. Similarly, preventative health measures to reduce respiratory
illnesses associated with air pollution by using traffic restrictions and the development of
active transportation infrastructure (e.g. bicycle paths, walking paths) can convey substantial
health benefits to citizens due to less traffic congestion, more physically fit individuals
and improved quality of life (Health Canada, 2005b). It is also generally acknowledged
that specific adaptation measures may ultimately provide significant economic benefits
for communities and governments. Relatively modest investments in disaster mitigation
activities (e.g. warning systems) can help prevent deaths, widespread suffering, and the
huge economic costs associated with disaster response and relief operations (International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2002).
On the other hand, current or planned policies and programs to reduce risks related to climate
change may be “maladaptive” when they fail to reduce targeted risks or when they create
new risks. For example, during the 1998 Ice Storm in eastern Canada, only four of a total of
28 deaths were from hypothermia; the other 24 were from carbon monoxide poisoning or
injuries related to the indoor use of open flames, barbecues, or propane or kerosene heaters.
Current policies could be contributing to increasing risks because they are not designed to
deal with changing conditions and circumstances brought about by climate change (Barg and
Swanson, 2005). It is important to gauge the effectiveness of current measures and identify
where risks can arise from maladaptation.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
416
Adaptation strategies may complement existing efforts to reduce GHG emissions aimed
at addressing climate change (IPCC, 2007a). For example, changes in urban planning and
building design to reduce the urban heat island effect (e.g. planting of trees, arcades and
narrow streets) can prevent buildings from warming up and contribute to comfortable indoor
living environments while simultaneously lowering GHG emissions through the reduced
need for air conditioning (Koppe et al., 2004). Conversely, ancillary environmental and
human health benefits, such as reduced local air pollution (especially fine particulate matter)
and corresponding decreases in respiratory illnesses can arise from appropriately planned
GHG reduction measures (Adger et al., 2005).27 Both adaptation and GHG mitigation actions
need to be employed to address climate change impacts (European Environment Agency,
2006; IPCC, 2007a).
8.10.1 Proactive Adaptation
Planning for the unexpected is one of the largest challenges posed by climate change.
Adaptation to climate change health risks needs to be proactive and not reactive to prevent
the largest potential impacts (WHO, 2002; Gosselin, 2004; IPCC, 2007a). The most
effective and cost-efficient adaptation responses will generally be planned ahead of time
rather than developed on an ad hoc basis without an integrated and comprehensive
approach (Roberts et al., 2006). The precautionary principle (Lambert et al., 2003) should
be used to guide the development of vulnerability assessments and adaptive public health
strategies.28 The implementation of early warning systems in anticipation of increased
risks to human health from climate-related hazards is an example of application of the
precautionary principle (Ebi, 2005).
There is general agreement among researchers about the types of measures needed to
either improve the way current risks to health are addressed, or to plan for what a changing
climate may bring. These types of measures are targeted toward both governmental
and non-governmental organizations. Practical experience has shown that a combination
of primary, secondary and tertiary preventative public health measures is needed to deal
effectively with climate-related health risks. Types of measures include:
• surveillance and monitoring
• public education and outreach
• legislation
• infrastructure development
• technological and engineering innovations
• medical interventions
All types of preventative measures are needed to effectively reduce the health risks associated
with climate change. However, secondary and tertiary prevention measures are both, in general,
less effective than primary prevention measures and can be more expensive in the long-term
(Kovats et al., 2003; The Sheltair Group, 2003).
Chapter 8
27 The Canadian Public Health Association has called for measures to reduce GHG emissions and to address the health impacts
of current energy use in Canada (CPHA, 2001c).
28 Health Canada defines the precautionary principle as “Where there are reasonable grounds to believe that exposure to an agent
may cause serious or irreversible damage to human health, take cost-effective precautionary measures, even if some cause and
effect relationships are not fully established scientifically. Where possible, strive to anticipate and prevent health risks rather
than merely to control those that already exist” (Health Canada, 2000, p. 8).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
417
Figure 8.9 Preventive approach to adaptation
Source: Adapted from Séguin et al. 2005.
A preventative approach (Figure 8.9) requires a sound understanding of the health risks
associated with the physical and ecosystem changes related to climate change. It also
requires risk-based decision support tools, a clear understanding of roles and responsibilities
for adaptation, and an understanding of possible adaptation measures. Communities and regions
will need to conduct their own investigations of existing vulnerabilities to health risks to
identify where additional capacity is needed.29 Vulnerability is often context specific as the
conditions that interact to shape exposures, sensitivities and adaptive capacities vary among
communities (Smit and Wandel, 2006). Regions and communities in Canada may have significant
differences with respect to the location and size of vulnerable groups. For example, effective
emergency management requires that officials have updated information about the location
and number of vulnerable populations—children, seniors, people with disabilities and chronic
illnesses, the socially disadvantaged—within their communities, along with knowledge of their
special needs and priorities (Murphy et al., 2005).
Chapter 8
29 Some communities or provinces have undertaken, or are in the process of undertaking, climate change impacts and adaptation
assessments that include discussion about risks to human health. For example, an assessment has been conducted for Nova
Scotia (DeRomilly and DeRomilly Limited et al., 2005), British Columbia (B.C. Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection,
2002), the City of Vancouver (The Sheltair Group, 2003), the City of Hamilton (Ormond, 2004) and the City of Toronto
(Ligeti et al., 2006). Most of the reports focus more on expected impacts and provide a less detailed analysis of vulnerabilities
resulting from limits to adaptive capacity.
Reduce Exposure
Monitor/intervene
Diagnose/Treat
Impacts on
determinants of health,
Personal health practices
Employment/working
conditions
Health & social services
Social networks
Culture
Physical environment
Impacts on health
Temperature-related
illnesses
Vector-borne illnesses
Water and food-borne
illnesses
Air pollution health effects
Injuries and psychological
effects due to natural
hazards
PRIMARY PREVENTION
Actions taken to prevent and/or
reduce human exposure to
hazards*
(e.g. planting of shade trees and
use of green roofs to reduce
exposure to extreme heat;
elimination of mosquito breeding
sites)
SECONDARY PREVENTION
Actions taken to detect early
evidence of changes in health
risk or status, followed by
specific targeted action
(e.g. infectious disease
surveillance to detect outbreaks
at an early stage, and appropriate
outbreak response measures;
heat response plans).
TERTIARY PREVENTION
Actions taken to lessen
morbidity or mortality
caused by existing
diseases
(e.g. treating heat-related
illnesses or infectious
disease cases)
Natural environment
Built environment
Social environment
Impacts on:
CLIMATE
CHANGE
*reduction of GHG levels (mitigation) has also been termed “primordial prevention”, or eliminating the risk itself, whereas primary prevention reduces exposure to
the risk
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
418
Authorities in the health and emer-
gency management sectors would
greatly benefit from information
derived from regional- and
community-level assessments of
vulnerability. These assessments
would identify the effectiveness
of key adaptation efforts currently
in place in their jurisdictions.
Such assessments should examine
existing socio-economic and
climate conditions, and those
projected in the future, and
develop linkages to current health
impacts from which to develop
adaptation strategies. They would
also identify gaps that need to be
addressed. Participatory impact and adaptation assessment approaches are useful for these
purposes (Kovats et al., 2003; Brooks and Adger, 2004).30 To support such activities, the next
sections identify current roles and responsibilities for managing climate-related health risks
in Canada and provide a list of possible adaptation options for public health officials to use
to address existing health vulnerabilities to climate change.
8.10.2 Roles and Responsibilities for Adaptation in Canada
Many climate impact and vulnerability studies highlight lists of adaptation options but fail
to investigate key decision-making processes. An important element of these processes is
defining roles and responsibilities for adaptation (Grambsch and Menne, 2003). In Canada,
different levels of government, including federal, provincial, territorial and municipal
authorities, share the responsibility for the delivery of public health, health care and emergency
social services. The allocation of responsibility for specific issues can differ significantly
from one region or province/territory in Canada to another.
Municipal-level governments play a central role in reducing climate-related health risks,
given their roles in providing police services, fire and ambulance services, local public
health and social services, and community emergency preparedness and planning. Most
emergencies in Canada are local in nature and are managed by the municipalities, or
at the provincial or territorial level (PSEPC, 2006). Many municipalities are expanding
their roles in these areas; however, some adaptations, such as emergency management
initiatives, require that municipalities be provided with financial support, information
and technical support from higher levels of government (Institute for Catastrophic
Loss Reduction (ICLR) and Emergency Preparedness Canada (EPC), 1998).
Table 8.4 summarizes the key activities performed by various organizations and governments
in relation to climate change health issues. Significant differences exist regarding the
division of responsibilities among the federal government, provinces, territories and munici-
palities, so the table is illustrative in nature; some jurisdictions may not be responsible
for all, or even many, of the activities listed under each health issue.31
Chapter 8
30 See Methods of Assessing Human Health Vulnerability and Public Health Adaptation to Climate Change (Kovats et al., 2003)
for guidance on conducting assessments. Also see Chapter 2, Assessment Methods, for more information about the strengths
and limitations of the methods and tools used in this Assessment.
31 For a more detailed listing of roles and responsibilities between provinces and municipalities with regard to infectious
diseases, food safety and drinking water issues, see Health Canada, 2006d.
Filling sandbags to combat Winnipeg’s
Red River Flood, 1997
Photo Credits: City of Winnipeg, Manitoba
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
419
Table 8.4
Roles and responsibilities for health adaptation in Canada
Chapter 8
Role
• Operation and safety of city water supplies including water testing,
water treatment, water delivery and storm-water management
• Drinking water quality standards and drinking water quality objectives
• Sewer systems
• Publish educational and advisory information on water quality
• Advise on issuing boil water advisories
• Develop and enforce all legislation pertaining to municipal and
public water supplies, including their construction and operation
• Advise on policies, regulations and protocols regarding water
quality inspections
• Conduct inspections of municipal drinking water systems and
laboratories that test drinking water
• Water quality testing laboratories
• Draft emergency response planning regarding water supplies
• Water quality standards and watershed management
• Approving designated areas for water treatment plants
• Well water safety
• Implementation of national guidelines for drinking water safety
• Research on threats to drinking water and development of a
recommended set of national guidelines for drinking water safety
• Public health inspections of food preparation and serving premises
including food-processing plants, special events, retail food
stores, mobile canteens
• Investigate food-borne illness outbreaks
• Issue permits to all food-handling establishments
• Enforcement and education and training of food-handling staff
• Respond to complaints made by the public
• Review and approve building plans for new food-service
establishments
• Engage in food safety awareness activities to reduce health risks
from food-borne diseases
• Food and safety quality regulations and legislation to ensure
safety of food (e.g. toxic substances) including apiculture
(bees and pollination), farming, livestock, pesticides, pest
management and plant health
• Register, licence and/or issue permits to food-handling
establishments
• Food protection, preparation and distribution programs
• Animal health programs
• Inspect food-processing establishments and milk plants
• Education and training of food-handling staff and industry
associations
• Investigate and respond to complaints made by the public
• Review and approve building plans for new food-service
establishments
• Investigate food-borne illnesses and outbreaks
• Provide food safety information to the public
• Note: Some provinces, such as Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and
Newfoundland and Labrador, assume responsibility for all aspects
for food safety and employ public health inspectors in this regard
Jurisdiction
Municipalities
Provinces/Territories
Federal Government
Municipalities
Provinces/Territories
Health Issue
Drinking Water
Quality
Food Safety
Continued on next page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
420
Chapter 8
Role
• Protect human health and the environment by minimizing the
risks associated with pest control products
• Set the safe residue levels for pesticides in food
• Establish policies and set standards regarding the safety and
nutritional value of food
• Evaluate the safety, quality and effectiveness of veterinary drugs
• Promote the nutritional health and well-being of Canadians
• Protect the food supply from food contamination
• Surveillance of communicable disease transmission at the
community level
• Disease prevention and control
• Hospital treatment
• Community-based residential, home health and public health
services related to infectious disease control
• Public education and awareness (e.g. West Nile virus, Lyme disease)
• Public health interventions such as vaccination and screening
programs, travel health
• Emergency or pandemic planning
• Regional disease monitoring and surveillance activities through
public health laboratories
• Notifiable disease management guidelines
• Collect, compile, analyze and publish statistics on disease incidence
• Inspect waste management facilities, accommodations, workplaces,
food-processing plants and various public areas
• Laboratory services for detection and assessment of illness
• Prevention and control
• Nursing certification
• Public and clinical education
• Research and disease surveillance activities
• Outreach and coordination with international partners (e.g. World
Health Organization)
• Quarantine, travel medicine and migration health programs
• Smog advisory systems and heat alert systems*
• Long-term clean air and/or climate change plans that are aimed
at reducing air pollution and emissions of GHGs
• Air quality monitoring and forecasting (e.g. air quality indices)
to inform city health officials and Canadians
• Temperature forecasts
• Home, community and residential care for seniors who are
particularly vulnerable to health risks from heat waves
• Initiatives, including regulations, to improve air quality from both
domestic and trans-boundary sources, such as transportation
(e.g. vehicle inspection and maintenance programs), electricity
generation and industrial point sources
Federal Government
Municipalities
Provinces/Territories
Federal Government
Municipalities
Provinces/Territories
Jurisdiction
Health Issue
Infectious Diseases
Air Pollution and
Heat Waves
Continued from previous page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
421
Chapter 8
Role
• Scientific monitoring and technical advice for development
of air quality indices and heat advisories
• Air quality and temperature forecasting for smog episodes
and heat alerts (e.g. humidex advisories)†
• Initiatives, including regulations, to improve air quality from
both domestic and trans-boundary sources, such as transportation,
electricity generation and industrial point sources (e.g. low
sulphur in gasoline and diesel fuels, Canada-United States
Air Quality Agreement)
• Pollution prevention plans for major emitters (e.g. base-metal
smelters)
• Prepare and implement community emergency management plans
including hazard identification and risk assessment
• Health emergency services including expert medical and public
health advice, management of actual or potential communicable
disease outbreaks, monitoring of evacuation centres, maintaining
food safety and sanitation for the community, offering counselling
for stress and coping problems, assisting with emergency dental
treatment, helping people with special needs, and checking the
environment to make sure the air, soil and water is safe
• Community design activities (e.g. land-use planning and zoning)
to reduce vulnerability to hazards
• Emergency management legislation that supports local authorities
in developing comprehensive emergency management systems
that include prevention and mitigation, preparedness, response
and recovery activities. It also gives local authorities special
powers to prevent or limit loss of life and damage to property
or the environment during a state of local emergency
• Conduct environmental assessments, environmental protection
and management, infrastructure upgrading and community
growth management
• Forecast trends in natural hazard frequency
• Monitor outbreaks and global disease events
• Assess public health risks during emergencies
• Work toward enhancing public safety and security for Canadians
in collaboration with other levels of government, community
organizations and international health and security agencies
• Implement federal public health rules governing laboratory
safety and security, quarantine and similar issues
• Bioterrorism detection, emergency health services and emergency
response
• Develop and implement federal and national emergency
management policies, response systems and standards, including
alerting the public in cooperation with provinces and territories
• Work with provincial and territorial emergency management
organizations to provide first responders with funds, tools
and training
Federal Government
Municipalities
Provinces/Territories
Federal Government
Jurisdiction
Health Issue
Natural Hazards
Continued on next page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
422
Chapter 8
Role
• Health promotion activities that contribute to reducing health
risks from climate variability and change (e.g. safe living
environments, immunization information, safe food preparation,
active living, etc)
• Undertake, or provide support for, continued training and
education of health professionals
• Initiatives to reduce GHGs
• Facilitate local and municipal strategies to improve the
health and well-being of Canadians living in their respective
jurisdictions
• Develop policies and strategies to focus on priority health areas
of concern (e.g. water quality)
• Deliver health care services
• Health promotion activities that contribute to reducing health
risks from climate variability and change (e.g. safe living
environments, immunization information, safe food preparation,
active living, etc)
• Undertake, or provide support for, continued training and
education of health professionals
• Initiatives to reduce GHGs
• National leadership for many important health issues
(e.g. West Nile virus) and collaboration with international
partners in efforts to protect the health of Canadians
• Facilitate the development and implementation of federal/
provincial initiatives (e.g. health emergency management)
• Conduct intramural research and analysis about health risks
and trends (e.g. human health risk assessments), develop and
publish health indicators (e.g. economic burden of illness
in Canada) and provide scientific and technical expertise to
provinces, municipalities and health professionals (e.g. air
pollution health effects)
• Existing collaborative arrangements, such as the federal/
provincial/territorial Committee on Health and the Environment,
enhance coordination among all levels of government, ensure
optimal knowledge transfer and systematic flow of scientific and
policy information that cascades from federal to provincial to
local government levels
• Health promotion activities that can contribute to reducing
health risks from climate variability and change (e.g. safe living
environments, immunization information, safe food preparation,
active living, etc)
• Undertake, or provide support for, continued training and education
of health professionals
• Initiatives to reduce GHGs
Municipalities
Provinces/Territories
Federal Government
Jurisdiction
Health Issue
Cross-Cutting
Continued from previous page
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
423
Chapter 8
Role
• Provide a wide range of health and social services to Canadians
• Emergency management programs which provide information
and emergency social services, such as clothing, shelter,
tracing and reunification services, and emotional support for
affected communities
• Disaster relief and mitigation through information exchange and
public awareness to change behaviour, education and training,
access to health care delivery and personal support, research
and policy development, and data collection for operational and
policy planning
• Help people with special needs access health services, such as
dialysis, chemotherapy and respiratory aids, street youth services,
assistance for homeless individuals, palliative care, services for
the mentally and physically challenged, safe houses for women and
children, meal services for seniors and community health centres
(provide primary and health promotion services in communities)
• Preventative measures to reduce the health risks from climate
extremes and change (e.g. personal health practices such as
reducing exposure to UV radiation, safe food preparation, correct
hand washing, safe-driving practices, emergency preparedness
plans and kits, etc)
• Stay informed of important risks to health (e.g. severe weather
warnings) and of measures that should be taken to protect health
• Reduce GHG emissions
• Testing of water quality in wells and private systems
• Initiatives and programs to adapt to climate change impacts that
directly or indirectly impinge on the health and well-being of
a population (e.g. transportation, agriculture, industry, tourism,
forestry, urban planning, insurance, etc)
• Reduce GHG emissions
Jurisdiction
Health Issue
Non-Governmental
Organizations
Individuals
Other Sectors
Notes: Responsibility for a number of public health issues in many provinces is delegated to regional-level
authorities or groups that often service more that one community. For example, the province of Ontario
had 36 public health units and the province of Alberta had nine regional health authorities at the time of
writing. Roles and responsibilities of this kind are covered under “Municipalities” in the “Jurisdiction”
column of the table.
* Some communities in Canada have undertaken such activities, although they have no formal
mandate to do so.
† Environment Canada issues humidex advisories not as weather warnings but as “Special Weather
Statements” (Environment Canada, 2006).
Source: Adapted from Philpot, 2006.
8.10.3 Adaptation Strategy Development and Implementation
Knowledge about processes of adaptation from the fields of risk management, natural hazards
research, and resource development and planning is available to inform adaptation planning
and vulnerability reduction (Smit and Pilifosova, 2001). Researchers have developed numerous
tools and approaches for assessing adaptation options. Some Canadian communities have also
developed general adaptation guides (Halifax Regional Municipality, 2006; Mehdi et al., 2006).
The Government of Canada, through Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada, has
developed a tool, Community-wide Vulnerability and Capacity Assessment, for carrying out a
vulnerability and capacity assessment at the community level (Kuban and MacKenzie-Carey,
2001). Figure 8.10 presents a framework for describing the process of developing an adaptation
strategy to reduce climate-related health risks.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
424
Figure 8.10
Framework for adaptation development and implementation
in the health sector
Source: Adapted from Penney and Wieditz, 2007.
The framework corresponds broadly to the key steps of standard risk management frameworks
that are employed in the health sector.32 Basic steps include early engagement of stakeholders,
assessing risks to health, identifying and implementing adaptation options, and monitoring and
evaluating the results. A number of important considerations that are described below need
to be taken into account when implementing this framework to develop effective adaptation
measures to protect populations from health risks related to climate change.
8.10.3.1 Considerations for strategy development and implementation
Local and regional approaches
Smit and Wandel (2006, p. 283) indicated, “Practical initiatives that tangibly address and
improve societal adaptive capacity, thereby reducing vulnerability, are commonly expected to be
evident at the community scale.” Therefore, efforts to develop needed adaptations to health
risks associated with climate change must be tailored to the specific needs of a community
or region to be successful in reducing existing vulnerabilities. In this regard, considerations
of how quickly the risk must be addressed, the expected costs of adaptations, risks versus
benefits of actions, and the perceptions, concerns and values of interested and affected parties
(Health Canada, 2000) need to be addressed by decision makers.
Initiatives to reduce risks in urban communities (e.g. heat alerts) may not be effective public
health interventions for protecting people who live in rural communities. For example, many
rural communities in Canada do not have public transportation to allow people to easily get
to cooling centres (if they exist) to escape extreme heat. These communities also often have
a much smaller infrastructure of helping agencies (e.g. food banks) to provide assistance
during extreme events (A. Berry, pers. comm., November 15, 2006).
Smaller communities may face specific challenges in preparing for and managing emergencies.
Training and certification of community officials can be problematic if they are required to travel
to colleges in distant large urban centres at their own personal cost. As well, many rural
Chapter 8
Awareness and
Engagement
of Stakeholders
Involve
Interested
and Affected
Parties
Establishment
of Institutional
Mechanisms
Assess
Climate-Related
Health
Vulnerabilities
Identification
of Adaptation
Options
Monitoring
and Evaluating
Results
Formulation of
Policies/Modification
of Existing Policies
Review
Effectiveness of
Existing Policies
and Programs
Incorporation
of Adaptation
into Projects
32 See, for example, Health Canada Decision-making Framework for Identifying, Assessing and Managing Health Risks (Health
Canada, 2000).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
425
communities in some parts of Canada have become popular tourist destinations during the
summer season, leading to a large influx of people at these times. For example, the community
of Bayfield, Ontario, can see its population increase tenfold during the summer months from
a permanent residency of 900 people. Emergencies during this period have the potential to
overwhelm health and social services, creating significant planning challenges (A. Berry,
pers. comm., November 15, 2006).
Multi-sectoral approach
The development of effective adaptations to climate change health risks often requires a
multi-sectoral approach to planning and policy development. Protecting the health of Canadians
requires effective adaptations by a range of sectors such as transportation, tourism and recreation,
fisheries, forestry, agriculture, industry and energy, and municipalities. “Education and engagement
of stakeholders has a primary role to play in establishing a foundation to build equitable and
sustainable strategies for adapting to climate change” (European Environment Agency, 2006, p. 28).
Maladaptation, or a lack of any adaptive actions at all, within any of these sectors could produce
significant health risks that would need to be managed. Consequently, the health sector should
aim to build close working relationships with officials in other sectors to promote awareness
of the need for proactive adaptations.
The insurance industry has become active in promoting natural hazard mitigation measures; these
involve actions to reduce, as much as possible, the actual physical impacts of a hazard (e.g. dams,
culverts, building codes) (Murphy et al., 2005). In Canada, these activities have been promoted by
the industry-funded Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, created in 1997, which facilitates the
development and dissemination of disaster prevention knowledge. The framework for developing
adaptive strategies to reduce health risks related to climate change includes involving officials
and experts from other relevant sectors in broad engagement processes; these processes require
input and participation at every stage from all interested and affected parties.33
Mainstreaming adaptation
The adaptation literature increasingly focuses on the importance of “mainstreaming” climate
change mitigation and adaptation considerations and information into existing decision-making
processes, rather than creating new policies or policy instruments. This has been driven by the
recognition that most adaptations are not likely to be taken because of concerns over climate
change impacts alone (Smit and Wandel, 2006). The concept of mainstreaming risks related to
climate change describes processes that would bring explicit consideration of climate change
into current decision-making processes (Dougherty and Elasha, 2004).
In the health sector, mainstreaming entails incorporating information about climate-related
health risks into existing risk management activities, and integrating efforts among different
health sector partners to develop coordinated responses to these risks. Hazard assessments that
take into account projected climate change impacts should be integrated into community official
plans; for example, development plans could be checked against known or expected hazards
to reduce risks to people and their property (McBean and Henstra, 2003). The framework for
developing adaptive strategies to reduce health risks related to climate change presented earlier
supports the concept of mainstreaming by highlighting the need to establish institutional
mechanisms for adaptation development, and to explicitly incorporate adaptation and climate
change considerations into policies and programs designed to reduce health risks. Identification
of needed adaptation options to reduce health risks becomes a routine part of policy development
once such considerations are mainstreamed in current activities. Table 8.5 summarizes possible
adaptation measures to manage health risks related to climate change that are highlighted
in the literature.
Chapter 8
33 See Air Quality and Climate Change Corporate Strategic Plan (City of Hamilton, 2006) for an example of a partnership
approach to address climate change impacts and adaptation issues at the community level.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
426
Chapter 8
Table 8.5
Possible adaptation measures to manage health risks related to climate change
Surveillance
and Monitoring
Public
Education and
Communication
Legislative
Air Pollution
Identify most vulnerable
populations
Establish air quality
monitoring systems
Establish systems for
reporting the impact of
vehicles and other polluting
sources on air quality
Issue Air Quality Health
Index daily to the public
Provide information about
actions to take to reduce
exposure to air pollutants,
for vulnerable groups in
particular (e.g. reduce
exertion levels and energy
consumption, stay indoors,
car pool)
Reduce emissions from
fossil-fuel power generating
stations
Traffic restrictions
Determine new air quality
guidelines and standards
to protect human health
Water- and
Food-borne Diseases
Identify most vulnerable
populations
Surveillance of water- and
food-borne diseases
Monitor and reporting
of disease incidence
Early warning system for
health professionals
Provide information to
residents, travellers and
vulnerable populations that
takes into account changes
in epidemiology of water-
and food-borne diseases
Provide information on
precautions to take to avert
risks (boiling water, safe
food handling procedures)
Watershed protection laws
Water quality regulations
Infectious Diseases
Identify most vulnerable
populations
Surveillance of vector
populations
Monitor and reporting
of disease incidence
Early warning system
for health professionals
Provide information to
residents, travellers and
vulnerable populations
that takes into account
changes in epidemiology
of infectious diseases
Provide information on
precautions to take to
avert risks (correct hand
washing, immunization)
Quarantine laws
Travel and importation
of goods laws
Extreme Weather Events
Prepare registries of vulnerable
individuals (e.g., seniors)
that require assistance
Early monitoring of health
outcomes from extreme
weather events
Enhance quantitative data
on short-term and longer-term
health impacts of extreme
weather events
Early warning systems
Provide information about
the risks of natural disasters
in specific communities
Provide information about
actions that would reduce
exposure before, during and
after extreme weather events
Provide information about
actions to take in preparation
for and during extreme
weather events (e.g. stockpiling
non-perishable food)
Improve land-use planning
(e.g. limit development in high-
risk areas such as floodplains
or coasts)
Foster environmental manage-
ment (e.g. defensive structures
to minimize flash floods,
water conservation)
Building guidelines to account
for increasing weather severity
Heat Stress
Prepare registries of vulnerable individuals
(e.g. seniors) that require assistance
Establish hot weather response plans and
early warning systems
Early warning systems
Provide information about the health risks
of heat stress and actions to protect health
Provide information about measures to
reduce temperatures in and around homes
(e.g., planting bushes and trees)
Building guidelines that make buildings more
heat resistant
Requirements for smart urban planning
to reduce urban heat island effect
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
427
Chapter 8
Infrastructure
Development
Technology and
Engineering
Medical
Interventions
Air Pollution
Improve public transit
systems and bicycle lanes
to reduce traffic-related
pollution levels
Incentive programs for
citizens, households, com-
munities and corporations
to reduce emissions and
energy consumption
Promote and encourage
use of alternative (clean)
fuels and zero-emission
vehicles
Increase public health staff
with a mandate to provide
information on air quality
health effects
Include climate change
projections in health
planning
Water- and
Food-borne Diseases
Laboratory facilities for
rapid detection of disease
pathogens
Upgrade water treatment,
sewage and sanitation
facilities to deal with more
severe extreme weather
Improve infrastructure
for effective interventions
(e.g. emergency rooms,
stockpiles)
Disease prevention measures
reflecting the latest infor-
mation from Canadian and
international surveillance
and research organizations
New technologies to improve
water treatment, sewage
and sanitation facilities
Develop and make available
new drugs and other
treatments
Include climate change
projections in health
planning
Infectious Diseases
Laboratory facilities for
rapid detection of
pathogens
Improve infrastructure
for effective interventions
(e.g. emergency rooms,
stockpiles)
Vector control measures
(e.g. reduce breeding
grounds for mosquitoes
and other vectors)
Develop and make
available new drugs
and vaccines
Public immunization
programs
Include climate change
projections in health
planning
Extreme Weather Events
Identify critical and hazardous
infrastructure
Develop cost sharing mecha-
nisms (e.g. insurance) for com-
pensation to reduce post-event
mental and economic stresses
Improve infrastructure for effective
interventions (e.g. emergency
rooms and stockpiles); maintain
and test public shelters and
evacuation plans
Maintain dams, floodplains,
and storm runoff capabilities
Strengthen and enforce
building codes and standards
Develop and implement
protective technologies: hard
(sea walls, dams, dykes) and
soft (marshes, wet lands,
natural buffers, etc) to reduce
the potential for floods
Increase redundancy, efficiency
and resilience of power
supply grids
Provide training to medical and
emergency staff; enlist and
train volunteers to be recruited
during an emergency
Maintain disaster management
programs, including tools
for local public health facilities
to provide rapid health needs
Include climate change
projections in health planning
Heat Stress
Provide accessible air-conditioned public
facilities and shelters
Provide accessible drinking fountains
in outdoor public places
Extend hours of cooling facilities
Improve urban design to reduce heat island
effect (e.g. planting trees, increasing green
spaces, shading conditions along streets and
parking lots, pattern of subdivisions and
shape, size and orientation of building lots)
Intervention activities (e.g. “heatline”) to
provide information to vulnerable populations
“Buddy system” to check on neighbours)
Include climate change projections in health
planning
Source: Adapted from Chiotti et al., 2002. Includes measures from Health Canada, 2001; IPCC, 2001, 2007a.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
428
8.10.4 Barriers to Adaptation
Many decision makers in the health sector do not yet consider adaptation to the impacts
of climate change a priority issue requiring immediate attention. The fact that most
Canadians are not well informed about the likely health risks associated with climate
change (Carty et al., 2004) may contribute
to the current approach by health officials.
As well, funding for adaptation-related
initiatives in Canada has been overshadowed
by efforts to reduce GHGs, and has
been inadequate to address existing risks
(The Conference Board of Canada, 2006).
Therefore, health officials may find that
they must compete for resources for
adaptation or share such resources with
others seeking to address a variety of
other public health problems.
Actions for adapting to climate-related health risks have also been hampered by an incomplete
understanding of climate processes, the interacting socio-economic variables that influence
climate change, and future societal responses to the expected impacts. These gaps make
it difficult to project specific impacts using future climate scenarios, including the associated
risks to human health. Ebi (2005, p. 49) suggested, “...there is high uncertainty about
the rate and intensity of any changes in climate variability
in a particular location over a specified time period, but high
certainty that without adequate preparation, extreme events
will lead to increased morbidity and mortality.” Consequently,
determining effective climate change adaptation strategies to
reduce health risks can be a difficult and complex task. For
example, rising sea levels and an increasing frequency of storm
surges are expected to pose significant risks to property and
people living in some communities of British Columbia, such
as the City of Richmond. At the time of writing, that city
was in the process of updating its system of dykes to accom-
modate changes in weather and rising sea levels. However,
uncertainty about the severity of future sea level rise is making
a cost-benefit analysis, as part of the efforts to update dykes
in that city, difficult (Ballard and Lidster, 2006).
Barriers to adaptation can also exist when proposed measures are
either not technically feasible or their effectiveness has not been
demonstrated. For example, more research needs to be conducted
on the effectiveness of different response plans to manage the health risks from heat waves so that
appropriate systems that respond to local needs can be developed. There may also be changes
that cannot be anticipated, and adaptations to these cannot be made in advance of their occurrence.
As IPCC suggests, the magnitude and timing of climate change impacts will vary with the amount
and timing of climate change, and unmitigated climate change would, in the long-term, likely
exceed the capacity of natural, managed and human systems to adapt (IPCC, 2007a).
Climate change is expected to affect Canada in specific geographic areas or distinct
ecosystems; its impacts will not follow traditional provincial or territorial boundaries. Because
provinces and territories are responsible for many aspects of environmental and health
management, governments and agencies will need to collaborate when addressing vulnerabilities
and developing adaptive strategies. This collaboration is needed to prevent duplication and
to use resources efficiently; separate adaptive strategies may not be needed for each jurisdiction.
Chapter 8
Scheraga et al. (2003) identified
the following possible explanations
for the failure to adapt effectively to
health risks associated with climate
variability under current climate
conditions:
• failure to identify and understand
factors that affect the risk and the
ability of society and individuals
to respond;
• limited resources available for
adaptation;
• conscious decision by society
not to invest scarce resources
in adaptive responses; and
• perceived lack of vulnerability or
perceived elimination of the threat.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
429
8.10.5 Opportunities for Future Actions
Even in the face of the many challenges to adaptation, important opportunities exist for making
progress in efforts to reduce health risks associated with climate change. Although significant
gaps remain with respect to knowledge about existing vulnerabilities to the impacts, including
those related to human health, research on impacts and adaptation in Canada is yielding results.
A knowledge base is being developed as a result of many studies that address regional and
sectoral issues, and by connecting researchers with decision makers who need to manage future
risks related to climate change (OAG, 2006). Understanding of basic concerns related to
health and a changing climate has increased through recent studies,34 and this Assessment will
contribute to this body of evidence.
The public health and emergency management communities can benefit from recent increases
in the ability to forecast extreme weather events which have taken place over the past 30 years
as more has been learned about the climate system. Environment Canada is recognized as
an international leader in global climate modelling (OAG, 2006) and therefore constitutes an
important source of information for future climate change adaptation work. In addition, the
health care sector in Canada is well organized with respect to sharing information about climate
change adaptation, both at home and internationally.
The public health field has many years of experience in reducing risks to health from
environmental hazards; this experience can be drawn upon to meet the challenges posed by
climate change (Ebi et al., 2005). It demonstrates that vulnerability to climate-related health risks
can be reduced through appropriate adaptive actions (e.g. heat alerts, disease surveillance,
health promotion activities to reduce poor health) and through efforts to build adaptive capacity.
A high level of awareness exists among public health officials in Canada about the impacts
of weather and climate on human health and well-being, and about potential future risks
to Canadians. This provides a strong basis for moving forward with actions to address these
risks. Interest in adaptation is growing with a greater acceptance of scientific findings on
climate change; reports on recent extreme weather events that have significantly impacted
communities within and outside of Canada also contribute to this interest (Penney
and Wieditz, 2007). Individual Canadians are capable of shifting their behavioural and
architectural practices to suit climatic conditions, even as the number and geographical
extent of climate-related hazards increase as the climate changes.
Canadian Red Cross: Expect the Unexpected Program
In response to the Saguenay floods of 1996, the Canadian Red Cross developed the
school-based Expect the Unexpected Program. It is an example of health promotion
activities carried out by a voluntary organization to reduce health risks related to natural
disasters. Since 1997, this program has delivered learning activities on natural disasters
and extreme weather events to over 750,000 students in 11 provinces and territories
in Canada (Canadian Red Cross, 2005).
Ultimately, the opportunity to address key barriers to adaptation exists. Public health and
emergency management officials and their partners can build on their past experience
in addressing these types of issues through effective interventions. They can draw from
the growing knowledge of health risks related to climate change and the increasing
awareness of Canadians about the issues.
Chapter 8
34 See Climate Change and Health: Research Report (Health Canada, 2004a).
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
430
8.11 KNOWLEDGE GAPS AND RESEARCH NEEDS
Successfully managing the health risks to Canadians arising from climate change will
require more detailed assessments of vulnerabilities to existing climate variability as well
as to future changes in climate. These need to take place at regional and community
levels, given the broad scope of potential impacts and of possible public health responses.
A number of research gaps that need to be addressed to improve adaptation development
and reduce health risks have been identified in the literature (McMichael et al., 2003;
Riedel, 2004). The lack of research findings related to climate change and health adaptation
and adaptive capacity in Canada was a major obstacle for the assessment of capacity
conducted in this chapter.
Future assessments and current efforts to manage climate-related health risks would benefit
from research to improve knowledge in the areas listed below.35
Climate Projections
• Improved climate models and scenarios, particularly at the regional scale, to reduce
the high level of uncertainty regarding possible future exposures to hazards for specific
populations.
• Greater understanding of the regional distribution of health risks associated with climate
change in Canada as well as differences in existing capacity to adapt (e.g. between
northern and southern communities) to the future changes.
Regional and Local Assessment of Vulnerabilities
• Regional- and community-level exposure to current and future climate-related hazards
that pose health risks.
• Location and attributes (e.g. perceptions and behaviours) of highly sensitive populations.
• Evaluation of emergency management plans in regions and communities that
take into account climate events, climate effects and multiple stressors (e.g. cumulative
impacts).
• Ability to plan for and respond to disease outbreaks and public health emergencies.
• Integrated activities to protect vulnerable populations from health risks associated
with air pollution and heat waves, including efforts that may be required to take
preventative measures to mitigate the health impacts of heat waves by reducing the
urban heat island effect.
• Extent to which adaptive capacity is unevenly distributed among communities within
regions or populations within communities. Disparities between cities and smaller
communities and rural areas with respect to the ability to plan and prepare for emergencies
can be significant.
Chapter 8
35 No attempt has been made to prioritize the knowledge gaps identified here.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
431
Adaptation Strategies and Measures
• Economic costs of the projected health impacts related to climate change.
• Economic costs of adaptation strategies (e.g. heat alert systems).
• “Best practice” adaptation measures (e.g. outreach activities, assistance to vulnerable
populations, monitoring of health impacts).
• Current extent of maladaptations and their contribution to health risks from current
climate variability.
• New infrastructure designs
which include standards
that take into account larger
and potentially more damaging
events expected under climate
change; as current infrastructures
are upgraded and replaced,
engineers need new and
updated climatic design values,
revised codes and standards,
and new methodologies to
incorporate climate change
considerations into engineering
procedures.
• Processes and drivers of adaptation decision making and how climate change considerations
can be integrated or “mainstreamed” into current health risk management practices and
frameworks; level of certainty needed for public health decision makers to act; tools needed
for effectively communicating this to decision makers.
• Factors that affect our current capacity to adapt at the individual, community and institutional
levels, including the cumulative impacts of repeated extreme events; conditions that stimulate
or act as a barrier to adaptation (e.g. institutional coordination, risk communication,
participatory processes).
• Monitoring of extreme heat events, heat alerts and heat-related illnesses and deaths per year
in Canadian communities.
Vulnerable Populations
• Characteristics or qualities that make specific populations more vulnerable to health
risks related to climate change and the distribution of such vulnerable groups
in Canada.
• Risk perception related to climate change health impacts among individual Canadians
that influences capacity to adapt.
• Communications and outreach strategies for changing individual behaviours to reduce
health risks (e.g. appropriate messaging during heat and smog alerts) and interventions
by public health officials.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
432
8.12 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
8.12.1 Conclusions
This review of climate-related hazards in Canada, the exposure of people to these hazards,
and the existing capacity to manage health risks reveals that Canadians are vulnerable to
climate variability and weather extremes.
In the past century, we have succeeded
in reducing mortality from weather
extremes and other public health
emergencies in Canada. However,
the economic costs of extreme
events in this country are rapidly
increasing, as is the number of
people affected by natural disasters.
The fullness of the health impacts
from such events is not well
understood. Such events and other
climate-related hazards (e.g. smog,
food-, water-, vector- and rodent-
borne diseases) continue to pose
significant short- and long-term risks to the health and well-being of Canadians and their
communities. Gaps in the adaptive capacity of governments and communities in Canada
to address climate-related health risks exist. In some circumstances existing systems and
measures may not be sufficient to deal with unforeseen events or to respond to the cumulative
stresses arising from many events occurring simultaneously, or in rapid succession. Findings
from this first assessment of adaptive capacity can inform our future research and program
and policy development to enhance our current capacity to adapt to climate change.
Several factors influence the vulnerability of the Canadian population to current and future
climate-related health risks:
About our population:
• All Canadians are exposed to climate-related hazards but to varying degrees. Many are
at increased risk of health effects because of a greater frequency and magnitude of these
hazards or due to inadequate protection or coping mechanisms.
• Health and demographic trends will increase the proportion of the population that is sensitive
to the health risks associated with climate change. The proportion of seniors in Canada
will grow from 13 to 25% of the population by 2031.
• Individuals play an important role in protecting themselves by responding to a range
of climate-related health risks. But Canadians often do not perceive a threat from natural
disasters and are generally unprepared for health emergencies.
About systems and measures in place:
• Many sectors in our society have a role to play in reducing vulnerabilities to health risks.
The extent to which human health considerations are not incorporated into land-use
planning, infrastructure development, emergency preparedness and mitigation, environ-
mental management, and transportation planning increases vulnerability to climate
change health impacts.
• Response systems, infrastructure and risk management approaches have been designed to
respond to discrete health risks or climatic events based on past climate trends. Climate change
is very likely to bring pressures that will test or exceed the limitations of these systems.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
433
• The likelihood of cumulative impacts and the possibility of irreversible (in human-time
scales) environmental changes related to climate change (e.g. loss of glaciers, desertification)
suggests that there will be limits to adaptation and unavoidable impacts on health.
About our capacity to adapt:
• Public health sector and emergency management officials display concern about risks to
populations from climate change but are generally not mobilized around this issue and
have not accorded it sufficient attention.
• Competing budgetary priorities make it difficult to allocate sufficient resources for
adaptation and preventative measures. The lack of resources is a particular constraint
for small cities and communities.
• Leadership is a necessary ingredient to mobilize officials and individual Canadians to take the
needed actions to protect health; many await such leadership to pave the way for future adap-
tations through the conduct of research and the development of needed policies and programs.
Actions to reduce the vulnerability of Canadians to current climate-related health risks are
needed. Significant capacity resides in existing institutions and programs, physical infrastructures
and human and financial resources that can be dedicated to protecting health and well-being.
Efforts taken now to reduce risks will significantly reduce our vulnerability to the health
impacts of future climate change. Well-designed adaptation strategies can have significant
near- and long-term ancillary benefits, such as reduced risks to Canadians posed by air and
water pollution, infectious disease outbreaks and disasters. As well, adaptation strategies
(e.g. mitigation of the urban heat island effect) may support existing efforts to reduce
emissions of GHGs; such measures can have significant benefits to health. Both adaptation
and GHG mitigation actions need to be employed to address climate change impacts.
Whether Canadians adapt successfully depends on whether existing knowledge, economic
resources, skills and other resources are employed fully and effectively.
8.12.2 Recommendations
A recent review of current adaptation initiatives in select urban centres in Canada and internationally
reveals that while many cities have taken action to reduce vulnerabilities to natural hazards,
few have taken into account the additional pressures that climate change will create (Penney and
Wieditz, 2007). This concurs with the findings of this chapter, and therefore the following
recommendations are made:
Governments, communities and individuals should maintain and enhance current measures
and programs to protect health from climate-related risks and incorporate climate change
information into existing activities.
Sustained initiatives and activities are needed to build adaptive capacity in the health and
emergency management sectors. Some systems (emergency management, public health,
infrastructure, etc.) should strengthen the ability to cope with existing stresses. Many lessons
have been learned from recent events in Canada that can inform the adaptation process.
In addition, gaps in current adaptive capacity identified in this chapter can provide direction
to decision makers for future actions.
Although the costs of adaptation can be high, the costs to health and well-being and the
quality of life of Canadians will be higher if planning and implementation of adaptive
responses to climate-related health risks does not occur (Health Canada, 2005a; Street et al.,
2005). Experience has shown that it is less costly to invest in shoring up capacity than to
repair damages from a disaster. Addressing the existing gaps in public health and emergency
management activities has the potential to significantly improve the ability of Canadians
to reduce health threats from future climate change in Canada.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
434
Governments, communities and individuals should identify future vulnerabilities and
plan new adaptations to increase the capacity required to manage emerging risks.
Efforts are needed to act proactively and initiate new adaptive strategies and partnerships
to build the capacity to adapt that will be needed in the future. The overview of roles and
responsibilities for adaptation provided in this chapter suggests that areas of responsibilities
are generally well defined, although some gaps may exist for specific issues. New
collaborations are required to address increases in climate-related hazards that do not
respect political boundaries and that lead to events that are potentially much larger
and more frequent than in the past.
Regional- and community-level assessments of health vulnerabilities are needed to identify,
at the local level, where current public health and emergency management activities
and those of other sectors need to be augmented to reduce risks to health. A number of
approaches for conducting vulnerability assessments and for assessing adaptation
options are available to public health and emergency management officials in Canada.
Local and regional studies are necessary to fully understand the factors that create
vulnerabilities and to guide the choice and implementation of effective risk management
measures. Priority avenues of inquiry for such assessments are detailed in section 8.11
Knowledge Gaps and Research Needs of this chapter.
Health care and social services authorities need to plan for the impacts to individual
and community health expected under climate change.
Health care and social services authorities in Canada should prepare for increased pressures
that are expected from climate-related health risks. Demographic trends suggest that the
projected increase in Canada’s population and, in particular, the increase in the size of
the cohort of seniors could contribute to these pressures. The health sector needs to
proactively address health risks associated with climate change through its central roles
in risk assessment and adaptation development (e.g. disease surveillance activities).
The convergence of increased workloads and more frequent emergencies from natural
hazards related to climate change may reduce the ability of the health system to protect
individuals and their families (McBean and Henstra, 2003). Developing the appropriate
capacity to manage the additional stress of climate change is essential for protecting
the future health of Canadians.
In conclusion, opportunities exist in Canada to protect the health and well-being of Canadians
from current climate variability and future climate change. Our ability to make progress
depends on our willingness and determination to plan for short- and long-term changes, and
fully utilize existing capacity to reduce health risks. All levels of government need to work
together, and with interested parties such as professional associations, community leaders,
businesses, voluntary sector organizations and public health practitioners, to address the
impacts of climate change on health. Future partnerships will benefit from the growing
knowledge about the health risks related to climate change that Canadians face, and from
previous public health experience in addressing environmental health issues with effective
interventions. Early results can be achieved and supported by increasing awareness among
Canadians of health risks related to a changing climate.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
435
8.13 ANNEXES
Annex 1: Types of Weather Alerts Issued by Environment Canada
Source: Adapted from Environment Canada, 2007b.
Annex 2: Heat Alert Response Plans in Canada
Chapter 8
Rainfall
Freezing Rain
Freezing Drizzle
Flash Freeze
Tropical Storm
Hurricane
Storm Surge
High Heat and Humidity
Heat Wave
Humidex
Severe Thunderstorm
Tornado
Funnel Cloud
Cold-Core Funnel
Landspout
Waterspout
Wind
Les Suetes
Wreckhouse Wind
Marine Wind
Dust Storm
Blizzard
Blowing Snow
Snowfall
Snow Squall
Winter Storm
Wind Chill
Cold Wave
Arctic Outflow
Frost
Multiple Weather
Fog-Smoke
UV
Air Quality
Municipalities
Capitale national (Quebec)
Chaudières-Appalaches
City of Brampton
City of Burlington
City of Hamilton
City of Kingston
City of London
City of Mississauga
City of Ottawa
City of Sudbury
City of Toronto
Estrie
Laurentides
Lanaudière
Laval
Mauricie-Bois-Francs
Montérégie
Montreal
Outaouais
Region of Peel
Regional Municipality of Halton
Region of Waterloo
Town of Markham
Town of Oakville
Industry
The Construction Safety Association
of Ontario (Heat Response Plan)
Occupational Health Clinics for Ontario
Workers Inc. (Humidex Based Heat
Response Plan)
Occupational Health and Safety
Division, Workers Compensation Board
of Prince Edward Island (Guide to
Heat Stress)
Ontario Forestry Safe Workplace
Association (Heat Response Plan)
Annex 3: Examples of Municipal Climate Change Programs in Canada
• City of Calgary
• City of Edmonton
• City of Halifax
• City of Ottawa
• City of Sudbury
• City of Toronto
• City of Vancouver
• City of Winnipeg
• Montreal
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
436
8.14 REFERENCES
Adger, W.N. (2003). Social aspects of adaptive capacity. In J.B. Smith, R.J.T. Klein, and
S. Huq (Eds.), Climate change, adaptive capacity and development (pp. 29–50). London:
Imperial College Press.
Adger, W.N., Brooks, N., Kelly, M.., Bentham, G., Agnew, M., et al. (2003). New indicators
of vulnerability and adaptive capacity. Tyndall Centre Working Paper. Norwich, U.K:
Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research
Adger, W.N., Tompkins, E., Warren, R., Arnell, N., Anderson, K., et al. (2005). Evidence to the
Stern review on the economics of climate change. Norwich, U.K.: Tyndall Centre for
Climate Change Research.
Angus, J. (2006). An evaluation of Toronto’s heat watch warning system. Toronto: University
of Toronto.
Atlas of Canada. (2007a). Projected forest fire severity level, 2050 to 2059. Retrieved March
10, 2007, from http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/maps/climatechange/potentialimpacts/
severityratingsforestfires2050-2059
—–. (2007b). Sensitivity of river regions to climate change. Retrieved March 10, 2007,
from http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/maps/climatechange/potentialimpacts/
sensitivityriverregions
Ballard, A., and Lidster, R. (2006, November 7). Denial as projections place BC cities under
water. The Tyee. Retrieved March 28, 2007, from http://thetyee.ca/News/2006/
11/07/Immersed/
Barg, S., and Swanson, D. (2005). Implementing adaptive policies – Project paper #2. Prepared
for the Joint IISD-TERI-IDRC Research Project entitled Designing policies that
can adapt to a world of uncertainty, change and surprise: Adaptive policymaking
for agriculture and water resources. Ottawa: International Institute for Sustainable
Development (IISD).
Barker, I.K., and Lindsay, L.R. (2000). Lyme borreliosis in Ontario: Determining the risks.
Canadian Medical Association Journal (CMAJ), 162(11), 1573–1574.
Basu, R., and Samet, J. (2002). Relation between elevated ambient temperature and mortality:
A review of the epidemiologic evidence. Epidemiologic Reviews, 24(2), 190–202.
Bellisario, L.M., McGee, J., and Nirupama, N. (2007). Emergency management education in
Canada: A view from the crossroads. In E.C. Haque, and D. Etkin (Eds.), Building
partnerships for risk and hazards mitigation and response. Montréal: McGill-Queen’s
University Press.
Berry, P. (2005). Planning our future: Reducing the health impacts of climate change. Health
Policy Research Bulletin, 11, 35–38.
British Columbia (B.C.) Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection. (2002). Indicators of climate
change for British Columbia 2002. Retrieved March 27, 2007, from http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/
air/climate/indicat/pdf/indcc.pdf
Brooks, N., and Adger, W.N. (2004). Assessing and enhancing adaptive capacity. In B. Lim,
and E. Spanger-Siegfried (Eds.), Adaptation policy frameworks for climate change:
Developing strategies, policies and measures (pp. 165–182). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Bruce, J.A., Donovan, K.F., and Hornof, M.J. (2005). Emergency management education in
Canada. Ottawa: Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada.
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) News. (2005, July 12). Southern Ontario heat wave
to last another two weeks. Retrieved October 22, 2007, from http://www.cbc.ca/
canada/story/2005/07/12/heat-050712.html
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
437
Chapter 8
—–. (2007, March 1). Diabetes rate in Ontario rose far faster than forecast: Study. Retrieved
March 02, 2007, from http://www.cbc.ca/health/story/2007/03/01/diabetes-soars.html
Canadian Disaster Database. (2007). Frequency of Natural Disasters in Canada, 1900–2006.
Ottawa: Public Safety Canada.
Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI). (2005). Understanding emergency department wait
times. Ottawa: Author. Retrieved November 21, 2006, from http://secure.cihi.ca/cihiweb/
dispPage.jsp?cw_page=AR_1266_E
—–. (2006a). Health indicators. Ottawa: Author. Retrieved November 17, 2006, from
http://secure.cihi.ca/indicators/june_2006/en/highlights06_e.html
—–. (2006b). Waiting for health care in Canada: What we know and what we don’t know.
Ottawa: Author. Retrieved November 21, 2006, from http://secure.cihi.ca/cihiweb/
dispPage.jsp?cw_page=AR_1385_E
Canadian Medical Association (CMA). (2007). 7th annual national report card on health care.
Ipsos Reid Corporation. Retrieved October 31, 2007, from http://www.cma.ca/
index.cfm?ci_id=46137&la_id=1&requiredfields=&q=Annual+REport+card+on+
health&proxycustom=
Canadian Public Health Association (CPHA). (2001a). Creating conditions for health.
Submitted to the Commission on the Future of Health Care in Canada, Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2001b). 2001 resolutions and motions. Retrieved March 26, 2007, from http://www.cpha.ca/
english/policy/resolu/2000s/2001/page1.htm
—–. (2001c). Roundtable on health and climate change. Strategic plan on health and climate
change: A framework for collaborative action. Ottawa: Author.
Canadian Red Cross. (2005). Expect the unexpected program. Retrieved April 1, 2005, from
http://www.redcross.ca/article.asp?id=009874&tid=028
Canadian Red Cross, Salvation Army, and St. John Ambulance. (n.d.(a)). Maintaining the passion:
Sustaining the episodic response emergency volunteer. Retrieved February 24, 2007,
from http://www.redcross.ca/cmslib/general/crc_disastermanagement_maintaining_e.pdf
—–. (n.d.(b)). Voluntary sector framework for health emergencies. Retrieved October 31, 2006,
from http://www.redcross.ca/cmslib/general/crc_disastermanagement_voluntary_e.pdf
Canzi, M, (2007). Actions being taken by GTA-CAC municipalities to reduce emissions from
municipal vehicles. Toronto: Clean Air Partnership (CAP). Retrieved October 28, 2007,
from http://www.cleanairpartnership.org/
Carty, P., Crabbe, P., and Krewski, D. (2004). A risk management approach to climate change
and health impacts in Eastern Ontario. Ottawa: University of Ottawa, R. Samuel
McLaughlin Centre for Population Health Risk Assessment, Institute of Population.
Charron, D.F., Edge, T., Fleury, M.D., Galatianos, W., Gillis, D., et al. (2005). Links between
climate, waterborne illness, and projected impacts of climate change. Report prepared
for Health Canada, Ottawa.
Charron, D.F., Thomas, M.K., Waltner-Toews, D.W., Aramini, J.J., Edge, T., et al. (2004).
Vulnerability of waterborne diseases to climate change in Canada: A review. Journal
of Toxicology and Environmental Health, 67(A), 1667–1677.
Cheng, S., Campbell, M., Li, Q., Li., G., Auld, H., et al. (2005). Differential and combined
impacts of winter and summer weather and air pollution due to global warming on
human mortality in south-central Canada. Technical report (Health Policy Research
Program: Project number 6795-15-2001/4400011).
Chiotti, Q. (2006). Review of risk management tools for protecting the health of Canadians from
air pollution and heat waves in the face of a changing climate. Draft report prepared
for Health Canada, Vulnerable Populations and Climate Change Office, Ottawa.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
438
Chiotti, Q., Morton, I., Ogilvie, K., Maarouf, A., and Kelleher, M. (2002). Towards an adaptation
action plan: Climate change and health in the Toronto–Niagara region–Summary for
policy makers. Toronto: Pollution Probe.
City of Calgary. (2006). Calgary climate change action plan: Target50. The City of Calgary corporate
and community outlook on climate & air quality protection. Calgary: Author. Retrieved
October 25, 2007, from http://www.calgary.ca/docgallery/bu/environmental_management/
climate_change_program/target_50_climate_change_action_plan.pdf
City of Hamilton. (2006). Hamilton—Air quality and climate change corporate strategic plan.
Vision 20/20 Hamilton. Hamilton: Author.
City of Toronto. (2007). Green roof incentive pilot program. Toronto: Author. Retrieved November 14,
2007 from http://www.toronto.ca/greenroofs/incentiveprogram.htm
Clean Air Partnership (CAP). (2004). Cool Toronto project—Toronto’s urban heat island mitigation
and adaptation project. Retrieved February 2, 2007, from http://www.cleanairpartnership.org/
cool_toronto.htm
Commission on the Future of Health Care in Canada. (2002). Building on values: The future
of health care in Canada—Final report. Saskatoon: National Library of Canada.
Davis, R.E., Knappenberger, P.C., Novicoff, W.M., and Michaels, P. (2002). Decadal changes
in heat-related human mortality in the Eastern United States. Climate Research, 22, 175–184.
DeRomilly and DeRomilly Limited, Dillon Consulting Limited, Alan Bell Environmental
Management Services, Cameron Consulting, Environment Canada, et al. (2005). Adapting
to a changing climate in Nova Scotia: Vulnerability assessment and adaptation options—
Final report. Prepared for the Nova Scotia Department of Energy, Halifax.
Dolney, T.J., and Sheridan, S.C. (2005). The relationship between extreme heat and ambulance
response calls for the City of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Environmental Research, 101,
94–103.
Dougherty, B., and Elasha, B.O. (2004). Mainstreaming adaptation into national development
plans. In second AIACC Africa and Indian Ocean Island Regional Workshop, University
of Senegal, Dakar. Retrieved September 26, 2005, from http://www.aiaccproject.org/
meetings/Dakar_04/Dakar_Final.pdf
Downing, T.E., and Patwardhan, A. (2005). Assessing vulnerability for climate adaptation.
In B. Lim, and E. Spanger-Siegfried (Eds), Adaptation policy frameworks for climate
change: Developing strategies, policies and measures (pp. 69–89). United Nations
Development Programme/Global Environment Facility (UNDP/GEF). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Drebot, M.A., Artsob, H., and Werker, D. (2000). Hatavirus pulmonary syndrome in Canada,
1989–1999. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 26(8), 65–69.
Ebi, K.L. (2005). Improving public health responses to extreme weather events. In W. Kirch,
B. Menne, and R. Bertollini (Eds.), Extreme weather events and public health responses.
New York: Springer Berlin/Heidelberg.
Ebi, K.L., Smith, J.B., Burton, I., and Hitz, S. (2005). Adaptation to climate variability and
change from a public health perspective. In K.L. Ebi, J.B. Smith, and Burton I. (Eds.),
Integration of public health with adaptation to climate change: Lessons learned and
new directions. London: Taylor & Francis.
Ebi, K. (2007). Towards an early warning system for heat events. Journal of Risk Research, 10(5):
729–744.
Egener, M. (2005). Overview of emergency preparedness at the community level: A focus on
public health aspects. Report prepared by Global Change Strategies International.
Ottawa: Health Canada.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
439
Environics Research Group. (2005). Development of a health-based Air Quality Index for Canada:
Final report. Prepared for Health Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved November 21, 2006,
from http://hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/alt_formats/hecs-sesc/pdf/air/out-ext/res-rech/aqi-iqa/
summary-sommaire_e.pdf
Environics Research Group. (2006). Health professionals’ information needs: Air Quality Health
Index—2006. Toronto: Author.
Environment Canada. (2002). Summer weather highlights 2002, seasonal forecast and highlights.
Retrieved March 26, 2007, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/issues/seasonalforecast_fall02_e.htm.
—–. (2003). The Meteorological Service of Canada: Annual report 2002–2003. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2006). Atmospheric hazards: Extreme heat. Retrieved April 25, 2007, from http://www.hazards.ca/
maps/background/ExtremeHeat-e.html
—–. (2007a). Canada’s top ten weather stories for 2006. Retrieved March 28, 2007, from
http://www.msc.ec.gc.ca/media/top10/2006/topten2006_e.html
—–. (2007b). Canadian weather alerts—Watches, warnings and special weather statements.
Retrieved March 27, 2007, from http://www.msc-smc.ec.gc.ca/cd/brochures/warning_e.cfm
Etkin, D., Haque, E., Bellisario, L., and Burton, L. (2004). An assessment of natural hazards
and disasters in Canada: A report for decision-makers and practitioners. Ottawa:
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC).
European Environment Agency. (2006). Vulnerability and adaptation to climate change in
Europe. EEA Technical Report, No. 7/2005, Copenhagen.
Evergreen Canada. (2007). Grounds for action: New research report by learning grounds.
Retrieved February 28, 2007, from http://evergreen.ca/en
Falkiner, L. (n.d.). Impact analysis of the Canadian Red Cross Expect the Unexpected
Program. Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. Retrieved October 31, 2006,
from http://www.redcross.ca/cmslib/general/imact_analysis_full_version.pdf
Fayer, R. (2000). Presidential address. Global change and emerging infectious diseases.
Journal of Parasitology, 86(6), 1174–1181.
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response.
(2004). National framework for health emergency management: Guideline for
program development. Ottawa: Author.
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM). (2007). About partners for climate protection.
Retrieved October 17, 2007, from http://sustainablecommunities.fcm.ca/
Partners-for-Climate-Protection/
Ferrier, N. (2002). A national assessment of emergency planning in Canada’s general hospitals.
Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and Emergency Preparedness. Ottawa:
Minister of Public Works and Government Services.
Ford, J.D., and Smit, B. (2005). A framework for assessing vulnerability of communities
in the Canadian Arctic to risks associated with climate change. Arctic, 57(4), 389–400.
Furgal, C.M. (2002). Climate change and health in the Canadian North: What we know and
where we are going. Invited presentation to the Health Canada Climate Change
and Health Workshop of Northern Health Representatives. Yellowknife, July 6–7, 2002.
Füssel, H.M., and Klein, J.T. (2004). Conceptual frameworks of adaptation to climate change
and their applicability to human health. Potsdam, Germany: Potsdam Institute for
Climate Impact Research.
Gaulin, C., Couillard, M., Pilon, P.A., Tremblay, M., Lambert, L., et al. (2004). Assessment of
surveillance of human West Nile virus infection in Québec, 2003. Canada Communicable
Disease Report, 30, 97–104.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
440
Gosselin, P. (2004). Human health. In C. DesJarlais, A. Bourque, R. Decoste, C. Demers,
P. Deschamps, et al. (Eds.), Adapting to climate change. Montréal: Ouranos Consortium.
Government of British Columbia. (2004). Weather, climate and the future—BC’s plan.
Retrieved December 2, 2006, from http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/air/climate/cc_plan/pdfs/
bc_climatechange_plan.pdf
Government of Canada. (2002). Canada’s aging population. A report prepared by Health
Canada in collaboration with the Interdepartmental Committee on Aging and Seniors
Issues. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2006). Canadian environmental sustainability indicators 2006. Statistics Canada Cat. No. 16-251-XIE.
Retrieved November 22, 2006, from http://www.environmentandresources.gc.ca/
default.asp?lang=En&n=6F66F932-1
—–. (2007). Canadian environmental sustainability indicators 2007: Highlights. Environment
Canada Cat. No. EN81-5/1-2007-1E. Retrieved November 13, 2007 from http://
www.environmentandresources.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=2102636F-1
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador. (2005). Climate change action plan 2005.
Retrieved November 28, 2006, from http://www.env.gov.nl.ca/env/
Government of Ontario. (2006). Emergency Management and Civil Protection Act. Ontario
Statutes and Regulations. Toronto: Author. Retrieved from November 21, 2006,
from http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/DBLaws/Regs/English/040380_e.htm
Government of Quebec. (2006). Quebec and climate change: A challenge for the future.
2006–2012 action plan. Québec: Author. Retrieved November 21, 2006, from
http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/changements/plan_action/2006-2012_en.pdf
Grambsch, A., and Menne, B. (2003). Adaptation and adaptive capacity in the public health
context. In A.J. McMichael, D.H. Campbell-Lendrum, C.F. Corvalan, K.L. Ebi,
Githeko, A., et al. (Eds.), Climate change and health: Risks and responses. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
Gutman, G.M. (2007). Seniors and natural disasters: A synthesis of four Canadian case
studies. Prepared for the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Ottawa.
Haines, A., Kovats, R. S., Campbell-Lendrum, D., and Corvalan, C. (2006). Climate change
and human health: Impacts, vulnerability, and mitigation. Lancet, 367(9528), 2102–2109.
Halifax Regional Municipality. (2006). Climate SMART—Be cool: Reduce global warming
and climate risks. Halifax: Author. Retrieved November 21, 2006, from http://
www.halifax.ca/climate/solution.html
Haque, C.E. (2002). Scoping of issues concerning risk reduction to all hazards in Canadian
non-urban communities. Submitted to the Office of Critical Infrastructure
Protection and Emergency Preparedness. Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and
Government Services.
Harchaoui, T.M., Tarkhani, F., and Warren, P. (2003). Public infrastructure in Canada:
Where do we stand? Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
Health Canada. (1999). A network for health surveillance in Canada. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2000). Health Canada decision-making framework for identifying, assessing and managing
health risks. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2001). Climate change and health and well-being: A policy primer. Retrieved March 26, 2007,
from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/pubs/climat/policy_primer_north-nord_
abecedaire_en_matiere/index_e.html
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
441
—–. (2002a). Canada’s aging population. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2002b). Healthy Canadians—A federal report on comparable health indicators. Retrieved
June 19, 2006, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hcs-sss/pubs/care-soins/2002-fed-comp-indicat/
index_e.html
—–. (2003a). Climate change and health: Assessing Canada’s capacity to address the health
impacts of climate change. Prepared for the Expert Advisory Workshop on Adaptive
Capacity, Mont Tremblant, Québec.
—–. (2003b). Learning from SARS: Renewal of public health in Canada. National Advisory
Committee on SARS and Public Health. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2003c). Responding to the challenge of diabetes in Canada: First report of the National
Diabetes Surveillance System. Retrieved March 27, 2007, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/
ccdpc-cpcmc/ndss-snsd/english/pubs_reports/pdf/WEB_NDSS_English_Report-nocover.pdf
—–. (2004a). Climate change and health: Research report. Retrieved March 27, 2007, from
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/pubs/climat/climate-report-rapport/index_e.html
—–. (2004b). Healthy Canadians: A federal report on comparable health indicators. 2004.
Ottawa: Author. Retrieved on October 25, 2007 from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hcs-sss/
pubs/system-regime/2004-fed-comp-indicat/index_e.html
—–. (2004c). Progress report on cancer control in Canada. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2005a, November). Climate change: Preparing for the health impacts. Health Policy
Research, Bulletin 11. Retrieved March 26, 2007, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/sr-sr/
pubs/hpr-rpms/bull/2005-climat/index_e.html
—–. (2005b). Your health and a changing climate: Information for health professionals.
Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2006a). A health-based national Air Quality Index. Retrieved November 21, 2006, from
http://hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/air/out-ext/air_quality_e.html
—–. (2006b). Assessment of the capacity of the emergency response and public health systems
in two Atlantic coastal communities to cope with and adapt to extreme weather events
exacerbated by a changing climate. Report prepared by Virtual Planning Inc. for
Health Canada.
—–. (2006c). It’s your health: Ultraviolet radiation from the sun. Retrieved June 13, 2007,
from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/iyh-vsv/environ/ultraviolet_e.html#he
—–. (2006d). Snapshot of adaptation and response capacity to climate change in public health.
Report prepared by the Canadian Public Health Association for Health Canada.
Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada. (2003). The growing burden of heart disease and
stroke in Canada. Ottawa: Author. Retrieved June 17, 2006, from http://www.cvdinfobase.ca/
cvdbook/CVD_En03.pdf
Hengeveld, H., Whitewood, B., and Fergusson, A. (2005). An introduction to climate change:
A Canadian perspective. Retrieved March 26, 2007, from http://www.msc.ec.gc.ca/
education/scienceofclimatechange/
Hogg, W., Huston, P., Martin, C., and Soto, E. (2006, October). Enhancing public health response
to respiratory epidemics: Are family physicians ready and willing to help? Canadian
Family Physician, 52, 1255–1260.
Hutton, D. (2005). Psychosocial aspects of climate change in Canada: A review of current literature
and research recommendations. Report prepared for Health Canada, Ottawa.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
442
Chapter 8
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC). (2007). Walpole Island First Nation to build
$10 million water treatment facility. Website. Retrieved on January 16, 2005 from
http://www.ainc-inac.gc.ca/nr/prs/s-d2005/2-02747_e.html
Infrastructure Canada. (2003). The state of infrastructure in Canada: Implications for infrastructure
planning and policy. Report prepared by S.M. Mirza, and M. Haider, Department of
Civil Engineering, McGill University for Infrastructure Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved
March 26, 2007, from http://www.regionomics.com/infra/Draft-July03.pdf
—–. (2006). Adapting infrastructure to climate change in Canada’s cities and communities—
A literature review. Ottawa: Author, Research and Analysis Division.
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) and Emergency Preparedness Canada (EPC).
(1998). A national mitigation policy: Findings from a national consultation on Canada
preparedness for disasters. Toronto: Author.
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. (2002). World disasters
report 2002. Bloomfield, CT: Kumarian Press. Retrieved March 27, 2007, from
http://www.ifrc.org/publicat/index.asp?navid=09_01
—–. (2004). World disasters report 2004: Focus on community resilience. Bloomfield, CT:
Kumarian Press. Retrieved April 8, 2005, from http://www.ifrc.org/publicat/wdr2004
Institute for Population Health. (2002). Expert panel workshop on climate change and health
and well-being in Canada: Key findings and recommendations. Report prepared
for Health Canada, Ottawa.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2001). Climate change 2001: Impacts,
adaptation and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution to the Third Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007a). Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working Group II
contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and
C.E. Hanson (Eds.).Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007b). Climate change 2007: The physical science basis. Working Group I contribution
to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, et al. (Eds.). Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
Ipsos-Reid Corporation. (2001). Public views on weather warnings—Final report. Report submitted
to Environment Canada. Ottawa: Author.
Koppe, C., Kovats, S., Jendritzky, G., and Menne, B. (2004). Heat waves: Risks and responses.
Copenhagen: World Health Organization (WHO).
Kovacs, P. (2006). Hope for the best and prepare for the worst: How Canada’s insurers stay
a step ahead of climate change. Policy Options, 27(1), 52–57.
Kovats, S., and Ebi, K. (2006). Heatwaves and public health in Europe. European Journal
of Public Health, 16(6): 592–599.
Kovats, S., Ebi, K.L., and Menne, B. (2003). Methods of assessing human health vulnerability
and public health adaptation to climate change. Health and Global Environmental
Change, Series no. 1. Report prepared for the World Health Organization, World
Meteorological Organization, Health Canada, and United Nations Environment
Programme, Copenhagen.
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
443
Kovats, R.S., and Haines, A. (2005). Global climate change and health: Recent findings and
future steps. Canadian Medical Association Journal (CMAJ), 172(4), 501.
Kovats, R.S., and Jendritzky, G. (2006). Heat-waves and human health. In B. Menne, and
K.L. Ebi (Eds.), Climate change and adaptation strategies for human health (pp. 63–97).
Germany: Steinkopff Verlag Darmstadt.
Kovats, S., and Koppe, C. (2005). Heat waves: Past and future impacts on health. In K.L. Ebi,
J.B. Smith, and I. Burton (Eds.), Integration of public health with adaptation to climate
change: Lessons learned and new directions. London: Taylor & Francis.
Kuban, R., and MacKenzie-Carey, H. (2001). Community-Wide Vulnerability and Capacity
Assessment (CVCA). Report prepared for Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and
Emergency Preparedness. Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and Government Services.
Lambert, T.W., Soskolne, C.L., Bergum, V., Howell, J., and Dossetor, J.B. (2003). Ethical
perspectives for public and environmental health: Fostering autonomy and the right to
know. Environmental Health Perspectives, 111(2), 133–137.
Lee, S.H., Levy, D.A., Craun, G.F., Beach, M.J., and Calderon, R.L. (2002). Surveillance for
waterborne disease outbreaks – United States, 1999–2000. Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report, 51, 1–47.
Lemmen, D.S., and Warren, F.J. (2004). Climate change impacts and adaptation: A Canadian
perspective. Ottawa: Natural Resources Canada (NRCan).
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J., and Bush, E. (Eds.). (2008). From impacts to adaptation:
Canada in a changing climate 2007. Ottawa: Government of Canada.
Levy, D.A., Bens, M.S., Craun, G.F., Calderon, R.L., and Herwaldt, B.L. (1998). Surveillance
for waterborne disease outbreaks – United States, 1995–1996. Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report, 47, 1–34.
Ligeti, E., Wieditz, I., and Penney, J. (2006). A scan of climate change impacts on Toronto.
Report prepared for Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved March 27, 2007, from
http://www.cleanairpartnership.org/pdf/climate_change_scan.pdf
MacLean, J.D., Demers, A., Hdao, M., Kokoskin, E., Ward, B.J., et al. (2004). Malaria epidemics
and surveillance systems in Canada. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 10(7), 1195–1201.
McBean, G. (2006). The worst is yet to come: Hurricanes and global warming. Policy
Options, 27(1), 21–26.
McBean, G., and Henstra, D. (2003, March). Climate change, natural hazards and cities. Institute
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) Research Paper Series—No. 31. Paper
prepared for Natural Resources Canada (NRCan), Ottawa.
McGeehin, M., and Mirabelli, M. (2001). The potential impacts of climate variability and change
on temperature-related morbidity and mortality in the United States. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 109 (suppl. 2): 185–189.
McMichael, A.J., Campbell-Lendrum, D.H., Corvalan, C.F., Ebi, K.L., Githeko, A., et al. (Eds.).
(2003). Climate change and health: Risks and responses. Geneva: World Health
Organization (WHO).
Mehdi, B., Mrena, C., Douglas, A., Connolly-Boutin, L., Sydneysmith, R., et al. (2006). Adapting
to climate change: An introduction for Canadian municipalities. Retrieved March 29, 2007,
from http://www.c-ciarn.ca/pdf/adaptations_e.pdf
Menne, B., and Bertollini, R. (2005). Health and climate change: A call for action. British Medical
Journal (BMJ), 331(7528), 1283–1284.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
444
Menne, B., and Ebi, K.L. (Eds.). (2006). Climate change and adaptation strategies for human
health. Germany: Steinkopff Verlag Darmstadt.
Mileti, D.S. (1999). Disasters by Design: A Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United States.
Washington, D.C.: Joseph Henry Press.
Munro, M. (2006, October 4). The big melt: Canada’s North on the frontline of change. CanWest
News Service. Retrieved October 6, 2006, from http://www.canada.com/cityguides/
halifax/info/story.html?id=8851d940-0b3e-4ef2-93ba-8dda0ff1836b&k=64479
Murphy, B.L. (2004). Emergency management and the August 14th, 2003 blackout. Institute for
Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) Research Paper Series—No. 40. Toronto: Institute
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.
Murphy, B.L., Falkiner, L., McBean, G., Dolan, H., and Kovacs, P. (2005). Enhancing local level
emergency management: The influence of disaster experience and the role of households
and neighbourhoods. Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction Research, Paper Series—
No. 43. Toronto: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). (2000). Sensitivities to climate change in Canada.
Ottawa: Author. Retrieved March 10, 2007, from http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/
home2_e.asp?CaID=17&PgID=63
—–. (2005). National climate change adaptation framework. Ottawa: Author. Retrieved
October 15, 2006, from http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/app/filerepository/
E84CC04097004024847DEDA0F9CB72C6.pdf
Nickels, S., Furgal, C., Buell, M., and Moquin, H. (2006). Putting the human face on climate
change: Perspectives from Inuit in Canada. Québec: Université Laval.
Noble, D., Bruce, J., and Egener, M. (2005). Global change strategies international. An overview
of the risk management approach to adaptation to climate change in Canada. Prepared
for Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa.
Nugent, O. (2002). The smog primer. Toronto: Pollution Probe. Retrieved March 27, 2007,
from http://www.pollutionprobe.org/Reports/smogprimer.pdf
Office of the Auditor General of Canada. (2006). Adapting to the impacts of climate change.
In 2006 Report of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development.
Chapter 2. Ottawa: Author.
Ogden, N.H., Bigras-Poulin, M., O’Callaghan, C.J., Barker, I.K., Lindsay, L.R., et al. (2005).
A dynamic population model to investigate effects of climate on geographic range and
seasonality of the tick Ixodes scapularis. International Journal of Parasitology, 35, 375–389.
Ogden, N.H., Lindsay, L.R., Beauchamp, G., Charron, D., Maarouf, A., et al. (2004). Investigation
of relationships between temperature and developmental rates of tick Ixodes scapularis
(Acari: Ixodidae) in the laboratory and field. Journal of Medical Entomology, 41(4), 622–633.
Oliver, S.L., Dastjerdi, A.M., Wong, S., El-Attar, L., Gallimore, C., et al. (2003). Molecular
characterization of bovine enteric caliciviruses: A distinct third genogroup of
Noroviruses (Norwalk-like viruses) unlikely to be of risk to humans. Journal of
Virology, 77, 2789–2798.
Ontario Medical Association. (2005). The illness costs of air pollution: 2005–2026. Health and
economic damage estimates. Retrieved August 5, 2005, from https://www.oma.org/
Health/smog/icap.asp
Ontario Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services. (2006, October 6). Emergency
information warning system will benefit Ontario communities. Retrieved November 21, 2006,
from http://ogov.newswire.ca/ontario/GPOE/2006/10/06/c5905.html?lmatch=&lang=_e.html
Ontario Public Health Association. (2004). Climate change and human health: Position paper
and resolution adopted by the Ontario Public Health Association. Toronto: Author.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
445
Ormond, P. (2004). CRIDS background study: Hamilton’s vulnerability to climate change.
Report prepared for the City of Hamilton by ECO5 Inc.
Pachauri, R.K. (2005). Foreword. In K.L. Ebi, J.B. Smith, and I. Burton (Eds.), Integration
of public health with adaptation to climate change: Lessons learned and new directions.
London: Taylor & Francis.
Paszkowski, D. (2007). Heat management in Canadian communities. Prepared for Health Canada.
Penney, J., and Wieditz, I. (2007). Cities preparing for climate change: A study of six urban
regions. Prepared by the Clean Air Partnership (CAP) for Natural Resources
Canada (NRCan).
Pepperell, C., Rau, N., Krajden, S., Kern, R., Humar, A., et al. (2003). West Nile virus infection
in 2002: Morbidity and mortality among patients admitted to hospital in south central
Ontario. Canadian Medical Association Journal (CMAJ), 168(11), 1399–1405.
Philpot, A. (2006). Scan of literature on drinking water, infectious disease control and food
safety in Canada’s 10 provinces. Report prepared for Health Canada by the Canadian
Public Health Association (CPHA).
Pinner, R.W., Rebmann, C.A., Schuchat, A., and Hughes, J.M. (2003). Disease surveillance
and the academic, clinical, and public health communities. Emerging Infectious Disease
Journal, 9(7), 781–787.
POLLARA. (2006). Health care in Canada—Survey 2006. Ninth annual national survey in
conjunction with HCIC partners. Retrieved March 26, 2007, from http://www.who.int/
patientsafety/news/2006_hcic.pdf
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2003). Canadian integrated surveillance report.
Salmonella, Campylobacter, pathogenic E. coli and Shigella, from 1996 to 1999.
Vol. 29S1. Retrieved March 02, 2007, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/
ccdr-rmtc/03vol29/29s1/index.html
—–. (2004). Global public health intelligence network. Retrieved March 27, 2007, from
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/media/nr-rp/2004/2004_gphin-rmispbk_e.html
—–. (2006). GIS for public health practice. Retrieved December 18, 2006, from http://
www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/php-psp/pdf/2005_brochure_gis_e.pdf
—–. (2007a). Canada’s new government provides an additional investment of up to $25 million
in cutting edge vaccine laboratory to keep Canadians safe and healthy. Retrieved
March 27, 2007, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/media/nr-rp/2007/2007_01_e.html
—–. (2007b). Canadian integrated public health surveillance (CIPHS). Retrieved March 26, 2007,
from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/php-psp/ciphs_e.html
—–. (2007c) Health topics: Chronic diseases – What are chronic and non-communicable
diseases? Retrieved December 12, 2007, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/
ccdpc-cpcmc/topics/chronic-disease_e.html
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC). (n.d.). An emergency management
framework for Canada. Ottawa.
—–. (2006). Reports on Plans and Priorities (RPP) 2006–2007. Ottawa: Treasury Board
of Canada.
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC). (2007a). Freezing rain: Ontario
to New Brunswick, 1998. Canadian Disaster Database. Retrieved October 25, 2007 from
http://ww5.ps-sp.gc.ca/res/em/cdd/results-en.asp?page=1
—–. (2007b). Is your family prepared? Retrieved April 26, 2007, from http://www.getprepared.ca/
index_e.asp
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
446
—–. (2007c). Tornado: Edmonton AB, 1987. Canadian Disaster Database. Retrieved
October 25, 2007 from http://ww5.ps-sp.gc.ca/res/em/cdd/results-en.asp?page=1
Regional District of Central Okanagan. (2001). Regional growth strategy: Air quality discussion
paper. Kelowna: Regional District of Central Okanagan.
Remedios, J.D. (2005). Risk perception and risk communication: A holistic approach to disaster
resilience. Toronto: Emergency Management Ontario.
Riedel, D. (2004). Human health and well-being. In D.S. Lemmen, and F.J. Warren (Eds.),
Climate change impacts and adaptation: A Canadian perspective. Ottawa: Natural
Resources Canada (NRCan). Retrieved March 26, 2007, from http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/
perspective_e.asp
Roberts, J., Iqubal, M., and Churchill, J.L. (2006). Adapting to climate change: Is Canada ready?
Ottawa: The Conference Board of Canada.
Rotermann, M. (2006). Seniors’ health care use in health reports: How healthy are Canadians?—
Annual report. Statistics Canada, supplement to Health Reports, 16, 2006. Retrieved
March 27, 2007, from http://www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/82-003-SIE/2005000/
pdf/82-003-SIE2005000.pdf
Rousseau, M. (2005). Montréal heat wave exercise. Report prepared for Health Canada, Ottawa.
Scheraga, J.D., Ebi, K.L., Furlow, J., and Moreno, A.R. (2003). From science to policy:
Developing responses to climate change. In A.J. McMichael, D.H. Campbell-Lendrum,
C.F. Corvalan, C.F., K.L. Ebi, A. Githeko, et al. (Eds.), Climate change and health:
Risks and responses. Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO).
Schuster, C.J., Ellis, A.G., Robertson, W.J., Charron, D.F., Aramini, J.J., et al. (2005). Infectious
disease outbreaks related to drinking water in Canada, 1974–2001. Canadian Journal
of Public Health, 96(4), 254–258.
Seguin, J. (2005). Evidence base: Where are we now, where are we going? Health Policy Research
Bulletin, 11, 12–15.
Smit, B., and Pilifosova, O. (2001). Adaptation to climate change in the context of sustainable
development and equity. In J.J. McCarthy, O.F. Canziani, N.A. Leary, D.J. Dokken,
and K.S. White (Eds.), Climate change 2001. Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Smit, B., and Wandel, J. (2006). Adaptation, adaptive capacity and vulnerability. Global Environmental
Change, 16, 282–292.
Smoyer-Tomic, K., and Rainham, D. (2001). Beating the heat: Development and evaluation
of a Canadian hot weather health-response plan. Environmental Health Perspectives,
190(12), 1241–1248.
Smoyer, K., Rainham, D. and Hewko, J. (1999). Integrated analysis of heat-related mortality
in the Toronto-Windsor corridor. Toronto-Niagara Region Study Report and Working
Paper Series, Report 99–1. Waterloo: Environment Canada.
—–. (2000). Heat stress mortality in five cities in southern Ontario: 1980–1996. International
Journal of Biometeorology, 44, 190–197.
Sommer, M. (2006). Red/Green alert: Early warning systems for public health threats. Interview
with Abla Mawudeku. A world of possibilities. Retrieved March 27, 2007, from
http://www.aworldofpossibilities.com/details.cfm?id=274
Spanger-Siegfried, E., and Dougherty, B. (2003). The adaptation policy framework: User’s
guidebook. Final draft. New York: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
447
Standing Senate Committee on National Security and Defence. (2004). National emergencies:
Canada’s fragile front lines, an upgrade strategy. Vol. 1. Ottawa: Author.
Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology. (2003). Reforming
health protection and promotion in Canada: Time to act. Report to the Committee:
Fourteenth Report. Ottawa: Government of Canada.
Statistics Canada. (2003a). 2001 census: Analysis series. Aboriginal peoples of Canada:
A demographic profile. Ottawa: Minister of Industry.
—–. (2003b). Cornerstones of community: Highlights of the National Survey of Nonprofit
and Voluntary Organizations. Catalogue no. 61-533-SPB, 2003. Retrieved
June 17, 2005, from http://www.statcan.ca/bsolc/english/bsolc?catno=61-533-X
—–. (2005a) Health reports. Ottawa: Author. Retrieved October 22, 2007, from
http://www.statcan.ca/cgi-bin/downpub/listpub.cgi?catno=82-003-XIE2004002
—–. (2005b). National health expenditure trends (1975–2005). Ottawa: Author. Retrieved
November 22, 2006, from http://secure.cihi.ca/cihiweb/dispPage.jsp?cw_page=
AR_31_E&cw_topic=31
—–. (2005c, December 15). Population projections, 2005 to 2031. The Daily. Retrieved
June 17, 2005 from http://www.statcan.ca/Daily/English/051215/d051215b.htm
—–. (2006). Canada at a glance: 2006. Retrieved November 22, 2006, from http://
www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/12-581-XIE/12-581-XIE2005001.pdf
—–. (2007). A portrait of seniors. Retrieved March 26, 2007, from www.statcan.ca/Daily/
English/070227/d070227b.htm
—–. (2008). Age of Public Infrastructure: A Provincial Perspective. Retrieved February 28, 2008,
from http://www.statcan.ca/english/research/11-621-MIE/11-621-MIE2008067.pdf
Stern, N. (2006). The economics of climate change: The Stern review. HM Treasury, London.
Retrieved January 24, 2007, from http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/independent_reviews/
stern_review_economics_climate_change/stern_review_report.cfm
Street, R., Maarouf, A., and Jones-Otazo, H. (2005). Extreme weather and climate events –
Implications for public health. In K.L. Ebi, J.B. Smith, and I. Burton (Eds.), Integration
of public health with adaptation to climate change: Lessons learned and new
directions. London: Taylor & Francis.
The Conference Board of Canada. (2006). Adapting to climate change: Is Canada ready?
Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2007). Operationalizing adaptation to climate change. Briefing. Ottawa: Author.
The Sheltair Group. (2003). Climate change impacts and adaptation strategies for urban
systems in Greater Vancouver. Report prepared for Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa.
Retrieved March 29, 2007, from http://www.sheltair.com/library_rem.html
The Sustainable Region Initiative. (2005). Air quality management plan for Greater Vancouver:
Clean air, breathe easy. Vancouver: Greater Vancouver Regional District.
Tierney, K.J., Lindell, M.K., and Perry, R.W. (2001). Facing the unexpected: Disaster preparedness
and response in the United States. Washington: Joseph Henry Press.
Tudor, C. (1997). EPC electronic disaster database and its characteristics. Project Report 97-1.
Office of the Scientific Advisor, Emergency Preparedness Canada. Retrieved
February 22, 2007, from http://dsp-psd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/D83-5-97-1E.pdf
United States (U.S.) Department of State. (2002). U.S. climate action report 2002. Washington,
D.C.: Author.
Chapter 8
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
448
United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA), National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, and United
States (U.S.) Department of Homeland Security. (2006). Excessive heat events guidebook.
Washington, D.C.. Retrieved March 10, 2007, from http://www.epa.gov/heatisland/
about/heatresponseprograms.html
Weir, E. (2005). Hantavirus: ‘tis the season’. Canadian Medical Association Journal (CMAJ),
173(2), 147.
World Economic Forum. (2007, January). Global risks 2007—A global risk network report.
Geneva: Author.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2002). Floods: Climate change and adaptation strategies
for human health—Report on a WHO meeting. Copenhagen: World Health Organization
Regional Office for Europe.
—–. (2005). Health and climate change: The “now and how”—A policy action guide.
Copenhagen: Author.
Yohe, G., and Tol, R.S.J. (2002). Indicators for social and economic coping capacity—Moving
toward a working definition of adaptive capacity: Global environmental change.
Human Policy Dimensions, 12, 25–40.
Zuker, R.C. (2004). Closing the municipal infrastructure gap in Canada. Report prepared
for the Federation of Canadian Municipalities, Ottawa.
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Conclusion
Jacinthe Séguin
Contributor: 
Peter Berry
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
451
CONTENTS
9.1
Summary .................................................................................................................... 452
9.2
Key Findings .............................................................................................................. 453
9.3
Knowledge Gaps ........................................................................................................ 457
9.4
Moving Forward Together ........................................................................................ 458
Chapter 9
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
452
9.1
SUMMARY
As the federal department responsible for helping Canadians maintain and improve their health
and well-being, Health Canada initiated this Assessment to advance the understanding of how
climate change impacts the health and well-being of Canadians. Carried out in collaboration
with several partnering organizations and individuals, it combines an investigation of population
vulnerabilities to current weather and climate variability with an exploration of the effects 
of future climate change on natural hazards, air quality, and water-, food-, vector- and 
rodent-borne diseases.
Two regional health assessments were also conducted, investigating climate effects on 
residents of Canada’s North and of the province of Quebec. These more in-depth regional 
assessments provide insights on the interactions of social, economic and environmental 
conditions that influence vulnerabilities and adaptive capacity in these regions. This
Assessment also includes discussion of vulnerability and adaptive capacity to provide health
sector and emergency management decision makers with information on key health 
risks to populations and the response capabilities needed to address immediate adaptation
needs. It paves the way for future vulnerability assessments by applying these concepts 
in research in a practical way and providing guidance to decision makers at all levels of 
government for the investigation of the health effects of climate change.
This Assessment confirms that, in Canada, climate variability and climate change affect
human health and well-being through different pathways that vary in their directness, 
temporal scale and complexity, causing or exacerbating a range of illnesses, injuries and, 
in extreme cases, death. Health can be affected directly as a result of exposure to climatic 
extremes (e.g. high temperatures causing dehydration and heat exhaustion) or sudden, 
intense changes in the environment such as a tornado or storm. Even when environmental
impacts are immediate, health effects may not be apparent until prolonged or repeated 
environmental exposure has occurred.
Health can also be affected indirectly as a result of climate-induced changes in biological 
and geochemical systems, which create conditions favourable for the survival and 
replication of vectors and pathogens that can transmit diseases, or affect economic and 
social systems (e.g. loss of employment or property after a natural disaster resulting 
in stress and other illnesses). Health impacts can also occur in the presence of other risks 
or because of cumulative exposures to several hazards. In such cases, attribution to a 
specific cause or determination of synergistic effect (e.g. combined exposure to heat and 
poor air quality) is complex and, at times, not possible. Because the scope of effects 
from climate variability and climate change on health is broad, there is still much to be
learned about the factors that combine with climate conditions to lead to illnesses 
and deaths among the Canadian population.
Climate change may convey benefits to the health and well-being of Canadians. However, 
the nature and scope of such benefits are not well understood. In fact, some of the 
benefits often cited in international literature, such as milder winter temperatures and 
lower winter mortality, may not be observed in Canada. For example, the analysis of 
temperature-related mortality in the province of Quebec revealed that current successful 
adaptation to very cold temperatures in that province means mortality does not peak 
under very cold conditions, as seen elsewhere in the world. The expected decrease in 
mortality due to future warmer winters is thus much reduced compared to other parts 
of the world. Furthermore, in the absence of further adaptations, summer mortality is 
expected to rise sharply under extreme heat conditions resulting in increases in average 
annual mortality in Quebec as the climate continues to warm. Additional research is needed 
Chapter 9
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
453
to understand current adaptive behaviours to temperature
extremes elsewhere in Canada and the expected net impacts
of climate change. The focus of current research is on 
avoiding and mitigating health risks and on ways to increase
individual and collective capacity to do so in the future.
There exists capacity to address many climate-related risks 
in Canada. However, Canadians must be prepared to 
deploy existing knowledge and resources to ensure that
capacity is broadly distributed across society and that 
no region or part of the population is left unprepared.
Accurately predicting the health impacts associated with
future climate change is not currently possible, because 
of uncertainty about the extent and rate of expected future
warming and about trends in socio-economic and demo-
graphic factors that affect the ability of Canadians to adapt 
to the health impacts and reduce their risks. Other sources 
of uncertainty in this Assessment arise from knowledge gaps related to the biological and
physical processes by which climate affects health, incomplete information on population
health status and health protection practices, confounding factors in attributing causes 
of illnesses, and difficulties inherent in estimating health impacts associated with projected
future climate trends, as well as cumulative impacts.
Even if rapid reductions of greenhouse gases can be achieved in the near term, there is 
virtual certainty that climate change will be experienced for decades to come because of 
inertia in the climate system. Despite uncertainty about the nature and expected severity 
of future impacts and the knowledge gaps described above, the findings of this Assessment
suggest the need for immediate action to buttress efforts to protect health from current 
climate hazards. Planning and preparing are also required to reduce or avoid potential 
adverse health outcomes as the climate continues to change. Together, the various chapters 
provide the following key findings.
9.2
KEY FINDINGS
Climate variables and climate hazards directly and indirectly impact the health 
and well-being of Canadians. Climate change will increase risks to health.
People in all segments of the population and regions of Canada are exposed to natural hazards
and extreme weather associated with climate change (e.g. droughts, severe storms, hurricanes,
extreme heat and cold events, avalanches and landslides, storm surges and floods). Knowledge
of one’s own community and individual vulnerabilities is imperative because the health risks
vary across the country, the size of some vulnerable populations is growing, and the capacity
to cope and adapt is uneven. Many factors affect Canadians’ vulnerability to climate change such
as where they live, their sensitivity to health impacts and their ability to protect themselves
(e.g. availability of resources, knowledge of protective behaviours, and access to services).
The scope of weather-related natural hazards in Canada is quite broad. This Assessment
inventoried 12 categories of weather events that can affect health. Because the Canadian
Disaster Database tracks only those events that meet specific criteria related to costs, injuries
and deaths, the full scope of health consequences of natural hazards reported is likely 
underestimated. Nevertheless, the number of Canadians affected by natural disasters has 
Chapter 9
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
454
risen in recent decades. Between 1994 and 2003, approximately 578,238 people across
Canada were directly affected by natural disasters. Impacts reported include deaths, illnesses 
and injuries, evacuations and service interruptions (power and water outages). There 
is also evidence that weather events can have significant short- and long-term psychosocial
impacts on the health and well-being of Canadians, but these effects are often poorly 
documented and under-studied in Canada. Overall, with the exception of the number of 
cold days, there is a projected increased risk of extreme weather and weather-related 
hazards in the future. Risks to human health will vary across Canada according to topography,
current land use and human activity patterns, regional climate systems, and adaptation 
measures and systems in place to minimize health risks. Future projections of impacts from 
climate change include increases in drought and wildfires and certain types of storms, 
including more intense heavy precipitation events that can increase the risk of flash floods.
Heat waves are predicted to increase in frequency and severity, with the risk of heat-related
deaths being the greatest in cities.
Climate change can influence air quality as demonstrated by the modelling of the effects of an
increase in global average temperature of 4°C on key air quality parameters such as ozone (O3)
and particulate matter (PM2.5) in Canada. While results from the atmospheric modelling 
conducted for this Assessment focussed only on changes in temperature and biogenic emissions,
this work demonstrated the need for future work to better understand the effects of different 
climatic conditions on air quality. Modelling of other variables that influence air quality and
different warming scenarios could lead to better understanding. There is solid evidence of 
the health effects of air pollution in Canada and, to a more limited extent, the health effects 
of extreme heat and heat waves. There is a possible additive or synergistic effect on health of
combined exposures to air pollution and higher temperatures in certain groups within the 
population, however, evidence from epidemiological studies remains insufficient at this time.
Better understanding of the implications of different climatic scenarios for air quality across
regions in Canada and of the effects of combined exposures to high temperatures and air 
pollutants, particularly for seniors and young populations, is important for deciding on the
most effective measures to protect various segments of the population.
Canadians are routinely exposed to infectious diseases that are sensitive to climate variables,
such as temperature and precipitation. These include diseases transmitted by insects, ticks 
or animals, as well as pathogens that are water-borne, food-borne, or both. There is evidence
that climate variables can influence pathogen ecology, and also the activities and behaviours of
Canadians which can increase their exposure to these diseases. Climate change can be expected
to create favourable conditions for pathogen and vector survival where low temperatures, 
low rainfall or the absence of vector habitat would have previously restricted the reproduction
of hosts and transmission of diseases. For example, the expansion of the range of Lyme disease’s
tick vector in Canada is related to higher ambient temperatures that shorten tick lifecycles;
together with more favourable conditions for host-seeking activity, this would increase the
geographic range of the disease. This Assessment identifies a range of water-, food-, vector- and
rodent-borne diseases whose incidence may increase under changing climate conditions; 
however, there remain significant gaps in knowledge of the ecology of diseases, of the burden
of illness from water- and food-borne illnesses, of the geographic distribution of zoonoses 
in wildlife and of many other factors. A systematic risk assessment that takes into account
pathogenicity, estimated number of cases and incidence rates, and the likelihood that climate
change will alter the risk would be useful to identify adaptation priorities. Continued multi-level
collaborations are necessary to build proactive surveillance systems that are capable of 
identifying changing disease patterns and emerging risks in a timely fashion. This will allow
public health officials to monitor population health risks and implement measures to reduce
exposure and/or introduce new treatments as required.
Chapter 9
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
455
The impacts of climate change can combine with other circumstances to increase 
health risks or create conditions for a disaster.
Climate change has already started to affect the environment, the economy, and infrastructures
that play an important role in the health status of Canadians. The scope of these changes in
Canada is documented in From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007,
recently released by the Government of Canada. The study of cumulative effects and the 
interaction between multiple factors determining health is challenging and still in its infancy.
However, past experience in Canada and elsewhere related to extreme weather events 
has demonstrated that risks associated with climate change combined with individual and
community vulnerabilities can lead to disasters. For this reason, it is very important to 
understand how well existing systems can deal with current risks, how they can withstand
repeated or simultaneous events, and what factors and events combine to exacerbate 
vulnerabilities.
This Assessment found that Canada’s
expected population growth, aging
population, increasing urbanization,
aging of public infrastructures and
trends in health status indicators
may amplify the impacts of a
changing climate on Canadians. In
the absence of effective adaptations,
the combined effects of projected
health, demographic and climate
trends in Canada are expected 
to increase the vulnerability of
Canadians to the health impacts 
of climate change. The proportion 
of Canadians highly sensitive to these impacts is expected to grow, although this will vary
from one region to another. The number of Canadian seniors is growing dramatically; 
this population cohort is expected to almost double in size by 2031 when it will account 
for between 23 and 25% of the population. The number of Canadians suffering from 
chronic illnesses, such as heart disease, cancer and respiratory disease, is also on the rise.
These illnesses and their management can be rendered more difficult by climatic factors.
Regional assessments highlighted the vulnerability of specific population groups and
confirmed the importance of developing adaptations tailored to local and regional needs.
This Assessment confirmed that regional-scale assessments are essential for understanding 
climate change and health vulnerabilities within a population as well as the factors that
increase or contribute to an individual’s or community’s vulnerability. Compared to national-
scale assessments, they require smaller data sets and can more easily take into account the
context within which these risks occur. For example, when conducting a vulnerability analysis,
they are better able to integrate relevant information such as local risk management practices,
individual perceptions and behaviours, and socio-demographic information. In sum, regional
assessments can more precisely identify the factors that influence vulnerability (e.g. exposure,
sensitivity and ability to manage risks) and make specific recommendations on how to reduce risk
and exposure, and how to increase the availability of response measures. Regional assessments
face the same methodological challenges relating to the treatment of uncertainty as national
studies. However, because they can undertake detailed assessments of current capacity to
manage the risks and adaptive capacity, they can be more successful in demonstrating the need
to take action despite uncertainty in the assessment of risks.
Chapter 9
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
456
The investigation of climate change impacts on health in Quebec revealed that as average
temperatures continue to increase, heat-related mortality in Quebec is expected to rise 
in the absence of further adaptations. A detailed survey of adaptive behaviours indicated that
Quebeckers are taking many actions to reduce health risks related to heat waves and cold
snaps, but that some groups have not adopted, or do not have access to, the necessary protective
measures and services. It also showed that most respondents strongly support the rapid 
implementation of vigorous adaptive measures in many economic sectors, including mitigation
of greenhouse gases.
This Assessment also advanced knowledge of public health and other local decision makers’
awareness of the health risks of climate change as well as what they regard as potential 
barriers to adaptation. Based on a review of current measures and systems in place, adaptation 
to climate change is well underway in the province of Quebec and to some extent in northern
Canada. However, key areas for further improvements have been identified based on the 
literature review and studies commissioned for this Assessment. Some of the identified 
deficiencies are already being addressed in the health component of the Quebec 2006–2012
action plan on climate change notably regarding surveillance systems and adaptation of 
health services and infrastructure.
In Canada’s North, people are already reporting dramatic environmental and climatic 
changes and are concerned about growing risks to their health and well-being. However, 
climate change is not manifesting itself uniformly across the North. For example, 
temperature and precipitation trends vary such that regions are warming at different 
rates, some regions are getting drier while others are getting wetter. Awareness of 
climate change and its impacts is high among Northerners and local observations play 
an important role in gathering information about these changes. Many communities 
report an increase in uncharacteristic weather events, which is compromising their 
travel safety. Livelihoods and diets that depend on subsistence activities (i.e. hunting, 
fishing, gathering) already appear to be impacted in many regions, and nutritional 
effects from such changes are of primary concern. The importance and immediacy 
of these health impacts are motivating Northerners to adapt, using new and locally 
developed technologies, practices and innovations. However, access to support 
and resources for adaptation is uneven and many individuals and communities remain 
vulnerable to the health impacts of climate change.
Northerners are also experiencing other important societal changes that can compound 
the impacts of climate change. While individuals and communities are leading the way 
in adapting to climate change, collaborative and coordinated efforts from public and private
sectors are needed to accompany local and individual efforts. Improvements in surveillance 
of a broad range of health impacts (e.g. water-, food-, rodent- and vector-borne diseases, 
ultraviolet radiation exposure, travel injuries, etc.) are required to better inform adaptation 
strategies, and to reduce risks to health through local interventions.
Developing the adaptive capacity of individuals, communities and governments 
is essential in order to address growing health risks and avoid unnecessary strain 
on health care and social systems.
Without effective adaptation strategies, the impacts of climate change on health are expected 
to increase pressure on a range of health and social service programs at all levels of government,
and therefore the costs of climate change could extend beyond the health impacts (e.g. increased
incidence of illness, injury, disease, death) to include increased economic costs to health care
and social systems.
Chapter 9
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
457
Decision makers rely on access 
to material and financial resources, 
technology, information and skills,
institutional arrangements and public
health infrastructure to address health
risks due to climate change. Adaptive
capacity fluctuates over time, as the
ability of individuals, institutions 
and governments within Canada to
manage these health risks changes.
This Assessment identifies important 
gaps in current capacity to address 
climate change health risks. In recent
years, significant strides have been
made in improving the ability of public health and emergency management officials to prepare
for and respond to a range of climate-related hazards including extreme weather events 
(e.g. heat waves), air pollution, and water-, food-, vector- and rodent-borne infectious disease
outbreaks. Building upon these efforts will ensure that the critical activities and partnerships
necessary for reducing health risks are identified, and made the focus of future collaborative
adaptation efforts.
Differences in access to social services, infrastructures and resources to reduce risks from climate
change mean that the capacity to cope and adapt in Canada is uneven. Rural communities face
unique challenges, such as limited resources for adaptation, less developed public infrastructures
and, in some cases, isolation. Urban areas are becoming more sophisticated in their public health
programming, but the complexity of issues facing them is increasing as are climate change
adaptation needs.
Climate change is expected to increase illnesses and deaths in Canada if public health authorities
and their partners do not examine their respective vulnerabilities, and develop and implement
adaptations that afford adequate protection to vulnerable groups. Regional- and community-level
assessments play a useful role in identifying key health vulnerabilities in the context of other
changes occurring in the population under study. They are also better positioned to assess the
magnitude and urgency of key health risks, and thus can guide decisions on when and where
to focus efforts. Several tools and approaches exist to assess adaptation options and best 
practices are beginning to emerge. These are necessary to increase decision makers’ support
for implementing adaptation measures and to reduce population health risks.
9.3
KNOWLEDGE GAPS
Research and knowledge from a broad range of disciplines is required to advance 
understanding of the effects of climate change on health and to support adaptive measures.
This Assessment highlighted the many sources of empirical data necessary for assessing 
the health impacts of climate change on Canadians. Surveillance and monitoring systems 
that public health and emergency management authorities rely upon are maintained at 
local, provincial and national levels and this can place limits on data aggregation and 
comparability. Non-empirical information, drawn from case studies and reports using 
local observations and personal experiences, is also important, particularly in the analysis 
of capacity. In each area studied, authors have identified knowledge needs that would 
Chapter 9
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
458
help to reduce uncertainty, expand the applicability of 
findings, identify vulnerable segments of the population 
and further the understanding of barriers to adaptation.
Overall, knowledge needs fall under the following 
broad categories:
• biological and physical processes by which climate
affects health;
• climate scenarios and models for estimating future
health risks;
• current and future exposure of Canadians to climate-
related hazards;
• identification of adaptation measures needed to 
reduce health risks due to climate change, including
cost-benefit analyses of measures;
• perception of health risks from climate change by individual Canadians and by public 
and private decision makers including motivations and barriers to adaptation; and
• processes of adaptation and integration of climate change considerations into current 
risk management practices.
9.4
MOVING FORWARD TOGETHER
This Assessment highlighted current impacts on health from a range of climate-related 
hazards and the potential health vulnerabilities to climate change for specific regions, 
communities and populations in Canada. Health sector and emergency managemnet 
decision makers are beginning to draw upon existing knowledge to address the risks 
posed by climate change. This is being accomplished through a wide range of actions 
such as the development of heat alert systems, enhanced emergency management 
planning, and the monitoring and surveillance of emerging infectious diseases. They 
are developing new practices and innovative approaches and measures to reduce 
risks to health. Supporting the dissemination and application of best practices is central 
to ensuring the broad protection of Canadians.
Future investigation of the effects of climate change on health and the implementation 
of needed adaptations will benefit from the multidisciplinary collaboration that has begun 
among many research organizations. These include Canadian and international centres of 
expertise, such as Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada, Environment 
Canada, Ouranos, several Canadian universities, Quebec’s Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec, the World Health Organization and the U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. Continued investments in multidisciplinary research and 
policy development are necessary to build on the increased awareness about health 
risks associated with climate change and on the current momentum within research 
agencies, professional organizations and local governments in order to take action 
to protect the health of Canadians.
Chapter 9
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
461
Abrupt Climate Change
The non-linearity of the climate system may lead to abrupt climate change, sometimes called
rapid climate change, abrupt events or even surprises. The term “abrupt” often refers to time
scales faster than the typical time scale of the responsible forcing. Some possible abrupt events
that have been proposed include a dramatic reorganization of the thermohaline circulation,
rapid deglaciation and massive melting of permafrost or increases in soil respiration leading 
to fast changes in the carbon cycle. Others may be truly unexpected (IPCC, 2007a).
Adaptation
Adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected effects of climate
change and variability, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities. Various
types of adaptation exist (e.g. anticipatory and reactive, private and public, autonomous and
planned) (IPCC, 2007a).
Adaptation Benefits
The avoided damage costs or the accrued benefits following the adoption and implementation
of adaptation measures (IPCC, 2007a).
Adaptation Costs
Costs of planning, preparing for, facilitating and implementing adaptation measures, including
transition costs (IPCC, 2007a).
Adaptation Mainstreaming
Integrating climate change adaptation considerations and information into policies, programs
and operations at all levels of decision making rather than creating new policies or policy
instruments. The goal is to make the adaptation process an essential component of existing
decision-making and planning frameworks (Adapted from UNDP, 2005).
Adaptive Capacity
The ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including climate variability and extremes) 
to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the 
consequences (IPCC, 2007b).
Aerosols
A collection of airborne solid or liquid particles with a typical size of 0.01 to 10 mm that reside
in the atmosphere for at least several hours. Aerosols may be of either natural or anthropogenic
origin. Aerosols may influence climate in two ways: directly through scattering and absorbing
radiation, and indirectly through acting as condensation nuclei for cloud formation or modifying
the optical properties and lifetime of clouds (IPCC, 2001).
Air Mass
Synoptic meteorological characterization of the entire body of air and its qualities. Air masses
can be determined empirically using a combination of meteorological variables, which 
include temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, wind direction and barometric pressure
(McMichael et al., 2003).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
462
Air Quality Index
The AQI is a communications tool used to report upon current and near term air quality conditions.
Some of the pollutants captured in currently reported Canadian AQIs are: sulphur dioxide, ozone,
nitrogen dioxide, total reduced sulphur compounds, carbon monoxide and fine and coarse 
particulate matter. AQI advisories, and the health messages associated with them, are reported
to the public and the media at set intervals each day by provinces, territories and some regional
districts or municipalities. With this information, individuals can then decide how to reduce
the risk to their health, as well as reduce their own personal contribution to air pollution
(Health Canada, 2006).
Albedo
The fraction of solar radiation reflected by a surface or object, often expressed as a percentage.
Snow-covered surfaces have a high albedo; the surface albedo of soils ranges from high to
low; vegetation-covered surfaces and oceans have a low albedo. The Earth’s planetary albedo
varies mainly through differences in cloudiness, snow, ice, leaf area and land cover changes
(IPCC, 2007a).
All-Hazards Approach
Ensures that disaster planning achieves its aims efficiently by collecting information on the
full range of threats so subsequent risk management decisions can be made appropriately
(Adapted from F/P/T Network on Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
Anthropogenic
Resulting from or produced by human activity (IPCC, 2007a).
Atmosphere
The gaseous envelope surrounding the Earth. The dry atmosphere consists almost entirely of
nitrogen and oxygen, together with a number of trace gases such as argon, helium and radiatively
active greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and ozone. In addition, the atmosphere contains
water vapour, clouds and aerosols (McMichael et al., 2003).
AURAMS
A Unified Regional Air-quality Modelling System developed by the Meteorological Service 
of Canada, Environment Canada (NARSTO, 2004).
Autonomous Adaptation
Adaptation that does not constitute a conscious response to climatic stimuli but is triggered 
by ecological changes in natural systems and by market or welfare changes in human systems.
Also referred to as spontaneous adaptation (IPCC, 2001).
Baseline/Reference
Any datum against which change is measured. “Current baseline” represents observable, 
present-day conditions. A “future baseline” is a projected future set of conditions excluding
the driving factor of interest. Alternative interpretations of the reference conditions can 
give rise to multiple baselines (IPCC, 2007a).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
463
Botulism
Botulism is a neuroparalytic (muscle-paralyzing) disease caused by a nerve toxin produced by
the bacterium Clostridium botulinum. There are three forms of naturally occurring botulism:
food-borne botulism, caused by ingestion of pre-formed toxin; infant botulism, caused by ingestion
of the bacterium which secretes toxin in the intestine; and wound botulism caused by wound
infection with the bacterium (CDC, 2005b).
Brucellosis
An infectious disease caused by bacteria of the genus Brucella, which is transmitted to humans
by ingestion of products from infected animals (i.e. unpasteurized milk products from cows,
goats or pigs), by direct contact with infected animals or by inhalation of the bacterium. The
symptoms include fever, headache, profuse sweating and chills (PHAC, 2003).
Campylobacter
Genus of bacteria that causes campylobacteriosis, an acute bacterial infection that attacks the
digestive system. The bacterium is contracted through ingestion of undercooked meat products
contaminated with Campylobacter, ingestion of contaminated water or close contact with infected
animals. The illness is characterized by vomiting and diarrhea; globally 5 to 14% of reported
cases of diarrhea are caused by infection with Campylobacter (PHAC, 2003).
Canada-wide Standards (PM and Ozone)
Canada-wide Standards (CWSs) refer to environmental quality and human health goals agreed
upon by provinces, territories and the federal government through the Canadian Council of
Ministers of the Environment. The health impacts attributed to PM and O3 have been observed 
at low concentrations and the CWSs attempt to reduce concentrations of these chemicals 
to safer levels (CCME, 2000).
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
A naturally occurring gas, also a by-product of burning fossil fuels and biomass, as was well as
from land use changes and other industrial processes. It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse
gas that affects the Earth’s radiative balance. It is the reference gas against which other greenhouse
gases are measured and therefore has a Global Warming Potential of 1 (IPCC, 2001).
Cholera
An intestinal infection, caused by the bacterium Vibrio cholerae, which results in frequent
watery stools, cramping abdominal pain and eventual collapse from dehydration. It is thought
that zooplankton in cold waters may carry a large number of cholera vibrios on their bodies.
Zooplankton feed by grazing on phytoplankton, which bloom with sunshine and warm conditions.
Thus, a phytoplankton (algal) bloom may lead to an increase in the population of zooplankton
that carry the vibrios (McMichael et al., 2003).
Climate
Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the average weather, also defined in statistical
terms as the mean and variability of relevant variables and over a period of time ranging from
months to thousands or millions of years. The classical period for averaging these variables is
30 years, as defined by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). Variables taken into
account most often include surface temperature, precipitation and wind. Climate in a wider sense
is the state, including a statistical description, of the climate system (IPCC, 2007a).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
464
Climate Change
Climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate that can be identified (e.g. by using
statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability of its properties, and that persists
for an extended period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due to natural
internal processes or external forcings, or to persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition
of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC), in its Article 1, makes a distinction between climate change
attributable to human activities altering the atmospheric composition, and climate variability
attributable to natural causes (IPCC, 2007a).
Climate Model
Anumerical representation of the climate system based on the physical, chemical and biological
properties of its components, their interactions and feedback processes, and accounting 
for all or some of its known properties. Coupled Atmosphere–Ocean General Circulation
Models (AOGCMs) provide a representation of the climate system that is the most 
comprehensive currently available. Climate models are applied as a research tool to study 
and simulate the climate, and for operational purposes, including monthly, seasonal and 
interannual climate predictions (IPCC, 2007a).
Climate Prediction (or Climate Forecast)
The result of an attempt to produce an estimate of the actual evolution of the climate in the
future (e.g. at seasonal, interannual or long-term time scales) (IPCC, 2007a).
Climate Projection
A projection of the response of the climate system to emission or concentration scenarios of
greenhouse gases and aerosols, or radiative forcing scenarios, often based upon simulations 
by climate models. The use of emission/concentration/radiative forcing scenarios and attendant
assumptions about, for example, future socio-economic and technological developments 
that may or may not be realized introduce substantial uncertainty in climate projections and
distinguish them from climate predictions (IPCC, 2007a).
Climate Scenario
A plausible and often simplified representation of the future climate, based on an internally
consistent set of climatological relationships and assumptions in radiative forcing, which has
been constructed for explicit use in investigating the potential consequences of anthropogenic
climate change, often serving as input to impact models. Climate projections are often the raw
material for constructing climate scenarios, but climate scenarios usually require additional
information, such as about the observed current climate. A “climate change scenario” is the
difference between a climate scenario and the current climate (IPCC, 2007a).
Climate Variability
Variations in the mean and other statistics (e.g. standard deviations, the occurrence of extremes)
of the climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond that of individual weather events.
Variability may be due to natural internal processes within the climate system or to variations 
in natural or anthropogenic external forcing (IPCC, 2007a).
Cold Wave
Period of unusually high atmospheric-related cold stress (Environment Canada, 2002a) that may
have adverse health consequences for the affected population.
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
465
Coping Ability
Short-term capacity or ability to manage an event or hazard (Smit and Wandel, 2006).
Coping Range
The variation in climatic stimuli that a system can absorb without producing significant impacts.
Also known as coping ability or capacity (IPCC, 2001).
Coping Resources
The individual and community skills, materials, equipment or services that can be used to
meet the demands created by an incident. Also can include municipal departments, emergency
services, private companies, volunteers, and other formal and informal sources (Adapted 
from the F/P/T Network on Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
Critical Infrastructure
Physical and information technology facilities, networks, services and assets which, if 
disrupted or destroyed, would have a serious impact on the health, safety, security or economic
well-being of a population or the effective functioning of governments in Canada (Public
Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC), 2007b).
Cryosphere
The component of the climate system consisting of all snow, ice and frozen ground (including
permafrost) on and beneath the surface of the Earth and ocean (IPCC, 2007a).
Cryptosporidium
A genus of parasites of the intestinal tracts of fishes, reptiles, birds and mammals. A particular
species isolated in humans has been identified as Cryptosporidium parvum. Cryptosporidiosis,
or cryptosporidium infection, is today recognized as an important opportunistic infection,
especially in immunocompromised hosts (McMichael et al., 2003).
Dengue Fever
An infectious viral disease spread by mosquitoes, often called breakbone fever because it 
is characterized by severe pain in joints and back. Subsequent infections of the virus may lead
to dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome (DSS), which may be 
fatal (IPCC, 2001).
Determinants of Health
At every stage of life, health is determined by complex interactions between social and economic
factors, the physical environment and individual behaviour. These factors are referred to as
‘determinants of health’. Key determinants include income and social status, social support
networks, education and literacy, employment/working conditions, social environments, 
physical environments, personal health practices and coping skills, healthy child development,
biology and genetic endowment, health services, gender and culture. It is the combined influence
of the determinants of health that determines health status (PHAC, 2007).
Disaster
An event that exceeds the ability of the local community to cope with the harmful effects 
and requires extraordinary response and recovery measures (Adapted from the F/P/T Network
on Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
466
Disaster Mitigation
Prevention of natural hazards from becoming natural disasters. It includes policies and actions
taken before or after a disaster to reduce the impacts on people and property, such as building
public awareness and support; development of local and regional plans for land use to prevent
inappropriate development in hazardous areas; and changing building codes and standards 
to protect people, property and infrastructure from extremes (PSEPC, 2007a).
Diurnal Temperature Range
The difference between the maximum and minimum temperature during a day (IPCC, 2001).
Dose–Response
Association between dose and the incidence of a defined histological effect in an exposed
population. Dose-response relationships are used to determine the probability of a specific
outcome or disease, or risk of a disease, by extrapolating from high doses to low doses 
and from laboratory animals to humans, and using mathematical models that define risk 
as a function of exposure dose (McMichael et al., 2003).
Downscaling
A method that derives local- to regional-scale (10 to 100 km) information from larger scale
models or data analyses (IPCC, 2007a).
Drought
Agricultural drought relates to moisture deficits in the topmost 1 metre or so of soil (the root
zone) that affect crops; meteorological drought is mainly a prolonged deficit of precipitation;
and hydrologic drought is related to below-normal streamflow, lake and groundwater levels
(IPCC, 2007a).
Ecological Study
An epidemiological study which seeks to find population- or community-level associations
between exposure and the occurrence of disease (Coggon et al., 1997).
Ecosystem
The interactive system formed from all living organisms and their abiotic (physical and 
chemical) environment within a given area. Ecosystems cover a hierarchy of spatial scales 
and can comprise the entire globe, communities of plants and animals corresponding to 
specific environmental conditions at the continental scale or small, well circumscribed systems
such as a small pond (IPCC, 2007a).
Ecosystem Approach (Ecosystem-Based Management)
The ecosystem approach is a strategy for the integrated management of land, water and 
living resources that promotes conservation and sustainable use in an equitable way. It applies
appropriate scientific methodologies focussed on the essential structure, processes, functions 
and interactions among organisms and their environment, and recognizes that humans, with
their cultural diversity, are an integral component of many ecosystems. The ecosystem approach
requires adaptive management to deal with the complex and dynamic nature of ecosystems
and the absence of complete knowledge or understanding of their functioning. Priority targets
are conservation of biodiversity and of the ecosystem structures and functioning, in order 
to maintain ecosystem services (IPCC, 2007a).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
467
Ecumene
Generally refers to land where people have made their permanent home, and to all work areas
that are considered occupied and used for any economic purpose (Statistics Canada, 2007).
El Niño-Southern Oscillation
The term “El Niño” was initially used to describe a warm-water current that periodically flows
along the coast of Ecuador and Peru, but now refers to a basin-wide warming of the tropical
Pacific east of the dateline. This oceanic event is associated with fluctuation of a global-scale
tropical and subtropical surface pressure pattern, in an event called the Southern Oscillation.
This coupled atmosphere-ocean phenomenon, with preferred time scales of 2 to about 7 years,
is collectively known as El Niño-Southern Oscillation, or ENSO. During an ENSO event, the
prevailing trade winds weaken, reducing upwelling and altering ocean currents such that the
sea surface temperatures warm, further weakening the trade winds. This event has great
impact on the wind, sea surface temperature and precipitation patterns in the tropical Pacific,
with effects throughout the Pacific region and in many other parts of the world, through 
global teleconnections. The cold phase of ENSO is called La Niña (IPCC, 2007a).
Emergency
Serious mishaps that involve more people, as victims and responders, than accidents, but do
not overwhelm the community to the point of being a disaster (Adapted from the F/P/T Network
on Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
Emergency Mandate
Organizations with an emergency mandate consist of those with emergency relief services 
as part of their constitutional mission and/or their established tradition of community service
delivery (Canadian Red Cross et al., n.d.).
Emergency Response
Actions taken in anticipation of, during and immediately after an emergency to ensure that its
effects are minimized and that people affected are given immediate relief and support (Canadian
Red Cross et al., n.d.).
Emission Scenario
A plausible representation of the future development of emissions of substances that are
potentially radiatively active (e.g. greenhouse gases, aerosols), based on a coherent and internally
consistent set of assumptions about driving forces (e.g. demographic and socio-economic
development, technological change) and their key relationships. Concentration scenarios, derived
from emission scenarios, are used as input to a climate model to compute climate projections.
Since 1992, IPCC has published two series of emission scenarios, most recently in the IPCC
Special Report on Emission Scenarios (Nakicenovic and Swart, 2000; IPCC, 2007a).
Epidemiology
The science of public health and preventative medicine that studies the distribution and 
determinants of health-related states or events in specific populations, and that applies study
findings to control and/or mitigate health problems (Coggon et al., 1997).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
468
Escherichia coli (E. coli)
A bacterium that produces infection characterized by acute bloody diarrhea and abdominal
cramps. Food-borne transmission occurs via contaminated meat or produce and unpasteurized
products. Water-borne transmission occurs through swimming in contaminated bodies of water
or drinking inadequately chlorinated water (CDC, 2005b), as was the case with the widely
reported E. coli outbreak in Walkerton, Ontario, in 2000.
Evaporation
The process by which a liquid becomes a gas (IPCC, 2001).
Evapotranspiration
The combined process of water evaporation from the Earth’s surface and transpiration from
vegetation (IPCC, 2007a).
Exposure
The amount of a factor to which a group or individual was exposed; sometimes contrasted
with dose (the quantity of material entering an exposed person). Dose is not the same as 
exposure (McMichael et al., 2003).
Extirpation
The disappearance of a species from part of its range; local extinction (IPCC, 2007a).
Extreme Event
An occurrence that can cause severe damage within a community, including property destruction,
personal injury and death (Adapted from the F/P/T Network on Emergency Preparedness 
and Response, 2004).
Extreme Weather Events
An event that is rare within its statistical reference distribution at a particular place. Definitions
of “rare” vary, but an extreme weather event would normally be as rare as or rarer than the 10th or
90th percentile. Examples of extreme weather events include floods and droughts (IPCC, 2007a).
Feedback
An interaction mechanism between processes in a system, which results when an initial process
triggers changes in a second process and that in turn influences the initial one. A positive
feedback intensifies the original process, and a negative feedback reduces it (IPCC, 2007a).
Food-Borne Diseases
Diseases that are infectious, parasitic or toxic in nature and that are acquired through the ingestion
of contaminated food (CDC, 2005a).
Food-Bourne Illnesses
See food-borne diseases.
Food Security
A situation that exists when people have secure access to sufficient amounts of safe and nutritious
food for normal growth, development and an active and healthy life. Food insecurity may be
caused by the unavailability of food, insufficient purchasing power, inappropriate distribution
or inadequate use of food at the household level (IPCC, 2007a).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
469
Gastroenteritis
Inflammation of the stomach and small and large intestines. Viral gastroenteritis is an infection
caused by a variety of viruses that results in vomiting or diarrhea. The pathogens that cause 
gastroenteritis may be spread through direct or indirect contact with an infected individual, 
as well as through the ingestion of contaminated food or beverages (CDC, 2005b).
General Circulation Model
A numerical representation of the climate system based on the physical, chemical and biological
properties of its components, their interactions and feedback processes, and accounting for all
or some of its known properties. The climate system can be represented by models of varying
complexity (i.e. for any one component or combination of components a hierarchy of models
can be identified, differing in such aspects as the number of spatial dimensions; the extent 
to which physical, chemical or biological processes are explicitly represented; or the level at
which empirical parameterizations are involved) (IPCC, 2001).
Giardia
A protozoan parasite that causes giardiasis, also known as beaver fever. Symptoms include
chronic diarrhea and abdominal cramps. Transmission occurs person-to-person where personal
hygiene may be poor, or through the ingestion of Giardia cysts in fecally contaminated water 
or food (PHAC, 2003).
Glacier
A mass of land ice flowing downhill (by internal deformation and sliding at the base) and 
constrained by the surrounding topography (e.g. the sides of a valley or surrounding peaks);
the bedrock topography is the major influence on the dynamics and surface slope of a glacier. 
A glacier is maintained by accumulation of snow at high altitudes, balanced by melting at low
altitudes or discharge into the sea (IPCC, 2001).
Global Positioning System (GPS)
A hand-held radio navigation system that allows land, sea and airborne users to determine
their exact location, velocity and time 24 hours a day, in all weather conditions, anywhere 
in the world (McMichael et al., 2003).
Greenhouse Effect
The process in which the absorption of infrared radiation by the atmosphere warms the 
Earth. In common parlance, the term “greenhouse effect” may be used to refer either to the
natural greenhouse effect, due to naturally occurring greenhouse gases, or to the enhanced
(anthropogenic) greenhouse effect, which results from gases emitted as a result of human
activities (IPCC, 2007a).
Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
Gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and 
emit radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of infrared radiation emitted 
by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere itself, and by clouds. Water vapour (H2O), carbon 
dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and ozone (O3) are the primary greenhouse
gases in the Earth’s atmosphere. A number of entirely human-made greenhouse gases in 
the atmosphere exist, such as the halocarbons and other chlorine- and bromine-containing 
substances (IPCC, 2007a).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
470
Ground-Level Ozone (O3)
Ground-level (tropospheric) ozone (O3) is a colorless and highly irritating gas that forms just
above the earth’s surface when nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
react in sunlight and stagnant air. Exposure to O3 has been linked to premature mortality and 
a range of morbidity health end-points such as hospital admissions and asthma symptom 
days, as well as negative impacts on vegetation and synthetic materials (Environment Canada,
2006b). See also ozone.
Hantavirus
A virus in the family Bunyaviridae that causes a type of haemorrhagic fever. It is thought that
humans catch the disease mainly from infected rodents, either through direct contact with 
the animals or by inhaling or ingesting dust that contains their dried urine (IPCC, 2001).
Hazard
The potential for a negative interaction between extreme events (of a natural or technological
origin) and the vulnerable parts of the population. Three factors combine to create a hazard: 
the events that can impact on a community, the vulnerability of a population to such impacts,
and the resources of the community to cope with those impacts (Adapted from the F/P/T
Network on Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
Heat Island Effect
The effect whereby a region within an urban area is characterized by ambient temperatures
higher than those of the surrounding area because of the absorption of solar energy by 
materials like asphalt (IPCC, 2001).
Heat Wave
A period of unusually high atmospheric-related heat stress (Environment Canada, 2002a) 
that may have adverse health consequences for the affected population. Environment Canada
considers a heat wave to occur when there are 3 consecutive days when the maximum 
temperature is 32°C or higher.
Humidex Advisory
Advisory issued by Environment Canada when temperatures are expected to reach or exceed
30°C and the humidex values are expected to exceed 40°C. Humidex values are intended to 
represent the effect that high humidity and high temperatures have on the human body. Comfort
levels for humidex readings are: 20–29 (comfortable), 30–39 (varying degrees of discomfort),
40–45 (almost everyone is uncomfortable), and +45 (many types of work and exercise should
be restricted) (Environment Canada, 2006a).
Ice Dam
An accumulation of broken river or sea ice caught in a narrow channel. Also known as 
an ice jam (IPCC, 2001).
Impact
The adverse and beneficial effects of climate change (and variability) on natural and human
systems. Depending on the consideration of adaptation, one can distinguish between potential
impacts and residual impacts: potential impacts are those that may occur given a projected
change in climate, without considering adaptation; residual impacts are the impacts of climate
change that would occur after adaptation is taken into account (IPCC, 2007a).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
471
Infectious Diseases
Any disease that can be transmitted from one person to another. This may occur by direct
physical contact, by common handling of an object that has picked up infective organisms,
through a disease carrier, or by spread of infected droplets coughed or exhaled into the 
air (IPCC, 2001).
Infrastructure
The basic equipment, utilities, productive enterprises, installations and services essential 
for the development, operation and growth of an organization, city or nation (IPCC, 2001).
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
A panel established by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) in 1988 to assess scientific, technical and socio-economic
information relevant for the understanding of climate change, its potential impacts and options
for adaptation and mitigation. It has three working groups (climate science; vulnerability,
impacts and adaptation; mitigation) and a task force (on national greenhouse gas inventories)
(IPCC, 2007a).
Invasive Species
An introduced species that invades natural habitats (IPCC, 2001).
Ixodes scapularis
Hard tick belonging to the family Ixodidae. These organisms transmit Lyme disease, a zoonotic
bacterial infection. See also Lyme disease (McMichael et al., 2003).
Landslide
A mass of material that has slipped downhill by gravity, often assisted by water when 
the material is saturated; rapid movement of a mass of soil, rock or debris down a slope
(IPCC, 2001).
Legionella
See Legionnaire’s disease.
Legionnaire’s Disease
The more severe form of legionellosis infection, caused by the bacterium Legionella 
pneumophila. Symptoms are consistent with pneumonia, and include fever, chills and cough.
Infection occurs through the inhalation of mist or vapour contaminated with the bacterium,
which thrives in hot-water environments like those found in hot tubs, hot water tanks, or parts 
of the air conditioning systems in large buildings (CDC, 2005b).
Leptospirosis
Bacterial infection of humans by the genus Leptospira. Symptoms include high fever, 
jaundice, severe muscular pains and vomiting. Transmission is associated with contact with
infected animals or water contaminated with rat urine. Also known as Weil’s disease
(McMichael et al., 2003).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
472
Literature Review
A comprehensive survey of publications in a specific field of study or related to a particular
line of research, usually in the form of a list of references or an in-depth review of key 
works. The first section of most research articles is usually devoted to a review of the previously
published literature on the topic addressed in the article (Kovats et al., 2003).
Lyme Disease
A zoonotic bacterial infection caused by the spirochaete Borrelia burgdoferi and transmitted
by hard ticks of the genus Ixodes. The main animal reservoir hosts for Lyme disease are 
wild deer as well as domesticated pets (McMichael et al., 2003).
Maladaptation
Any deliberate adjustments in natural or human systems that inadvertently increase vulnerability
to climatic stimuli; an adaptation that does not succeed in reducing vulnerability but increases
it instead (IPCC, 2001).
Malaria
Endemic or epidemic parasitic disease caused by four species of the protozoan genus Plasmodium
that are transmitted to humans by the bite of female Anopheles mosquitoes. Disease is 
characterized by high fever attacks and systemic disorders and is responsible for approximately
two million deaths every year, 90% of which occur in Sub-Saharan Africa. Malaria is the 
most serious vector-borne disease in the world (McMichael et al., 2003).
Meta-Analysis
The process of using statistical methods to combine the results of different independent 
studies (McMichael et al., 2003).
Methane
A hydrocarbon that is a greenhouse gas produced through anaerobic (without oxygen) 
decomposition of waste in landfills, animal digestion, decomposition of animal wastes, coal
production and incomplete fossil-fuel combustion. It is one of the six gases to be mitigated
under the Kyoto Protocol (WHO, 2003).
Microclimate
In climatology: localized climate, incorporating physical processes in the atmospheric boundary
layer. The boundary layer is the lowest 100 to 200 m of the atmosphere and the part of the 
troposphere that is directly influenced by the Earth’s surface. For example, atmospheric humidity
is influenced by vegetation, ambient air temperatures by buildings and roads etc. In ecology: 
climatic conditions in the environmental space occupied by a species, a community of species
or an ecosystem. For example, on mountain slopes, temperatures experienced by plants differ
depending on the direction of the slope. Similarly, in forests, air temperature varies according
to canopy cover and height. In many cases, such differentials are crucial for species survival 
and longevity (McMichael et al., 2003).
Mitigation (climate change)
In the context of climate change, mitigation is an anthropogenic intervention to reduce the sources
or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases (IPCC, 2001).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
473
Morbidity
Rate of occurrence of disease or other health disorder within a population, taking account of 
the age-specific morbidity rates. Health outcomes include chronic disease incidence/prevalence,
rates of hospitalization, primary care consultations, disability-days (i.e. days when absent 
from work) and prevalence of symptoms (IPCC, 2001).
Mortality
Rate of occurrence of death within a population within a specified time period; calculation of
mortality takes account of age-specific death rates, and can thus yield measures of life expectancy
and the extent of premature death (IPCC, 2001).
National Framework for Health Emergency Management
In 2001, the Federal, Provincial and Territorial Ministers of Health recognized the necessity 
for a more integrated and coordinated strategic plan for emergency management in the 
health and social services sectors across Canada. The Deputy Ministers of Health, through 
the Advisory Committee on Population Health and Health Security (ACPHHS) and the
Federal/Provincial/Territorial Networks for Emergency Preparedness and Response, 
tasked the Council of Health Emergency Management Directors (CHEMD) to develop 
a pan-Canadian framework for health emergency management. A key outcome was 
the development of the National Framework for Health Emergency Management, which 
provides a set of guiding principles for the development of an integrated and comprehensive 
health emergency management system in Canada(F/P/T Network on Emergency Preparedness 
and Response, 2004).
Nitrous Oxide (N2O)
A powerful greenhouse gas emitted through soil cultivation practices, especially the use of
commercial and organic fertilizers, fossil fuel combustion, nitric acid production and biomass
burning. One of the six greenhouse gases to be curbed under the Kyoto Protocol (McMichael 
et al., 2003).
Non-Market Impacts
Impacts that affect ecosystems or human welfare, but that are not directly linked to market
transactions (e.g. an increased risk of premature death) (IPCC, 2001).
“No Regrets” Policy
A policy that would generate net social benefits whether or not there is anthropogenic climate
change (IPCC, 2001).
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO)
The North Atlantic Oscillation consists of opposing variations of barometric pressure 
near Iceland and near the Azores. On average, a westerly current, between the Icelandic 
low pressure area and the Azores high pressure area, carries cyclones with their associated
frontal systems toward Europe. However, the pressure difference between Iceland 
and the Azores fluctuates on time scales of days to decades, and can be reversed at 
times (IPCC, 2001).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
474
Ozone (O3)
Ozone, the triatomic form of oxygen, is a gaseous atmospheric constituent. In the troposphere, 
it is created both naturally and by photochemical reactions involving gases resulting from human
activities (photochemical smog). In high concentrations, tropospheric ozone can be harmful 
to a wide range of living organisms. Tropospheric ozone acts as a greenhouse gas. In the 
stratosphere, ozone is created by the interaction between solar ultraviolet radiation and molecular
oxygen. Stratospheric ozone plays a decisive role in the stratospheric radiative balance.
Depletion of the stratospheric ozone, due to chemical reactions that may be enhanced by climate
change, results in an increased ground-level flux of ultraviolet (UV) B radiation (IPCC, 2001).
See also ground-level ozone.
Pandemic
Epidemic occurring over a very wide area, crossing international boundaries and usually affecting
a large number of people (McMichael et al., 2003).
Particulate Matter (PM)
Very small solid exhaust particles emitted during the combustion of fossil and biomass 
fuels. Particulates may consist of a wide variety of substances. Of greatest concern for health
are particulates of less than or equal to 2.5 micrometres in diameter, usually designated 
as PM2.5 (IPCC, 2001).
Parts Per Million (ppm)
Parts per million; unit of concentration often used when measuring levels of pollutants in air,
water, body fluids, etc. One ppm is one part in one million by volume (McMichael et al., 2003).
Pathogen
An agent that causes disease, such as bacteria, viruses, algae, fungi and protozoa (Health
Canada, 2007).
Permafrost
Perennially frozen ground that occurs wherever the temperature remains below 0°C for 
many years (IPCC, 2001).
Phenology
The study of natural phenomena that recur periodically (e.g. development stages, migration)
and their relation to climate and seasonal changes (IPCC, 2007a).
Policy Instruments
The means to address a problem and achieve desired policy goals that governments can use 
to change socio-economic structures, and individual and collective behaviours. Instruments
include provision of information, voluntary guidelines and codes and standards, regulations,
and market-based mechanisms (e.g. emissions trading schemes, water pricing and allocation
schemes) (UNDP, 2005).
Population Health
A measure of the health status of populations, proposed during the 1990s to selectively replace
the use of the terms “human health,” which is more restrictive, and public health which also
encompasses preventative and curative measures and infrastructures (McMichael et al., 2003).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
475
Precautionary Principle
Where there are reasonable grounds to believe that exposure to an agent may cause serious or
irreversible damage to human health, decision makers should take cost-effective precautionary
measures, even if some cause and effect relationships are not fully established scientifically.
Where possible, strive to anticipate and prevent health risks rather than merely control those
that already exist (Health Canada, 2000).
Preparedness
Developing and readying response and recovery actions to increase the community’s ability 
to respond to future impacts (Adapted from the F/P/T Network on Emergency Preparedness
and Response, 2004).
Prevention
A method of averting health problems (e.g. disease, injury) through interventions. Preventing and
reducing the incidence of illness and injury may be accomplished through three mechanisms:
activities geared toward reducing factors leading to health problems; activities involving the early
detection of, and intervention in, the potential development or occurrence of a health problem;
and activities focusing on the treatment of health problems and the prevention of further 
deterioration and recurrence (F/P/T Network on Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
Proactive Adaptation
Adaptation that takes place before impacts of climate change are observed. Also referred 
to as anticipatory adaptation (IPCC, 2007a).
Rabies
Rabies is a viral disease of mammals often transmitted through the bite of an infected animal.
There is a vaccine for the rabies virus, which affects the central nervous system. Early symptoms
are non-specific and include fever, headache and malaise, and later symptoms are neurological 
in nature. Death usually occurs within days of the onset of symptoms (CDC, 2005b).
Recovery
Actions taken after a disaster to restore critical systems and return a community to pre-disaster
conditions which involves the physical, social and economic components of the community
(F/P/T Network on Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
Recurrence Interval
Also called return period, it is the average time until the next occurrence of a defined event.
When the time to the next occurrence has a geometric distribution, the return period is equal
to the inverse of probability of the event occurring in the next time period, that is, T = 1/P,
where T is the return period, in number of time intervals, and P is the probability of the next
event’s occurrence in a given time interval (AMS, 2000).
Reinsurance
The transfer of a portion of primary insurance risks to a secondary tier of insurers (reinsurers);
essentially “insurance for insurers” (IPCC, 2001).
Resilience
Amount of change a system can undergo without changing state (IPCC, 2001).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
476
Resource-Reliant Communities
Resource reliance is a measure of the relative importance of a resource sector (or sectors) to 
a particular community, specifically in relation to the employment income directly generated
by the exploitation, processing and (in some cases) distribution of resources. Based on 2001
Census information and for comparative analysis, categories of resource reliant communities
range from “moderately reliant” (30-49.9% of employment income derives from resource
activity) to “solely reliant” (80% and above) (Atlas of Canada, 2006).
Response to Natural Hazards
Actions taken immediately before, during and after a disaster to protect people and property
and to enhance recovery, such as emergency public communication, search and rescue, and
medical assistance (PSEPC, n.d.).
Risk
Risk refers to the uncertainty that surrounds future events and outcomes. It is the level 
of exposure to uncertainties that an organization must understand and effectively manage. 
Risk is the expression of the likelihood of a future event occurring as well as its potential 
to influence the achievement of an organization’s objectives (Health Canada, 2005).
Risk Management
Risk management is about making decisions involving uncertain future situations. Risk 
management is the systematic process – the practices and procedures – that an organization
uses to manage the risks it faces. It is about setting a preferred course of action under 
uncertainty by identifying, assessing, understanding, acting on and communicating risk issues
(Health Canada, 2005).
Rodent-Borne Disease
Diseases transmitted by rodents through close contact with humans, either indirectly or 
directly. Diseases can be spread indirectly to humans by way of ticks, mites and fleas that
transmit the infection to humans after feeding on infected rodents. Direct transmission
includes bite wounds, consuming food or water that is contaminated with rodent feces, 
coming into contact with surface water contaminated with rodent urine, or by breathing 
in germs that may be present in rodent urine or droppings that have been stirred into 
the air (CDC, 2006).
Salmonella
A group of bacteria that cause acute infectious disease with sudden onset of abdominal pain,
diarrhea, nausea and vomiting. Transmission occurs by ingestion of contaminated foods, 
contact with infected animals (i.e. reptiles and birds), or fecal-oral person-to-person transmission.
Most persons recover without treatment (PHAC, 2003).
Scenario
A plausible and often simplified description of how the future may develop based on 
a coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions about driving forces and key 
relationships. Scenarios may be derived from projections, but are often based on 
additional information from other sources, sometimes combined with a narrative storyline 
(IPCC, 2007a).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
477
Sea Ice
Any form of ice found at sea that has originated from the freezing of sea water. Sea ice may
be discontinuous pieces (ice floes) moved on the ocean surface by wind and currents (pack
ice), or a motionless sheet attached to the coast (land-fast ice). Sea ice less than 1 year old 
is called first-year ice. Multi-year ice is sea ice that has survived at least one summer melt
season (IPCC, 2007a).
Sea Level Rise
An increase in the mean level of the ocean. Eustatic sea level rise is a change in global average
sea level brought about by an increase in the volume of the world ocean. Relative sea level 
rise occurs where there is a local increase in the level of the ocean relative to the land, which
might be due to ocean rise and/or land level subsidence. In areas subject to rapid land level
uplift, relative sea level can fall (IPCC, 2007a).
Sensitivity
Sensitivity is the degree to which a system is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by 
climate-related stimuli. The effect may be direct (e.g. a change in crop yield in response 
to a change in the mean, range or variability of temperature) or indirect (e.g. damages caused
by an increase in the frequency of coastal flooding due to sea level rise) (IPCC, 2007a).
Shigella
Family of bacteria that cause shigellosis in humans, which is characterized by fever, stomach
cramps and diarrhea that is often bloody. Transmission of Shigella occurs through ingestion 
of contaminated food, by swimming in or drinking contaminated water, or through fecal-oral
person-to-person transmission (CDC, 2005b).
Social Capital
The aggregate of actual or potential resources that can be mobilized through social relationships
and membership in social networks (Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998, as cited in Resilience
Alliance, 2007).
SRES Scenarios
The storylines and associated population, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and emissions scenarios
associated with the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) (Nakicenovic et al., 2000),
and the resulting climate change and sea-level rise scenarios. Four families of socio-economic
scenarios (A1, A2, B1 and B2) represent different world futures in two distinct dimensions: 
a focus on economic versus environmental concerns and global versus regional development
patterns (IPCC, 2007a).
Stakeholder
A person or an organization that has a legitimate interest in a project or entity, or would be affected
by a particular decision (IPCC, 2007a).
Storm Surge
The temporary increase, at a particular locality, in the height of the sea due to extreme 
meteorological conditions (low atmospheric pressure and/or strong winds). The storm surge 
is defined as being the excess above the level expected from the tidal variation alone at 
that time and place (IPCC, 2007a).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
478
Stratosphere
Highly stratified region of atmosphere above the troposphere extending from about 10 km (ranging
from 9 km in high latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) to about 50 km (IPCC, 2001).
Surge Capacity
Refers to a system’s ability to rapidly expand beyond normal services to meet the increased
demand for qualified personnel, and services in the event of large-scale emergencies or disasters
(USDHHS, n.d.).
Sustainable Development
Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs (IPCC, 2001).
Synoptic
Relating to or displaying atmospheric and weather conditions as they exist simultaneously
over a broad area (IPCC, 2001).
Synoptic Air Mass Identification
Assessing the meteorological quality of the entire atmosphere; methods used to analyze 
relationships between total atmospheric conditions and the surface environment (McMichael
et al., 2003).
System
An entity comprised of diverse but interrelated components that function as a complex whole.
Examples include the climate system, ecosystems and market economies (Kump et al., 2004).
Threshold
The level of magnitude of a system process at which sudden or rapid change occurs. It is 
also a point or level at which new properties emerge in an ecological, economic or other 
system, invalidating predictions based on mathematical relationships that apply at lower 
levels (IPCC, 2007a).
Tools (for adaptation)
A generic term that refers to methodologies, guidelines and simplified processes that enable
stakeholders to assess the implications of climate change impacts and relevant adaptation
options in the context of their operating environment. Tools come in a variety of formats and have
diverse applications: cross-cutting or multidisciplinary (e.g. climate models, scenario-building
methods, stakeholder analysis, decision-support tools, decision-analytical tools) to specific sectoral
applications (e.g. crop or vegetation models, methods for coastal zone vulnerability assessment)
(Adapted from UNFCCC, n.d.)
Toxoplasma gondii
See toxoplasmosis.
Toxoplasmosis
A disease caused by the single-celled parasite Toxoplasma gondii, which is transmitted
through ingestion of contaminated food or water, or through contact with cat feces. Most
healthy individuals do not exhibit symptoms; however, pregnant women and individuals 
with compromised immune systems should exhibit caution (CDC, 2005b).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
479
Traditional Knowledge
Various systems of knowledge, practice and belief gained through experience and culturally
transmitted among members and generations of a community (ACIA, 2005).
Trichinella
See trichinosis.
Trichinosis
Also called trichinellosis. A disease caused by eating raw or undercooked meat of animals
infected with the larvae of the roundworm Trichinella. Initial symptoms include nausea, 
diarrhea, vomiting, fatigue and fever. If infection is heavy, cardiovascular problems and, 
in severe cases, death may result (CDC, 2005b).
Troposphere
The lowest part of the atmosphere from the surface to about 10 km in altitude in mid-latitudes
(ranging from 9 km in high latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) where clouds and
weather phenomena occur. In the troposphere, temperatures generally decrease with height
(IPCC, 2001).
Tropospheric Ozone
See ground-level ozone.
Tularemia
A zoonotic bacterial infection caused by the bacterium Francisella tularensis, generally 
found in animals such as rodents, rabbits and hares. Transmission occurs through ingestion 
of contaminated food or water, inhalation of the bacteria or from the bite of an infected 
insect. Symptoms include fever, chills, headache, diarrhea, and, depending on the route of
exposure, ulcers on the skin or mouth, and swollen glands and eyes (CDC, 2005b).
Ultraviolet Radiation
Solar radiation within a certain wavelength, depending on the type of radiation (A, B or C).
Ozone absorbs strongly in the UV-C range (<280 nm) and solar radiation in these wavelengths
does not reach the Earth’s surface. As the wavelength is increased through the UV-B range
(280 nm to 315 nm) and into the UV-A range (315 nm to 400 nm) ozone absorption becomes
weaker, until it is undetectable at about 340 nm (McMichael et al., 2003).
Uncertainty
An expression of the degree to which a value (e.g. the future state of the climate system) is
unknown. Uncertainty can result from lack of information or from disagreement about what is
known or even knowable. It may have many types of sources, from quantifiable errors in the data
to ambiguously defined concepts or terminology, or uncertain projections of human behaviour.
Uncertainty can therefore be represented by quantitative measures (e.g. a range of values 
calculated by various models) or by qualitative statements (e.g. reflecting the judgment of a team
of experts) (IPCC, 2001).
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
Convention signed at United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in 1992.
Governments that become Parties to the Convention agree to stabilize greenhouse gas 
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system (WHO, 2003).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
480
Urban Heat Island Effect
See heat island effect.
Urbanization
Net rural-to-urban migration, resulting in an increasing percentage of the population in any nation
or region living in settlements that are defined as urban centres, and the associated conversion of
land from a natural state or managed natural state (e.g. agriculture) to cities (IPCC, 2007a).
Vector
An organism, such as an insect, that transmits a pathogen from one host to another (IPCC, 2001).
Vector-Borne Disease
A disease that is transmitted between hosts by a vector organism such as a mosquito or tick
(e.g. malaria, dengue fever, leishmaniasis) (IPCC, 2007a).
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
A bacterium in the same family as those that cause cholera. Causes gastrointestinal illness in
humans, with symptoms including watery diarrhea, abdominal cramping, nausea, fever and
chills. Infection is usually as a result of consumption of raw or undercooked shellfish, though
the bacterium may infect open wounds (CDC, 2005b).
Voluntary Agency (Organization)
Organizations are considered to be part of the non-profit and voluntary sector if they are:
organized (i.e. have some structure and are institutionalized to some extent, but not necessarily
legally incorporated); non-governmental (i.e. are institutionally separate from governments);
non-profit-distributing (i.e. do not return any profits generated to their owners and directors);
self-governing (i.e. are independent and able to regulate their own activities); and voluntary 
(i.e. benefits to some degree from voluntary contributions of time or money) (Canadian Red
Cross et al., n.d.).
Voluntary Sector
Includes both volunteers and those entities that are neither for-profit nor agencies of the state. 
It includes incorporated non-profit organizations as well as unincorporated volunteer community
groups. It is also known as the community-based-sector, the non-profit sector, the third sector 
or the public benefit sector. The common feature is their reliance on volunteer boards of directors
to govern their activities (Canadian Red Cross et al., n.d.).
Vulnerability
Vulnerability is susceptibility to harm. Vulnerability to climate change is the degree to which a
system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including
climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability to climate change is a function of the character,
magnitude and rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity and its
adaptive capacity (IPCC, 2007a).
Water-Borne Illnesses
Water-borne illnesses result from exposure to pathogenic microorganisms or chemicals in
drinking water or recreational water. Contaminated water most often enters the body by ingestion,
but contaminants in water can also be inhaled, adsorbed or enter the body through contact
with open sores or wounds (Environment Canada, 2001).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
481
Water-Borne Diseases
See water-borne illnesses.
Weather
Weather is the state of the atmosphere at a given time and place with regard to temperature,
air pressure, humidity, wind, cloudiness and precipitation. The term “weather” is used mostly
for conditions over short periods of time (Environment Canada, 2007).
West Nile Virus
A zoonotic virus transmitted by mosquitoes (normally Culex) and maintained in a wildlife cycle
involving birds. Occasional spillover to the human population results after virus amplification
and can cause large epidemics. Symptoms may be mild and include fever, headache and
malaise, while symptoms of severe infection include high fever, neck stiffness, coma and
paralysis (McMichael et al., 2003).
Wind Chill
The cooling sensation caused by the combined effect of temperature and wind. The wind 
chill poses a health hazard because it speeds up the rate at which a body loses heat
(Environment Canada, 2002b).
Winter Road
A temporary roadway over frozen ground or a frozen body of water that facilitates transportation
to and from communities and resource extraction sites without permanent roads (Manitoba
Infrastructure and Transportation, n.d.).
Zoonosis
The transmission of a disease from an animal or non-human species to humans. The natural
reservoir is a non-human animal (IPCC, 2001).
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
482
REFERENCES
American Meteorological Society (AMS). (2000). Glossary. Retrieved October 25, 2007, from
http://amsglossary.allenpress.com/glossary/browse?s=r&p=45
Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA). (2005). Changing Arctic: Indigenous perspectives.
In Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) scientific report (pp. 61–98). Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
Atlas of Canada. (2006). Resource-reliant Communities, 2001. Retrieved January 3, 2008, from
http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/maps/economic/rdc2001/1
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME). (2000). Canada-wide Standards 
for particulate matter (PM) and ozone. Québec: Author.
Canadian Red Cross, Salvation Army, and St. John Ambulance. (n.d.). Voluntary sector framework for
health emergencies. Retrieved October 31, 2006, from http://www.redcross.ca/cmslib/general/
crc_disastermanagement_voluntary_e.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2005a). Foodborne illness. Retrieved January 3,
2008, from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/diseaseinfo/foodborneinfections_g.htm
—–. (2005b). Infectious disease information. Retrieved June 4, 2007, from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/
diseases/index.htm
—–. (2006). Diseases from rodents. Retrieved October 25, 2007, from http://www.cdc.gov/rodents/
diseases/index.htm
Coggon, D., Rose, G., and Barker, D.J.P. (1997). Epidemiology for the uninitiated, 4th Edition. British
Medical Journal Publishing Group. Retrieved January 3, 2008, from http://www.bmj.com/
epidem/epid.html
Environment Canada. (2001). Threats to sources of drinking water and aquatic ecosystem health in
Canada. National Water Research Institute, Burlington, Ontario. NWRI Scientific Assessment
Report Series No. 1. Retrieved January 4, 2008, from http://www.nwri.ca/threats/intro-e.html
—–. (2002a). Glossary. Introduction to Meteorology and Related Sciences. Retrieved January 3, 2008,
from http://www.msc-smc.ec.gc.ca/education/imres/glossary/glossary_e.html
—–. (2002b). Wind chill fact sheet. Retrieved June 4, 2007, from http://www.msc-smc.ec.gc.ca/
education/windchill/windchill_fact_sheet_aug_10_e.cfm
—–. (2006a). Atmospheric hazards: Extreme heat. Retrieved April 25, 2007, from http://www.hazards.ca/
maps/background/ExtremeHeat-e.html
—–. (2006b). Ground-level O3. Clean Air Online. Retrieved January 3, 2008, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/
cleanair-airpur/Ground_Level_Ozone-WS590611CA-1_En.htm
—–. (2007). Glossary. Retrieved June 6, 2007, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/default.asp?Lang=En&n=
7EBE5C5A-1
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Network on Emergency Preparedness and Response. (2004).
National framework for health emergency management: Guideline for program development.
Prepared for the Conference of F/P/T Ministers of Health. F/P/T Network for Emergency
Preparedness and Response.
Health Canada. (2000). Health Canada decision-making framework for identifying, assessing 
and managing health risks. Ottawa: Author.
—–. (2005). A Strategy to Implement an Integrated Risk Management Framework in Health 
Canada Population. Retrieved December 31, 2007, from www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ahc-asc/pubs/
ris/irmf-cgir_e.html
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
483
—–. (2006). A Health-based National Air Quality Index. Retrieved January 4, 2008, from
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/air/out-ext/air_quality_e.html
—–. (2007). Glossary. Retrieved January 7, 2008, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/sr-sr/biotech/
about-apropos/gloss_e.html#p
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2001). Climate change 2001: Impacts, adaptation
and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution to the Third Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007a). Summary for Policymakers. In M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden
and C.E. Hanson (Eds.), Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (pp. 7-22). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
—–. (2007b). M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson (Eds.),
Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working Group II contribution to
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Kovats, S., Ebi, K.L., and Menne, B. (2003). Methods of assessing human health vulnerability and 
public health adaptation to climate change. World Health Organization, Health Canada, 
World Meteorological Association, United Nations Environment Programme. Retrieved
January 3, 2007, from www.euro.who.int/document/e81923.pdf
Kump, L.R., Kasting, J.F., and Crane, R.G. (2004). The earth system (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Prentice Hall.
Manitoba Infrastructure and Transportation. (n.d.). Winter Roads in Manitoba. Retrieved January 3,
2008, from http://www.gov.mb.ca/tgs/hwyinfo/winterroads/
McMichael, A.J., Campbell-Lendrum, D.H., Corvalan, C.F., Ebi, K.L., Githeko, A., et al. (Eds.) (2003).
Climate change and human health: Risks and responses. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Nakicenovic, N., Alcamo, J., Davis, G., de Vries, B., Fenhann, J., et al. (2000). Special report 
on emissions scenarios. A special report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
NARSTO. (2004). Glossary. In P. McMurry, M. Shepherd, and J., Vickery (Eds.), Particulate Matter
Assessment for Policy Makers: A NARSTO Assessment. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2003). Infectious diseases. Retrieved June 4, 2007, 
from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/id-mi/index.html
—–. (2007). Population Health. Retrieved December 30, 2007, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/
ph-sp/phdd/determinants/
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada (PSEPC). (n.d.). An emergency management 
framework for Canada. Ottawa. Retrieved January 3, 2008, from http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/
prg/em/emfrmwrk-eng.aspx
—–. (2007a). About disaster mitigation. Retrieved January 3, 2008, from http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/
prg/em/ndms/aboutsnac-eng.aspx#typ
—–. (2007b). Description of critical infrastructure protection. Retrieved October 25, 2007, from
http://www.ps-sp.gc.ca/prg/em/nciap/about-eng.aspx
Resilience Alliance. (2007). Resilience Alliance glossary. Retrieved October 25, 2007, from
http://www.resalliance.org/608.php#D
Glossary
Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity
484
Schneider, S., and Sarukhan, J. (2001). Overview of impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability to climate
change. In J.J. McCarty, O.F. Canziani, N.A. Leary, D.J. Dokken, and K.S. White (Eds.),
Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Report of Working Group II, Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, 13-16 February 2002. Geneva: World Meteorological Organization
(WMO)/United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
Smit, B., and Wandel, J. (2006). Adaptation, adaptive capacity and vulnerability. Global Environmental
Change, 16, 282-292.
Statistics Canada. (2007). 2006 Census dictionary. Statistics Canada catalogue no. 92-566-XWE.
Retrieved October 24, 2007, from http://www12.statcan.ca/english/census06/reference/
dictionary/index.cfm
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (2005). Adaptation policy frameworks for 
climate change: Developing strategies, policies and measures. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). (n.d). Methodologies and 
Tools to Evaluate Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation. Retrieved January 4, 2008, 
from http://unfccc.int/adaptation/methodologies_for/vulnerability_and_adaptation/
items/2674.php
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS). (n.d.). Surge Capacity: Education and
Training for a Qualified Workforce. Retrieved January 3, 2008, from www.dhs.ca.gov/
smallpox/PDF/SurgeCapacityOA_Final.pdf
World Health Organization (WHO). (2003). Climate change and human health—Risks and 
responses. Retrieved March 30, 2006, from http://www.who.int/globalchange/
publications/cchhsummary/en/
Glossary
