Combatting Canada’s 
Rising Flood Costs:
Natural infrastructure is an underutilized option 
September, 2018
2
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
About Insurance Bureau of Canada 
Established in 1964, Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) is the national industry association 
representing Canada’s private home, auto and business insurers. Its member companies 
represent 90% of the Canadian P&C insurance market. IBC works on a number of fronts to 
increase public understanding of home, auto and business insurance. To learn more about 
IBC, visit www.ibc.ca.
About the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is an applied research centre 
at the University of Waterloo. It was founded in 2015 with a gift from Intact Financial 
Corporation, Canada’s largest property and casualty (P&C) insurer. The Intact Centre 
helps homeowners, communities and businesses reduce the risks they face from climate 
change and extreme weather events. To learn more about the Intact Centre, visit 
www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca.
About the University of Waterloo
The University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation university. With more than 36,000 
students, the university is home to the world’s largest co-operative education system of its 
kind. Its unmatched entrepreneurial culture and intensive research focus powers one of the 
top innovation hubs in the world. To learn more about the University of Waterloo, visit 
www.uwaterloo.ca.
About the International Institute for 
Sustainable Development 
The International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) is an independent think tank 
that champions sustainable solutions to 21st century problems. Its mission is to promote 
human development and environmental sustainability. Through research, analysis and 
knowledge sharing, it identifies and champions sustainable solutions that make a difference. 
Established in 1990, IISD has offices in Canada, Switzerland and the United States, and its 
work affects economies, communities, ecosystems and lives in nearly a hundred countries. 
IISD thanks the Great-West Life Assurance Company for supporting their research on this 
project. To learn more about IISD, visit www.iisd.org.
CITATION Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B., Venema, H., Osman, H. 2018. Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural 
infrastructure is an underutilized option. Prepared for Insurance Bureau of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, 
University of Waterloo.
DISCLAIMER The information stated in this report has, to the best of our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as 
possible. No representation or warranty (express or implied) is given as to the accuracy or completeness of the information 
contained in this publication, and the Insurance Bureau of Canada, Intact Centre, their respective employees and affiliates do 
not accept or assume any liability, responsibility or duty of care for any consequences to you or anyone else acting, or 
refraining to act, in reliance on the information contained in this report or for any decision based upon it. This report has been 
prepared for general guidance on matters of interest/information purposes only and does not constitute professional advice. 
Do not act upon any information contained in this report without obtaining specific professional advice.  
The material contained in this document and the related materials are subject to copyright and may not be reproduced
or distributed in any form for any purpose without the express written consent of Insurance Bureau of Canada.
Generously supported by:
3
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Table of Contents
Executive Summary
Chapter 1: The Need for Climate Adaptation in Canada
1.1: Escalating costs of natural disasters and flooding in Canada
1.2: Repeated flooding stresses Canada’s mortgage holders
1.3: Climate risk and flooding affect credit ratings
1.4: Flooding gives rise to lawsuits
1.5: Flooding affects the mental health of Canadians
1.6: Canada’s commitment to disaster risk reduction through natural infrastructure
Chapter 2: The Utility of Natural Infrastructure for Climate Adaptation
2.1: Defining natural infrastructure – A multifaceted climate adaptation solution
2.2: Canada’s natural infrastructure being lost to development – Conservation and restoration required
2.3: Investing in natural infrastructure is good business for Canada – Case studies
Case Study #1: Assessing the value of natural assets for the coastal town of Gibsons, BC
Case Study #2: Estimating the benefits of wetland conservation in rural and urban municipalities in southern Ontario
Case Study #3: Assessing the value of the Pelly’s Lake wetland restoration project in Manitoba
Case Study #4: Assessing the value of natural infrastructure in the town of Oakville, Ont.
Chapter 3: Framework for Natural Infrastructure Implementation
3.1: Community engagement
3.2: Watershed and climate risk assessment
3.3: Materiality assessment
3.4: Feasibility assessment
3.5: Economic costs and benefits assessment	
Case Study #5: Assessing green infrastructure benefits for a public parking lot, southern Ontario – TEV
3.5.1: Measurement of benefits – Considerations for natural infrastructure projects
3.5.2: Measurement of costs – Considerations for natural infrastructure projects
3.5.3: Calculating NPV
3.5.4: Accounting for uncertainty in calculations
3.6: Design, construction and maintenance
3.7: Monitoring and reporting
3.7.1: Performance monitoring
3.7.2: Risk monitoring
3.7.3: Outcome assessment and reporting
Chapter 4: Additional Mechanisms to Promote Natural Infrastructure
Chapter 5: Conclusion
Appendix A: Green Infrastructure – A TEV Approach by PwC Canada
Appendix B: Direct-Market Valuation, Indirect-Market Valuation and Survey-Based Valuation Approaches
Example of stated-preference approach for estimating benefits of wetland retention and restoration in southern Manitoba
Appendix C: Decision-Support Tools to Account for Risks and Uncertainty in Cost-Benefit Evaluation of Natural Infrastructure Projects	
Definitions
Acronyms
Endnotes
  4 
  7 
  8
  9
10
11
12
13
14
14
16
16
17
18
19
22
23
25
26
26
27
29
30
33
33
35
36
37
38
38
40
40
41
43
44
45
46
48
55
57
58
4
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
The financial impacts of climate change and extreme weather events are being felt by a growing number of 
homeowners and communities across Canada. The increase in P&C insurance losses is indicative of the growing 
costs associated with these events. These losses averaged $405 million per year between 1983 and 2008, and 
$1.8 billion between 2009 and 2017.  Water damage is the key driver behind these growing costs. Fortunately, as 
documented in this report, flood risk can be limited through conservation and restoration of natural infrastructure 
features, such as ponds, wetlands and vegetated areas. This report demonstrates how to quantify the benefits 
and costs of these natural features as a strong complement or a viable alternative to grey infrastructure option for 
flood mitigation. As a general “rule of thumb”, in order of preference, the most cost-effective means to mitigate 
flood losses utilizing natural systems is to:
(i)	
retain what you have;
(ii)	
restore what you’ve lost; and
(iii)	
build what you must.
This report presents ample evidence to suggest that efforts by governments to limit flood risk may be consistent 
with – and reinforce – their fiduciary responsibility to administer good governance. Flood risk is mounting across 
Canada from fluvial sources, such as rivers and lakes; pluvial sources, such as intense rainfall inundating urban 
environments; and coastal sources, such as storm surges compounded by rising sea levels. As this responsibility 
is likely to grow in response to increasing climate change and the associated extreme weather events, natural 
infrastructure merits consideration alongside grey infrastructure solutions as a means of limiting flood risk across 
all levels of government and all jurisdictions.   
Beyond the specific methods needed to assess and compare grey infrastructure against natural infrastructure 
options relative to their utility to mitigate risk, a framework is required that would provide guidance to those 
considering or opting for a natural infrastructure solution. The natural infrastructure implementation framework 
that is being introduced provides such a structure, and it is consistent with the natural infrastructure preservation 
commitments Canada has made under the Paris Agreement, the United Nations’ Sendai Framework for Disaster 
Risk Reduction and the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change. 
Natural infrastructure can be a cost-effective way to mitigate material financial losses that would otherwise result 
from flooding, as can be exemplified by: 
•	
Naturally occurring ponds in the coastal town of Gibsons, British Columbia (BC), that provide 
$3.5 million to $4 million of stormwater storage services annually;
•	
A 250-metre naturalized channel in the town of Oakville, Ontario, that provides $1.24 million to 
$1.44 million of stormwater conveyance and storage annually;
•	
Naturally occurring wetlands in southern Ontario that reduce flood damage costs to buildings by 
$3.5 million (or 29%) at a rural pilot site and by $51.1 million (or 38%) at an urban pilot site; and
•	
A restored and engineered wetland in Manitoba that is valued at $3.7 million for the flood reduction, 
water quality improvement, carbon sequestration and other benefits it provides.
Executive Summary
5
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Figure 1: 
Framework for Natural 
Infrastructure Project 
Implementation
COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT
1
FEASIBILITY
ASSESSMENT
4
MATERIALITY
ASSESSMENT
3
WATERSHED
AND CLIMATE RISK
ASSESSMENT
2
ECONOMIC
BENEFITS
ASSESSMENT
5
DESIGN,
CONSTRUCTION AND 
MAINTENANCE
6
MONITORING
AND
REPORTING
Moreover, natural infrastructure can offer other valuable environmental and social benefits that are often not 
attainable through the implementation of traditional, grey-engineered solutions. A thorough cost-benefit analysis 
should measure all infrastructure options through a common cost-benefit lens. For example, although naturally 
occurring ponds provide stormwater storage capacity, which helps attenuate flooding, they also create habitat for 
aquatic species, improve biodiversity and provide aesthetic benefits to the community. These additional benefits 
are not available through a grey infrastructure solution, such as a stormwater storage tank, and this needs to be 
reflected in a cost-benefit analysis. A comprehensive assessment of the financial, environmental and social costs 
and benefits (i.e., a total economic value [TEV] assessment) is required to illuminate these otherwise uncaptured 
benefits.   
Canada will continue to experience loss and degradation of its natural infrastructure assets if it does not start to 
apply a robust TEV assessment for natural versus grey infrastructure solutions.
To assist governments, practitioners and investors with land-use planning and infrastructure investment decisions, 
this report includes a framework for natural infrastructure project implementation (Figure 1).
6
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
The framework provides an improved due diligence process for the assessment and implementation of natural 
infrastructure projects. It also adds economic rigour to the way in which costs and benefits are assessed, 
including assessments of materiality and feasibility, approaches to calculating TEV and net present value (NPV), 
and accounting for uncertainty. This expands the utility of the framework beyond local communities and makes 
the framework relevant to parties seeking to direct green infrastructure spending in Canada (e.g., Infrastructure 
Canada, corporate sponsors and foundations).
The framework is part of a broader suite of measures that could be taken to further the uptake of natural 
infrastructure projects. To increase the ability and willingness of communities to explore and adopt natural 
infrastructure solutions, Canada should also consider the following measures:
•	
Assess the TEV of natural infrastructure as part of land-use planning and infrastructure 
investment decisions;
•	
Establish sustainable funding models and mechanisms for natural infrastructure conservation 
and restoration (e.g., landowner compensation schemes, economic linkages between 
de-risking and longer-term savings);
•	
Establish funding mechanisms and criteria that explicitly recognize the unique programmatic 
needs of implementing effective natural infrastructure solutions within broader infrastructure 
funding frameworks;
•	
Work with municipalities, the new Canada Infrastructure Bank and the financial sector to 
develop and implement new financial instruments  to accelerate natural infrastructure 
investment and implementation; and 
•	
Develop forums for convening traditional actors responsible for natural infrastructure 
preservation (e.g., conservation authorities, environmental non-governmental 
organizations [NGOs]), municipalities, institutional investors, and insurers to deliver 
market-based solutions.
As illustrated throughout this report, a new skill set – one that combines financial acumen with broader 
environmental and social impact assessment – is required to curtail the possible debilitating loss of natural 
infrastructure assets in the country. If Canada remains committed to the Sendai Framework and the Paris 
Agreement, it needs to act now, in innovative and unprecedented ways, before it cannot act at all.  
7
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Climate change–associated extreme weather events and flooding are becoming more frequent in Canada, bringing 
ever-increasing costs to governments, insurers, investors and ultimately all Canadians. Since 2009, flooding from 
coastal and inland sources has emerged as the most pervasive and costly natural disaster in the country, causing 
financial and psychosocial distress to homeowners in virtually all regions.
To limit the impacts of extreme weather and flooding, all levels of government are making new infrastructure 
investments and implementing climate adaptation strategies. While the primary focus has been on implementing 
traditional grey infrastructure solutions (e.g., dams, diversion channels, water and wastewater plant upgrades, and 
the construction of new dikes) to limit risk, there is a growing recognition that natural infrastructure solutions can 
play an important role in climate adaptation and disaster risk reduction.
Chapter 1 examines the need for climate adaptation – particularly flood risk reduction – in Canada. Chapter 2 
features Canadian case studies in which natural infrastructure projects were used for flood risk reduction and 
provided a range of other environmental and societal benefits. These case studies demonstrate that there is a 
significant economic benefit associated with natural infrastructure conservation and restoration. Chapter 3 
presents a framework for implementing natural infrastructure projects. A key element of the framework is 
quantifying the broad economic benefits that natural infrastructure offers (e.g., flood attenuation, water quality 
improvement). Chapter 4 explores additional ways that the uptake of natural infrastructure can be improved. 
Chapter 5 concludes that it is possible – and indeed imperative – for communities in Canada to consider both grey 
and natural infrastructure solutions for climate adaptation. It also emphasizes that the framework featured in the 
report can help identify circumstances where natural infrastructure solutions are the best fit.  
Chapter 1: The Need for 
Climate Adaptation in Canada
8
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
1.1: Escalating costs of natural disasters and flooding in Canada
In the coming years, climate-related natural catastrophes and their associated economic losses are expected to 
increase. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change projects continued global warming and increased 
global frequency of heavy precipitation events in the 21st century,2  with Canada warming faster than the global 
average and experiencing more frequent and severe weather.3  Similarly, Environment and Climate Change 
Canada predicts growth in the frequency and severity of extreme weather events in Canada.4  These projected 
trends are already manifesting, presenting a significant economic concern. 
According to Public Safety Canada, the number of natural disasters for which provinces and territories required 
and obtained federal assistance under the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) increased 
dramatically between 1970 and 2015 (Figure 2).5  Similarly, the Office of the Auditor General of Canada noted that 
from 2009 to 2015, DFAA’s compensation to the provinces and territories was greater than any of the previous 39 
fiscal years combined.6  The DFAA’s spending on flooding accounted for 75% of all weather-related expenditures.7 
Figure 2: Number of Natural Disasters in Canada Requiring DFAA Compensation
for Provinces and Territories (1970–2015)
Source: Public Safety Canada. 2016–2017 Evaluation of the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements.
Number of events
Estimated trend
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
9
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
IBC has determined that “property and casualty insurance payouts from extreme weather have more than doubled 
every five to 10 years since the 1980s.” 8 While insurable payouts averaged $400 million per year from 1983 to 2008 
in Canada, for eight of the last nine years leading up to 2017, insurance payouts for catastrophic losses exceeded 
$1 billion per year (Figure 3). The insurance gap in Canada is also significant; for every dollar of insured losses 
borne by insurers in Canada, three to four dollars are borne by governments and home and business owners.
Figure 3: Catastrophic Insured Losses in Canada (1980–2017)
1.2: Repeated flooding stresses Canada’s mortgage holders
There are 1.7 million Canadian households (19% of Canada’s population) at risk of river (fluvial) and surface water 
(pluvial) flooding.i  For areas where flood insurance coverage is limited or unavailable, and where Canadians are at 
the highest risk of flooding, this represents a significant economic concern.
Flood damages can cost homeowners tens of thousands of dollars to repair. For example, according to the 
National Flood Insurance Program in the U.S., a 15-centimetre flood in a 2,000-square-foot home is likely to cause 
about US$40,000 in flood damage.9  With limited or no flood insurance, it may be challenging for homeowners to 
cover this cost on their own.
As of 2017, the Canadian Payroll Association reported that almost half of working Canadians are living paycheque 
to paycheque, with 47% of working Canadians indicating that it would be difficult to meet their financial 
obligations if their paycheque was delayed by even a week.10 Consequently, there is an emerging risk facing 
Canada’s mortgage market. In the future, flood-related mortgage default rates may increase as saving rates remain 
low and more households are subject to debilitating flooding.
Source: IBC Facts Book, PCS, CatIQ, Swiss Re, Munich Re and Deloitte. 
*Values in 2017 dollars; total natural catastrophe losses normalized by inflation and per-capita wealth accumulation.
Loss + loss adjustment expenses
Estimated trend
i IBC commissioned an analysis of fluvial and pluvial residential flood risk for Canada based on 2015 residential housing stock excluding apartment buildings and condos.
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1983
1985
1987
1995
2003
1989
1997
2005
1991
1999
2007
1993
2001
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
$ Billion
Quebec
Floods
Ontario Wind
and Rain
Alberta and
Toronto Floods
Fort McMurray 
Fire
Eastern
Ice Storm
10
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
1.3: Climate risk and flooding affect credit ratings
Global credit rating agencies, including DBRS, Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s, are beginning to examine climate 
change risks and potential impacts on ratings of tradable assets, including municipal bonds.11 The Carbon 
Disclosure Project predicts that tax base, debt levels and management quality are the three main areas that credit 
rating analysis for municipal bonds will start to incorporate to determine how well municipalities are addressing 
climate and extreme weather risks.12  Indeed, in November 2017, Moody’s Investors Service, the bond credit rating 
dimension of Moody’s Corporation, outlined four key credit risks associated with climate change that their credit 
rating analysts look at when examining U.S. local and state government risks:
1.	 Economic disruption (e.g., property loss and/or damage, lower revenues, business 
interruption, increased debt and higher insurance costs)
2.	 Physical damage (e.g., property loss and/or damage, loss of utilities, transportation 
and communication networks)
3.	 Health and public safety (e.g., loss of life, jeopardized critical emergency service provisions)
4.	 Population displacement (e.g., short-term displacements and longer-term 
population migration).13 
Notably, coastal and non-coastal flood risks comprise two of the six total metrics of climate risks assessed 
by Moody’s:
1.	 Gross domestic product (GDP) coastal counties/total state GDP, 2016
2.	 Tropical cyclone damage (1980–2017)/state GDP, 2016
3.	 Coastal dwelling units in 100/500 year flood plains/total coastal dwelling units
4.	 Damage from non-tropical cyclone weather events (1980–2017)/state GDP, 2016
5.	 Non-coastal dwelling units in 100/500 year flood plains/total non-coastal dwelling units
6.	 Agricultural, forestry, fishing and hunting/total state GDP, 2016.14 
In Canada, where flooding is the most common extreme weather risk facing municipalities, the focus of credit 
rating analysis for municipal bonds will undoubtedly reflect the initiatives that local governments deploy to 
improve their flood resiliency. Measures to mitigate physical exposure to climate risks will weigh increasingly 
on credit ratings. 
11
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
1.4: Flooding gives rise to lawsuits
Flood-related lawsuits involving homeowners, developers, local governments, conservation authorities, 
Indigenous peoples, provinces and private businesses are on the rise in Canada. Table 1 provides examples of 
these lawsuits. These cases demonstrate the need for flood resilience at all levels of government, as well as for 
businesses and society.
Table 1: Examples of Stormwater Management and Flood-Related Lawsuits in Canada
A $950-million class action lawsuit was brought forward by 4,000 
residents of four First Nations following severe flooding in spring 
2011. The flood resulted in damage to property and the evacuation 
of many families from their homes. The plaintiffs brought claims of 
negligence, nuisance and breach of treaty rights, alleging that the 
Government of Manitoba caused the flooding through its water 
and flood control measures that affected the water levels around 
the four First Nations. The class action lawsuit was certified in 
January 2017 and is moving forward.
Province, Association of 
Native Fire Fighters Inc.
Anderson et al. v. Manitoba et al., 2017 (ongoing)
CASE NAME AND YEAR
DESCRIPTION
(damages, cost and settlement amounts included where identified)
Muskoka residents as well as cottage and business owners 
launched a $900-million class action lawsuit against the Province 
of Ontario after flooding and high water levels caused damage. The 
plaintiffs allege that the Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry 
was negligent for failing to control water levels. 
Province 
Muskoka Class Action, 2016 (ongoing)
In May 2012, floods resulted in severe damage in Thunder Bay, 
Ont. The plaintiffs allege negligence in repairing, inspecting and 
maintaining the water pollution control plant, as well not diligently 
operating and supervising at the time of the flood (including an 
allegation that alarms were ignored). The $300-million claim is 
ongoing. The court certified action on consent in 2013.
Municipality 
Cerra et al. v. The Corporation of the  
City of Thunder Bay, 2012 (ongoing)
After a 2010 flood, 15 households filed a class action lawsuit against 
a developer and contractor, two engineering firms and the City 
of Maple Ridge, BC. The plaintiffs allege that the defendants were 
negligent, arguing construction failure, faulty workmanship and 
design, and failure to inspect basements for leaks and repair leaks 
as requested. The plaintiffs also argue that the houses were not 
waterproofed to code, despite the municipality’s inspection, review 
and issuance of permits. The trial was scheduled to begin in 2016.
Municipality, developer, 
contractor, engineering 
firms
Maple Ridge Class Action, 201015  (ongoing)
Upper- and lower-tier municipalities, the Province of Ontario and 
the conservation authority were all named as defendants in a 
negligence claim related to systemic flooding in the Lisgar area of 
Mississauga over several years. The $200-million class action lawsuit 
was withdrawn before trial. However, this case shows the potential 
for systemic flooding giving rise to class action lawsuits.
Province, municipality, 
conservation authority
Panza et al. v. The Corporation of the  
City of Mississauga et al., 2012
DEFENDANTS
12
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Table 1: Examples of Stormwater Management and Flood-Related Lawsuits in Canada
1.5: Flooding affects the mental health of Canadians
Mental health impacts associated with flooding can include general mental distress, anxiety, post-traumatic  
stress disorder and depression. Mental distress is defined as being of “sufficient intensity to disrupt a person’s 
normal life patterns.”16
In Canada, several studies indicate that Canadians experienced mental distress because of flooding both in the 
immediate term and over the long term:
•	
A 2017 study of 200 households in Montreal that experienced flooding found that  
“almost 70% of respondents reported having suffered from anxiety, sleep disturbances  
or concentration problems since the floods.”17
•	
A 2004 study of 176 households in Manitoba found that over a third experienced  
psychological distress following a major flood event.18
•	
A 2016 study of men and women affected by the 2013 Alberta floods found a 164%  
increase in the use of anti-anxiety medication and a 232% increase in the use of  
sleeping aids among women in High River, one of the worst-hit areas.19
•	
A 2000 study of Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean, Que., residents following the 1996 floods found  
that 12% had to take sick leave or were absent from work, and 6% took an early retirement.20
Source: Zizzo Strategy. 2017. Legal Risks and Requirements to Address Flood Resilience. Prepared for the Intact Centre.
The Quebec Court of Appeal dismissed a class action lawsuit by 
owners of 1,723 homes that flooded in 1997 when sewers backed up 
following heavy rains. The court ruled that the sewers were designed 
to withstand a five-year storm as required by provincial guidelines, 
and the town was not obliged to do more. However, the court noted 
that current design standards might not protect municipalities in 
future lawsuits, in light of “recent climate phenomena” and other 
scientific advances.
Municipality
Dicaire v. Chambly (Town), 2008
CASE NAME AND YEAR
DESCRIPTION
(damages, cost and settlement amounts included where identified)
A major flood in the city of Stratford, Ont., after a severe rainfall in 
2002 left many with sewage in their basements. The plaintiffs (city 
residents) claimed negligence in the design, construction, operation 
and maintenance of the storm and sanitary sewer system. The class 
action lawsuit was certified by the court in 2005, and the case was 
settled in 2010, eight years after the flood. Stratford settled for $7.7 
million after already spending $1.3 million in emergency relief, and 
then upgraded its system to a 250-year storm standard.
Municipality
McLaren v. Stratford (City), 2005
DEFENDANTS
13
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Findings from a 2018 Intact Centre study of 100 households in flood-affected neighbourhoods in southern Ontario 
confirm that flooding can cause mental distress. Three years after experiencing a flood, nearly 50% of households 
are “significantly worried” about flooding when it rains. Furthermore, homeowners who experienced basement 
flooding had to take, on average, seven days off work following the flood event.21
1.6: Canada’s commitment to disaster risk reduction through natural 
infrastructure
To improve resilience against natural disasters, all levels of government in Canada have begun to prepare for 
extreme weather and develop climate adaptation strategies and plans. These efforts are consistent with the 
Paris Agreement, which Canada signed in 2016;22 with the United Nations’ Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk  
Reduction;23 and with the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change.
Both the global Sendai Framework and the Pan-Canadian Framework recognize that natural infrastructure is  
a key priority for disaster risk reduction. Under the Sendai Framework, national and local governments are advised 
to strengthen the sustainable use and management of ecosystems and implement integrated environmental 
and natural resource management approaches for disaster risk reduction.”24 Under the Pan-Canadian Framework, 
both traditional and natural adaptation solutions are noted to “build resilience, reduce disaster risks, and save 
costs over the long term.”25 In the words of Ralph Goodale, Canada’s Minister of Public Safety, “with astute science, 
engineering, planning, and investment, we could develop a network of upstream water control structures – large 
and small, natural and constructed – together with properly designed channels, reservoirs, wetlands, and wooded 
areas to manage water flows in a smarter, more effective way, countering the debilitating cycles of uncontrolled 
floods and drought.”26
In its 2017 budget, Canada announced $2 billion for a Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund, and stated that 
natural infrastructure was eligible. Unfortunately, the $20 million minimum project cost and funding-matching 
criteria will likely exclude applications for programs that feature natural infrastructure, as they are usually not that 
expensive to implement. Furthermore, the analytical and institutional capacity to identify, design and finance 
natural infrastructure options is not well developed. This report first profiles the utility of natural infrastructure for 
climate adaptation and then outlines an analytical framework that practitioners can use to develop the business 
case for natural infrastructure conservation and restoration.
14
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
This chapter first outlines the considerable loss of natural infrastructure, particularly wetlands, in Canada. It then 
provides Canadian case studies in which the benefits and costs of natural infrastructure were evaluated. The 
case studies demonstrate that natural infrastructure merits consideration as a complement to grey infrastructure 
solutions for climate adaptation.
2.1: Defining natural infrastructure – A multifaceted climate adaptation solution
For the purpose of this report, natural infrastructure is defined as “a strategically planned and managed network 
of natural lands, such as forests, wetlands and other open spaces, which conserves or enhances ecosystem values 
and functions and provides associated benefits to human populations.” 27, 28  Natural infrastructure can be further 
defined as “fully natural” or “engineered” using the following criteria:
•	
Fully natural infrastructure (e.g., a wetland, forest or flood plain), once established,  
requires no human intervention or management.
•	
Engineered infrastructure, such as a water retention facility, can leverage natural  
processes but be optimized through human design and management. For example,  
an engineered retention storage project (a small reservoir) can intercept floodwaters  
and release them through an engineered outlet. The reservoir produces many of the  
same ecological benefits as, for example, a wetland, with the important distinction that  
water levels can be manipulated by human intervention.
A key benefit of using natural infrastructure for climate adaptation is that typically, it can serve a number of functions 
(e.g., both flood and drought attenuation) and have a variety of additional ecological and societal benefits.29, 30 
Meanwhile, traditional grey infrastructure is generally designed to meet a limited set of purposes.31, 32, 33, 34  
Natural infrastructure can be a strong complement to traditional infrastructure solutions.35, 36 For example, 
reforesting watersheds above dams helps prevent erosion, which slows the reservoir sedimentation processes 
and, in turn, increases power generation efficiency and the longevity of hydropower facilities.37 Similarly, small-
scale hydraulic retention structures (i.e., structures that can store water during intense rainfall periods to reduce 
flooding and release water for irrigation during droughts) can also help improve water quality by capturing 
nutrients and sequestering carbon through growth in vegetation.38, 39, 40, 41  
Chapter 2: The Utility of 
Natural Infrastructure for 
Climate Adaptation
15
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Table 2 summarizes and compares the costs and benefits of grey and green infrastructure.
Table 2: Conceptual Comparison of Costs and Benefits of Natural Infrastructure 
versus Grey Infrastructure Solutions for Stormwater Storage (e.g., naturally 
occurring ponds versus storage tanks) 
COSTS (EXAMPLES)
BENEFITS (EXAMPLES)
NATURAL
INFRASTRUCTURE
NATURAL
INFRASTRUCTURE
GREY
INFRASTRUCTURE
GREY
INFRASTRUCTURE
Pre-Construction
•	
Baseline data collection
•	
Stakeholder consultation
•	
Site identification
•	
Assessment of design alternatives
•	
Detailed engineering design of selected alternative
•	
Land acquisition
•	
Environmental assessment
•	
Permitting and legal fees
•	
Development of construction specifications
•	
Development of monitoring program and key performance indicators (KPIs)
Construction
•	
Site preparation
•	
Site construction
Post-construction
•	
Infrastructure maintenance activities
•	
Infrastructure condition assessment
•	
Monitoring against KPIs
•	
Evaluation and reporting
•	
Carbon cost over project life cycle
Administration
•	
Project management and oversight
•	
Stormwater storage
•	
Water quality
•	
Habitat creation / improvement
•	
Microclimate stabilization (e.g., urban heat island reduction)
•	
Air filtration
•	
Recreational amenity and aesthetic services
•	
Energy savings
•	
Carbon savings
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
                                             x
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
16
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
2.2: Canada’s natural infrastructure being lost to development – 
Conservation and restoration required
Despite the intrinsic value of natural infrastructure preservation, Canada continues to experience the loss of 
wetlands, forests and vegetated areas. The loss of natural infrastructure is most pronounced in southern Canada, 
where population growth is concentrated, and agriculture and urban development have expanded.42 For example:
•	
In southern Ontario, 72% of the original wetlands have been lost to development  
(e.g., agriculture, urban sprawl and other land conversion).43
•	
In Alberta, approximately 64% of the original wetlands in settled areas no longer exist.44 
•	
In BC, over 70% of the original wetlands disappeared in the lower Fraser Valley and parts  
of Vancouver Island, and an 85% wetland loss has been documented in the South Okanagan.45
The considerable loss of these natural environments increased the respective communities’ vulnerability to floods, 
droughts and water contamination. 
To mitigate further natural infrastructure loss and ecosystem degradation, governments across Canada introduced 
policies and regulations for natural infrastructure conservation. For example, the federal policy on wetland 
conservation includes two key commitments: (1) no net loss of wetland functions on federal lands and waters 
through restriction of development related to these wetlands; and (2) enhancement and rehabilitation of wetlands 
in areas where the continuing loss or degradation of wetlands has reached critical levels.46 Other examples of the 
government’s commitment to protect and conserve natural infrastructure include Ontario’s Wetland Conservation 
Strategy47; the Alberta Wetland Policy48; the establishment of the Saskatchewan Wetland Conservation 
Corporation, which delivers wetland, native prairie and riparian habitat protection programs in the province; 
and Manitoba’s water conservation policies, which guide conservation and management of the province’s lakes, 
rivers, groundwater and wetlands. In addition, various organizations across Canada continue to undertake natural 
infrastructure restoration projects.
2.3: Investing in natural infrastructure is good business for Canada –  
Case studies
The following case studies illustrate the utility of efforts to conserve and restore natural infrastructure assets in 
Canada. They’re part of a growing body of research that demonstrates that natural infrastructure is an economically 
viable solution for climate adaptation in Canada and should be considered alongside traditional engineering 
projects for disaster risk reduction.
17
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
ii  A layer of rock that contains water or allows water to pass through it
iii The assessment of ponds cost $45,000; the cost of dredging was estimated at $15,000 every three years.
Case Study #1: Assessing the value of natural assets for the coastal town of Gibsons, BC
The Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI) assesses the financial value of natural infrastructure in terms of the 
municipal services it provides. MNAI engages with municipalities across Canada to identify, value and account 
for the contribution of natural assets to municipal government service delivery (i.e., services that engineered 
assets would otherwise need to deliver). The municipalities are able to use MNAI assessments to integrate natural 
infrastructure into traditional asset management decisions.49
Gibsons was the first municipality in North America to utilize an MNAI assessment framework and declare natural 
infrastructure assets as municipal assets. The town then committed to operate and maintain its natural assets in 
the same manner as storm sewers, roads and other traditional engineered assets.50
Specifically, Gibsons assessed the value of its naturally occurring aquiferii to provide water storage services 
and its ponds to provide stormwater management services. Gibsons found that at a cost of $30,000 per year 
for maintenance and monitoring, the aquifer provided water for approximately 70% of the town’s projected 
population.51 The assessment of its naturally occurring ponds in the town’s White Tower Park found that providing 
the same stormwater management services through engineered assets would have cost about $3.5 million to  
$4 million.iii These assessments led Gibsons to protect its aquifer and White Tower Park ponds from proposed  
new housing developments.52 Furthermore, Gibsons now recognizes the financial value of natural infrastructure 
assets in its financial statements:
The Town is fortunate to have many natural assets that reduce the need for engineered infrastructure 
that would otherwise be required. This includes the Gibsons aquifer (water storage and filtration), creeks, 
ditches and wetlands (rain water management) and the foreshore area (natural seawall). Canadian public 
sector accounting standards do not allow for the valuation and recording of such assets into the financial 
statements of the Town. As such, these natural assets are not reported in these financial statements. 
Nevertheless, the Town acknowledges the importance of these assets and the need to manage them in 
conjunction with engineered infrastructure. For example, on July 19, 2016, the Town adopted a revision  
to the Development Cost Charges Bylaw 1218, which included a $3.2 million valuation for an increase  
in the White Tower storm retention pond volumes. This pond system is a natural storage and retention 
system that would replace, in part, a traditional pipe system. The valuation recognizes the service this 
natural asset will provide.53
18
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
 Ten other Canadian jurisdictions now participate in MNAI. In BC, the City of Grand Forks, City of Nanaimo, City of 
Courtenay, District of Sparwood and District of West Vancouver participate in MNAI. In Ontario, the Town of Oakville 
(see Case Study #4), the Regional Municipality of Peel and the City of Oshawa participate. In New Brunswick, the 
Western Valley Regional Service Commission and Southeast Regional Service Commission participate in MNAI.  
As MNAI gains popularity, it could be leveraged across Canada as a standard practice to account for the economic  
value that natural infrastructure delivers as a municipal asset.
Case Study #2: Estimating the benefits of wetland conservation in rural and urban 
municipalities in southern Ontario
Recognizing that flood attenuation is the number one climate adaptation priority for communities in Canada, the 
Intact Centre developed an approach to quantify the value of wetlands for flood-damage cost-reduction. It first 
tested the approach at two pilot sites in southern Ontario, one urban and one rural. The Intact Centre found that 
if wetlands are maintained in their natural state, under conditions of a severe rainfall event (a one-in-500-year 
event) they can reduce flood damage costs to buildings – including homes and apartments as well as industrial, 
commercial and institutional structures – by close to 40%.54  
The Intact Centre deployed the following four-step approach to assess the flood attenuation benefits of wetlands:
1.	 Complete hydrologic and hydraulic modelling for the study area, with and 
without the natural infrastructure features of interest. The hydrologic and 
hydraulic modelling provided flood extents and depths with wetlands and without 
natural infrastructure features (i.e., by replacing natural infrastructure features 
with a different land use in the models). The hydrologic and hydraulic modelling 
considered a range of rainfall events (e.g., two-year, five-year, 10-year, 25-year, 
50-year and 100-year). A key output of this step was raster data55 and shapefiles,56 
which showed flood extents and flood depths for each of the modelled rainfall 
events, under conditions of natural infrastructure features (wetlands) being 
preserved or lost to development.
2.	 Complete land use and building footprint analysis. Local government websites 
provided land use and building footprint data. This data was overlaid with flood-
extent and flood-depth data from Step 1 to confirm which structures were 
inundated for the specified range of rainfall events. The expectation was that 
when natural infrastructure features were preserved, fewer buildings would be 
inundated, or the levels of building inundation would be lower, compared to being 
lost to development. This analysis was completed using Geographic Information 
System (GIS) software (i.e., ArcMap GIS).
19
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
3.	 Detailed analysis of inundated buildings. Once the inundated building structures 
were identified in Step 2, they were classified according to use (e.g., residential, office, 
institutional, industrial, retail) and structural type (e.g., single-family home, apartment 
building). Other details about the inundated buildings, such as main-floor elevation 
relative to grade and presence of underground parking and basements, were collected 
to analyze the flood damage cost for each inundated building. This data was collected 
through virtual examination of buildings using specialized software developed by 
IBI Group, a global architecture, planning, engineering and technology firm. The tool, 
implemented in Google Earth Pro, relies on Google Earth imagery to help users visually 
inspect buildings and download relevant recorded data to Excel for further flood 
damage cost analysis.
4.	 Calculation of flood damages with and without the natural infrastructure features of 
interest. After all of the inundated buildings were classified in Step 3, IBI Group’s Rapid 
Flood Damage Assessment Model (a free, publicly available software developed for the 
Government of Alberta’s Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study57) was used to 
calculate the estimated annual flood damages to buildings, with and without wetlands.58
The study found that at the rural pilot site, where wetlands remained intact, flood damage costs were $8.9 million, 
which was $3.5 million or 29% lower than the $12.4 million cost that would have been realized had agricultural 
development replaced the wetlands. At the urban pilot site, when wetlands were maintained in their natural state  
the cost of flood damages were $84.5 million, which was $51.1 million or 38% lower than the $135.6 million that  
would have occurred consequent to agricultural replacement. The study illustrated that simply leaving wetlands  
in their natural state was meaningful for flood attenuation.59
Case Study #3: Assessing the value of the Pelly’s Lake wetland restoration project in Manitoba
The Pelly’s Lake water retention wetland system, near Holland, Man., is located in a heavily drained agricultural area 
upstream of a high-flood-risk area of the Boyne River system. The Boyne River is a tributary of the Red River, which  
has a history of severe flooding. The Red River contributes approximately 60% of the nutrient load to Lake Winnipeg, 
the most eutrophic large lake in the world. Pelly’s Lake is a 121-hectare wetland area, frequently flooded under natural 
conditions and overgrown with an aggressive macrophyte species, Typha (e.g., cattail), which flourishes in wet,  
nutrient-enriched environments and consumes large amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus.
 
In 2015, a retention structure was built to manage water releases at Pelly’s Lake, effectively transforming a natural 
slough and marginal agricultural land into an engineered wetland and reservoir. The key benefits of the engineered 
wetland include the ability to control water releases for flood attenuation, late-season recharge of waterways further 
20
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
downstream, and the ability to release sufficient water from the reservoir so that conventional agricultural 
equipment can access the site and harvest the cattails. Harvesting cattails as a biomass crop produces multiple 
benefits including improved water and habitat quality, as demonstrated by the increased diversity of plant and 
bird species (e.g., waterfowl and songbirds).60
In 2017, University of Saskatchewan researchers assessed the economics of Pelly’s Lake and disseminated their 
analyses in three peer-reviewed publications.61, 62, 63  The return on investment analysis that follows is based on 
these publications, with Table 3 summarizing the key inputs in the calculation. The estimated internal rate of return 
(IRR)iv for this project, assuming a 20-year life cycle, was estimated at 32% with the net Benefit-Cost Ratios (nBCRs)v 
ranging from 2.8 to 3.64, depending on the discount rate.
•	
At a 3% discount rate, the NPV was calculated at $3,700,148, with an nBCR of 3.64.
•	
At a 4% discount rate, the NPV was calculated at $3,262,905, with an nBCR of 3.21.
•	
At a 5% discount rate, NPV was calculated at $2,883,146, with nBCR of 2.83.
For context, the United Kingdom Treasury published value for money (VfM) guidance documents. These 
documents are widely used for public procurement and public-private-partnership infrastructure projects.64, 65 
Projects with an nBCR between 2 and 4 are regarded as having a “high” VfM, and those above 4 are regarded as 
having a “very high” VfM. 
iv  The IRR is the rate at which the project breaks even.
v  Defined as Net Present Value (the difference between the present value of benefits and the present value of costs associated with the project, over a period of time) divided by Total Capital Expenditure.
Table 3: The Pelly’s Lake, Man., Water Retention Wetland System, Cost and Benefits 
(in 2017 dollars) 
CAPITAL EXPENSE (CapEx)
IN 2017 DOLLARS
Land                                                                                                                                                                                        $467,183 
Civil works                                                                                                                                                                             $550,000
                                                                                                       Total CapEx	
$1,017,183
OPERATING EXPENSE (OpEx)
IN 2017 DOLLARS
Operations and maintenance                                                                                                                                           $45,000 
Harvest                                                                                                                                                                                     $80,000 
                                                                                                       Total OpEx	
$125,000 
TOTAL BENEFITS
IN 2017 DOLLARS
Flood attenuation ($740/ha; 121 ha)                                                                                                                              $89,540 
Biomass production ($16.20/t; 1,550 t)                                                                                                                          $25,100 
Carbon dioxide offsets ($25/t; 3,100 t)                                                                                                                           $77,500 
Phosphorus ($60/kg; 1,500 kg)                                                                                                                                         $90,000 
Nitrogen ($36/kg; 4,650 kg)                                                                                                                                            $167,400  
                                                                                                       Total benefits	
$449,540
                                                                                                       Net benefits = Total benefits - Total OpEx	 $324,540 
21
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
The full VfM proposition for Pelly’s Lake, outlined above, may be underestimated for several reasons: 
•	
The land acquisition cost is based on fair market value for high-value agricultural 
land in Manitoba, not the actual value of the land that Pelly’s Lake occupies (low 
value, frequently flooded). 
•	
The unit flood risk reduction benefit ($740 per hectare) applied to Pelly’s Lake is 
adapted from two published meta-analyses of the benefits provided by wetlands 
in agricultural landscapes.66, 67 Flood risk reduction benefits should be based on 
a detailed local modelling study using hydrodynamic modelling, LiDAR and the 
local value of flood-exposed agricultural land, municipal infrastructure, agricultural 
infrastructure  
and livestock.
•	
The biomass value represents the low-end of the bio-product value spectrum for 
Typha’s use as a local space heating fuel. The benchmark spot price for an equivalent 
biomass source (industrial wood pellets) averaged US$162.87/tonne between 2009 
and 2017.68
•	
The carbon credit price is constant over the 20-year life of the project at $25 per 
tonne, whereas current Canadian federal policy anticipates the introduction of a 
carbon tax in 2018 at $10 per tonne and an escalation to $50 per tonne by 2022.
•	
The phosphorus value ($60 per kilogram) was conservative. Tertiary phosphorus 
removal technologies now in use in Canada have unit costs above $1,000 per 
kilogram69 and the phosphorus offset program now operational in the Lake Simcoe 
watershed uses a $35,000 per kilogram for phosphorus offset charge.70
•	
There are unaccounted benefits of improved habitat for waterfowl and songbirds 
associated with active wetland management, as well as groundwater recharge,  
drought resiliency and irrigation benefits.
The Pelly’s Lake case study reveals that the investment case for natural infrastructure projects can be high to very 
high. It’s built on several public and private co-benefits, and the use of ecosystem markets (particularly for carbon 
and phosphorus) can be important to harness the multi-functional character of natural infrastructure. This case 
study also reveals the importance of geographic targeting to identify potential natural infrastructure development 
sites with high hydrologic and low agricultural value to minimize land acquisition costs.
22
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Case Study #4: Assessing the value of natural infrastructure in the town of Oakville, Ont.
Through MNAI, Oakville conducted a pilot study that assessed the projected value of the municipal services 
provided by a naturalized channel (an open unregulated watercourse) both under existing and intensified land uses. 
Oakville has a population of 193,83271 and is located in southern Ontario. It borders Lake Ontario, is about halfway 
between Toronto and Hamilton, and is in the Halton Region. Oakville is part of the Greater Toronto Area, one of  
Canada’s most densely populated areas, and is experiencing rapid growth and land development.
For the MNAI analysis, Oakville selected a non-regulated channel (i.e., a flood plain not regulated by the area’s 
conservation authority) in an older part of the community, which receives stormwater from upstream lands, 
including municipal right-of-ways and residential and employment lands. The channel was evaluated in terms of 
the stormwater conveyance, flood attenuation, infiltration and water quality improvement benefits it provides. 
For the study, Amec Foster Wheeler, an engineering and project management company 72 working on behalf of the 
town, contributed technical services, including executing engineering modelling and analysis. It was determined 
that the economic value of municipal services provided by the channel increases over time, as Oakville changes 
its land use through redevelopment and intensification. Specifically, the engineering analysis confirmed that 
the channel, that’s about 250 metres long, serves a well-defined stormwater conveyance function and reduces 
peak flows downstream during rainfall events. The infiltration and water quality benefits were less clear, but were 
acknowledged to exist to some degree. The cost of operating and maintaining the channel was assumed nil 
because the channel is contained on private land, where Oakville does not provide operations and maintenance 
services.
The economic benefits of the channel’s stormwater conveyance and flood attenuation are significant. Under 
intensified land use conditions, to provide the same conveyance function using equivalent grey infrastructure (i.e., 
1,350- to 1,500-millimetre diameter pipes, at a unit cost of $847 per metre of pipe) would cost $725,000. Similarly, 
to attenuate flooding for a 100-year storm event, using equivalent grey infrastructure (i.e., through an end-of-pipe 
storage facility, with the pipe enclosure in place) would cost an additional $715,000 under intensified land use 
conditions.
In summary, the naturalized channel provides stormwater conveyance and flood attenuation benefits, which would 
otherwise cost Oakville $1.24 million to $1.44 million under current and intensified land use conditions, respectively.
23
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
As outlined in chapters 1 and 2, natural infrastructure conservation and restoration are integral to the climate 
adaptation and disaster risk reduction commitments that Canada made under the Pan-Canadian Framework 
on Clean Growth and Climate Change and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. However, several 
barriers must be overcome before policymakers, engineers and investors can embrace natural infrastructure as 
an optimal climate adaptation option. In their review of natural infrastructure projects, researchers note that the 
absence of a well-established framework to identify, quantify and communicate the multiple benefits of natural 
infrastructure projects is a key gap that can also preclude larger-scale natural infrastructure project deployment:73
Gray infrastructure solutions have dominated water management systems and engineering curricula for 
decades, which have led to informal biases and skepticism of natural infrastructure approaches. These 
informal biases are perpetuated in that capital budgeting and asset valuation methods fail to account 
for natural infrastructure as an asset. As a result, because infrastructure decision makers and constituents 
do not have a clear understanding of the benefits of natural infrastructure, they often do not attempt 
to incorporate natural infrastructure into traditional infrastructure designs… .  Infrastructure decision 
makers often lack the technical capacity to design natural infrastructure projects that optimize costs 
and benefits. Site-specific assessment of environmental factors that must be considered in evaluating 
natural infrastructure projects is beyond the typical uniform water system development process, and few 
engineers are trained in such assessments. One complicating factor is the inherent uncertainty associated 
with natural systems, and how, for example, natural infrastructure might respond to a changing climate. 
Without reliable quantitative analysis, those charged with evaluating infrastructure options are limited to 
(weaker) qualitative arguments for natural infrastructure investments.
The framework presented below outlines the necessary steps that organizations can follow to (1) evaluate the 
business case of such investments and (2) confirm that the projects deliver the intended benefits. The cost-benefit 
assessment, which allows natural and grey infrastructure to be compared, and this framework can be applied  
to a range of natural infrastructure projects, including wetland and riparian buffer restoration, reforestation, 
riverbank naturalization and flood plain restoration.  
Each component of the framework shown in Figure 4 is described in the sections that follow. While all framework 
components require the preparation of a strong business case for natural infrastructure implementation, they can 
be completed at different times or simultaneously.
Chapter 3: Framework 
for Natural Infrastructure 
Implementation
24
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Figure 4:  
Framework for Natural 
Infrastructure Project 
Implementation
COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT
1
FEASIBILITY
ASSESSMENT
4
MATERIALITY
ASSESSMENT
3
WATERSHED
AND CLIMATE RISK
ASSESSMENT
2
ECONOMIC
BENEFITS
ASSESSMENT
5
DESIGN,
CONSTRUCTION AND 
MAINTENANCE
6
MONITORING 
AND
REPORTING
Before reviewing the framework in detail, it is critical to underscore two points. First, every effort should be made to 
conserve natural infrastructure in its natural state, especially in ecologically sensitive areas in Canada. To this end, 
planners and policymakers should be cautioned that restoration projects in one geographical area cannot be used to 
justify ecosystem loss in another. For example, a study of 621 restored and created wetlands around the globe found 
that even after 50 to 100 years after restoration, restored wetlands recovered only 74% of their biogeochemical 
functions relative to the control group of 556 naturally occurring wetlands. In other words, the abundance of species 
and the biodiversity of native animals and plants could not be fully recovered through restoration efforts within that 
time.74 Similarly, an analysis of forest restoration projects in Alberta on reclaimed lands across the oil sands region 
showed that most plants have not stabilized, even after 20 years since reclamation.75 
Furthermore, even when natural infrastructure assets are protected, it is not always possible to guarantee the 
protection status. For example, the City of Kelowna, BC, established a 10-year partnership with the Central 
Okanagan Naturalists’ Club and the Wildlife Branch of BC’s Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks to develop 
a rating system for wetlands located in the city. The partnership culminated in the addition of a Wetlands 
Management Strategy, Bylaw 8327, to the Official Community Plan (OCP) in 1999. This OCP amendment protected 
25
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
certain wetlands from development by assigning them a “protected wetlands” status. However, following one  
of the first rezoning applications for a residential development that came forward to council a few weeks later,  
the OCP was rewritten. The current OCP, Bylaw 8600, no longer contains the term “protected wetlands” but  
rather “high and moderate wetlands,” making the legal mechanism less stringent for protecting wetlands from 
further development.
The second major point to underscore is that infrastructure decision-making ought to consider natural 
infrastructure options on an equal footing with grey infrastructure. To identify the most appropriate option, the 
TEV of natural infrastructure must be compared and contrasted with grey infrastructure solutions that aim to 
achieve the same objectives (e.g., reduce stormwater runoff, improve water quality) .
 
Specifically, the analysis should account for the NPV of the costs and benefits associated with implementing 
natural “green” infrastructure and conventional “grey” infrastructure solutions, including a side-by-side comparison 
of their economic, environmental and social impacts. This holistic “triple bottom line” valuation enhances the  
due diligence behind land use planning and investment decisions, and should be conducted to fairly compare  
the two alternatives.
3.1: Community engagement
A key priority in undertaking any natural or grey infrastructure project is to secure key stakeholder support for the 
project. As noted below, every community has different challenges and priorities, which influence how projects 
are valued, selected and designed. With continuous community engagement and support, project proponents 
dramatically increase the likelihood of the project being implemented. 
Community engagement can take various forms and will differ depending on the stage of the project. In the initial 
stage, community engagement is focused on creating awareness and buy-in for the project. Public consultation 
is a key element in establishing such buy-in, as well as in identifying challenges and opportunities associated 
with implementing the project in the community. As a project progresses through to construction phases, 
communication and outreach activities continue.
Since most natural infrastructure projects are highly visible, they can be utilized for public education on climate 
change, water scarcity, biodiversity and other topics. Transparency about project objectives and intended outcomes 
is necessary to establish accountability with project funders and community members. The key elements of 
community engagement include regular project performance reports and updates through local newspapers,  
radio and social media.
26
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
vi  A watershed is an area, delineated by topography, where all precipitation drains to one point or outlet
3.2: Watershed and climate risk assessment
Prior to undertaking any natural or grey infrastructure project, it is critical to assess the watershedvi where the 
proposed project would be implemented. This includes confirming current watershed challenges (e.g., flooding, 
drought, water quality issues and habitat loss), as well as investigating potential future challenges associated 
with projected land use changes, climate variability and extreme weather events. The relative materiality of these 
challenges will drive the natural or grey infrastructure project and site selection process. This process will help 
determine whether a solution that targets multiple problems might be a better, more cost-effective solution.
Typically, publicly available documents, such as municipal land use and development plans, environmental 
assessments, flood risk assessments and flood reports, will be relevant. Global circulation models (GCMs) and 
climate-adjusted intensity duration frequency (IDF) curves76 can aid in quantifying climate change trends and 
analyzing the potential impacts of extreme rain events for a given watershed.
In terms of outcome, the watershed assessment should confirm (1) the most pressing hydrologic and climate 
change issues faced by communities located in the watershed and (2) the geographic areas of concern (e.g., areas 
subject to chronic flooding, drought-sensitive areas).
3.3: Materiality assessment
Once a range of watershed challenges has been identified, it is important to confirm their relative materiality 
in order to prioritize them. To conduct a materiality assessment, engage key stakeholders (e.g., municipal 
representatives, community groups, conservation authorities, local developers, homebuilders, residents) in an 
exercise to rank each challenge in terms of its impact and urgency. This process will help determine whether a 
solution that targets multiple problems might be a better and more cost-effective solution.
For example, if there are multiple areas that experience flooding in a community, and one of those areas has a 
baseball field while another has a hospital, then addressing flooding at the hospital is the obvious priority. In other 
instances, the decision may be less clear: protecting certain water sources from pollution may be a priority for one 
stakeholder group while preventing habitat loss at a different location may be more important to another group.
Conflicts between competing objectives – such as conflicts between flood management and biodiversity – may 
need to be resolved. For example, flood risk reduction generally requires floodwater storage during peak flows, 
which is then followed by releasing the floodwater to provide storage for subsequent high-flow events. Some 
habitat functions may be negatively affected by these water release requirements.77
27
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Therefore, it is critical to prioritize issues for a community because these priorities will determine the design of  
a particular natural or grey infrastructure system. As discussed above, a system with the primary objective of flood 
attenuation will have a fundamentally different design from a system that aims to create habitat. Since the design 
of a natural infrastructure project requires interdisciplinary planning to achieve ecological, social and economic 
goals, decision-making must rely on an integrated, systemic method of valuation that accurately accounts for 
environmental, social and economic costs and benefits. A variety of resources are available to guide materiality 
assessments to ensure that interdisciplinary input is reflected from the onset of the project. For climate adaptation, 
natural infrastructure projects will be typically designed to attenuate floods and droughts, with improved water 
quality and habitat creation as co-benefits.78
3.4: Feasibility assessment
Following the watershed assessment, a feasibility analysis can confirm which natural or grey – or a combination 
of natural and grey – infrastructure projects best address the priority issues. Sometimes, natural infrastructure 
projects may offer a solution to more than one watershed challenge identified during the materiality analysis, 
increasing their value proposition regarding traditional grey infrastructure solutions. Feasibility analysis consists 
of assessing the technical, legal and regulatory, organizational, social and economic factors for implementing any 
given natural or grey infrastructure project. Grey infrastructure projects would typically serve as a baseline for the 
feasibility assessment.79
The first step of the feasibility assessment is to collect baseline data to provide the basis for comparing different  
options and analyzing the impacts of doing nothing (the status quo option). For example, if a community 
determines that flood attenuation is its primary concern and would like to explore the possibility of a wetland 
restoration project, then the baseline scenario would entail collecting and analyzing relevant baseline data, 
including:
•	
Hydrologic and hydraulic modelling that demonstrates the depth and extent of flooding for a range  
of rainfall events;
•	
Flood damage assessments that indicate the costs that can be expected for a given location under current  
and future conditions (e.g., accounting for changes in land use and climate);
•	
Assessments of wetland capacity to attenuate flooding (i.e., wetland storage capacity); and
•	
Relevant field observations and monitoring data to confirm modelling projections and assumptions.
It is important to note that every watershed is unique in terms of its physical attributes, including its 
geomorphology, hydrology, topography and climate. Engineering expertise is required to model the baseline 
scenario and analyze the design alternatives. Such expertise may be available through the municipality, 
conservation authorities and/or engineering consulting firms. 
28
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
BOX 1: Researchers note that light detection and ranging (LiDAR) technology offers the best-in-class data 
product for analyzing natural infrastructure features (e.g., wetlands, depression areas) as an input to hydrologic 
and hydraulic modelling. For example, Federal Floodplain Mapping Framework for Canada,80 recommended 
LiDAR because it can produce high-resolution digital elevation models, which are then used to derive water 
storage volumes for natural infrastructure features. Coarse (low-resolution) models are incapable of resolving the 
subtle topographic features that characterize the potential sites for natural infrastructure projects.81 Moreover, 
LiDAR provides a cost-effective solution for generating a systematic overview of the watershed and can help 
optimize the natural infrastructure site selection process.
Once the baseline scenario is completed, the feasibility analysis addresses the remainder of the considerations for 
project implementation (Table 4). Project proponents should document the modelling tools used to analyze the 
baseline scenario and evaluate the effectiveness of a natural infrastructure project to achieve the desired objectives. 
Documentation should include key modelling assumptions and parameterization.
Table 4: Feasibility Analysis – Sample Considerations for a Wetland Restoration 
Project Aimed at Flood Attenuation
FACTORS
CONSIDERATIONS
•	
Is climate data available to project future climate risks?
•	
What is the impact of a status quo, or do-nothing, approach on flood damages for the location?
•	
What are the potential alternatives to the proposed activity (e.g., natural versus engineered solutions  
to achieve desired benefits)?
•	
What are the possible wetland restoration options to achieve the required water storage capacity?
•	
Is sufficient land available for an engineered natural infrastructure option?
•	
Are there design alternatives that provide additional benefits (beyond flood attenuation)? At what additional cost?
Technical
•	
Is the proposed activity a regulated or exempt activity?
•	
Would environmental assessment be required for the project?
•	
What permits, if any, would be required to carry out the project? 
•	
What is the cost and time to complete the required studies and obtain permits?
•	
What are the post-construction monitoring and reporting requirements?
Legal and regulatory
•	
What resources are required to support project planning and implementation?
•	
Is there internal capacity to execute the project?
•	
What are the costs of securing external expertise for the project?
Organizational
•	
Who are the key stakeholders that need to be engaged for various stages of the project?
•	
Is there community support for the project? 
•	
Do the affected landowners support the project?
•	
Is there opposition to the project?
Social
•	
What are the expected costs of implementing this project?
•	
What is the impact of climate projections on costs and benefits? 
•	
What are the expected benefits, recognizing that once the adaptation feature is in place, savings accrue every 
time that disaster cost is avoided?
•	
What are the expected operational and maintenance expenditures?
•	
What are the expected monitoring costs?
•	
What is the total budget required to execute the project and maintain it over the expected life cycle?
Economic
Source: Wang, Lei, and Jaehyung Yu. “Modelling detention basins measured from high-resolution light detection and ranging data.” Hydrological Processes 26;19 (2012): 2973–2984.
29
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
3.5: Economic costs and benefits assessment
When selecting natural or grey infrastructure projects, it is important to ensure that both options are analyzed, 
allowing for costs and benefits to be directly compared and contrasted. To this end, grey infrastructure projects 
would typically serve as the baseline for the cost-benefit assessment, and the economic, environmental and social 
impacts of natural versus grey infrastructure project implementation would be evaluated side by side.
As the PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) Canada case study (case study #5) demonstrates, the TEV framework can be 
used to assess the economic, environmental and social impacts associated with project implementation. Specific 
to natural infrastructure projects, TEV divides the economic value for a given natural infrastructure project into use 
values and non-use values. Use values can further be divided into:
•	
Direct-use values, which refer to actual uses, such as hunting, fishing, 
birdwatching and hiking;
•	
Indirect-use values, which refer to the benefits derived from ecosystem functions,  
such as natural water filtration, flood protection and carbon sequestration; and
•	
Option values, which are approximations of an individual’s willingness to pay to 
safeguard an asset for the option of using it at a future date. 
Non-use values are the values that people assign to the ecosystem services even if they never have and never will 
use those services (e.g., preserving wetlands for enjoyment by future generations). Accordingly, the TEV of natural 
infrastructure is the sum of all relevant use and non-use values.82
To calculate the TEV of natural infrastructure, non-market benefits associated with ecological functions that 
natural infrastructure provides have to be monetized. Some of the more common techniques used by economists 
to monetize ecological functions include:
•	
Market-pricing approaches, which rely on the availability of market prices to 
derive values for ecosystem goods and services. For example, to estimate the flood 
attenuation value of wetlands, researchers could estimate the cost of flood damages 
to buildings attributable to wetland loss and inquire about how much people 
living in these buildings would be willing to pay to avoid these costs. Alternatively, 
these same people could be asked about their willingness to pay for construction 
and maintenance of engineered structures to deliver flood-risk reduction benefits. 
Another example of a market-pricing approach is a replacement-cost method. Under 
this method, the value of a given ecosystem service is viewed as the cost of replacing 
that service by an alternative means. For example, some studies have valued clean 
drinking water provided by watershed protection by using the cost savings from not 
having to build a water filtration plant.83 
30
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
•	
Revealed-preference approaches, which estimate the value of ecosystem 
services by observing the choices made by individuals, which can be attributed 
to how they value various ecosystem services; for example, the amount that 
individuals are willing to pay for houses with a direct view of the lake versus the 
amount they are willing to pay for similar houses located farther from the lake 
may help estimate the aesthetic value attributable to the lake.
•	
Stated-preference approaches, which measure society’s willingness to pay to 
preserve ecosystems for future uses. For example, this can involve asking people 
directly how much they would be willing to pay for a specific ecological function 
or the amount of compensation they would be willing to accept to give up an 
ecological function.
Appendix B describes these approaches in more detail and provides a case study in which a stated-preference 
approach was used to assess the value of wetland restoration in Manitoba.
Case Study #5: Assessing green infrastructure benefits for a public parking lot in  
southern Ontario – TEV
In 2017, Metrolinx, a Government of Ontario agency created to improve the coordination and integration of all 
modes of transportation in the greater Toronto and Hamilton areas, engaged PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) 
Canada, supported by Autocase, to develop a TEV methodology for environmental and social capital accounting 
as applied to a cost-benefit analysis of investments in green infrastructure.84 
The methodology was piloted on the Mount Pleasant GO station parking lot, located in Brampton, on the Kitchener GO 
train line. The objective of the pilot was to generate considerations for how TEV could be integrated within Metrolinx’s 
capital project planning and budgeting (CapEx) and operation/maintenance planning and budgeting (OpEx) processes.
PwC compared the incremental value of the parking lot designed with green infrastructure features relative to a 
baseline scenario without green features (Table 5).
31
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Table 5: Description of Baseline and Green Infrastructure Design Options for Public 
Parking Lot, Southern Ontario 
The annual costs and benefits associated with each project option were assessed for a 60-year period and then 
converted to NPV using a 3.5% discount rate. The cost-benefit analysis included site-level financial considerations  
and broader environmental and social impacts. Appendix A outlines the financial, environmental and social costs  
and benefits applicable to a TEV approach for green infrastructure considered by PwC.
By applying the TEV analysis to the sample parking lot, PwC found that investing in green infrastructure at the 
Mount Pleasant GO station parking lot would generate an NPV of $225,777 over 60 years, compared to a base-case 
option without any green features. The benefit-to-cost ratio was 12.35, with an NPV-to-initial-cost ratio of 8.95. 
Accordingly, the total economic case for green infrastructure design was compelling: the financial, environmental 
and social benefits for the green design of the parking lot were over 10 times higher than the additional financial 
investment required to support the marginally higher operating costs of green infrastructure features.85
Moreover, the pilot illustrated that applying the TEV lens to infrastructure projects can change the picture of costs 
and benefits dramatically. Under a traditional, grey-engineered infrastructure analysis (i.e., base case) considering 
only the financial cost would yield an NPV of -$2,320,355. Under the green infrastructure analysis considering only 
the financial cost would yield an NPV of -$2,337,420. By applying the TEV framework to compare the baseline and 
green infrastructure design cases, a more robust and holistic understanding of investment costs and benefits was 
achieved, resulting in an overall marginal NPV of $225,777 (Figure 5).86
*This area is not included in the total site area, as it is located underground.
23,700m2, 600 parking spots
23,700m2, number of parking spots unknown
None
3,800m2
None
220m3 storage*
Baseline scenario
Green infrastructure design
ASPHALT ROADS/PAVEMENT, CONCRETE 
SIDEWALKS AND STORMWATER PIPING
LANDSCAPING AND VEGETATED 
BIOSWALE (PERVIOUS SURFACES)
UNDERGROUND 
STORAGE TANKS
32
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
The Mount Pleasant GO station parking-lot case study completed by PwC and Autocase for Metrolinx demonstrates 
the utility of a green parking lot design in southern Ontario. The TEV method could be further expanded to 
incorporate climate change resilience in asset planning and design, likely leading to an even higher NPV for 
green parking lot design. Parking lots are a significant part of Metrolinx’s asset portfolio (Metrolinx is one of 
North America’s largest public parking lot operators) and a significant part of the urban landscape in Canada.87 
Accordingly, the case study demonstrates that for parking lot (re)construction projects, green infrastructure design 
options can be economically viable and should be assessed and considered.
BOX 2: As it relates to the assessment of the economic benefits and costs associated with natural infrastructure 
projects, the distinction between the ecological functions that these projects deliver and the ecosystem values 
that society may place on them is important to note. For example, for wetland restoration projects, wetland 
ecological functions are natural processes (physical, chemical, biological) that are associated with wetlands, and 
are independent of the benefits of those processes to humans. Wetland values reflect the ecosystem services that 
wetlands provide to humans and the societal values placed upon these services. For any given wetland ecological 
function, the associated wetland value may differ depending on individual or community preferences; ecological 
functions do not have a market price. However, in order to establish the business case for natural infrastructure 
project implementation, the monetization of non-market benefits (e.g., habitat protection, climate moderation, 
flood attenuation and aesthetic value) is required.
       Source: Hanson A. L., Swanson D., Ewing G., et al. 2008. Canadian Wildlife Service Technical Report Series. Wetland Ecological Functions Assessment: An Overview of Approaches.
Figure 5: Comparing Baseline and Green Infrastructure Design: Financial Costs, 
and Social and Environmental Benefits for Mount Pleasant GO Station Parking 
Lot, Metrolinx (NPV by Impact Category; in 2017 dollars; 3.5% Discount Rate)
Base Case
Green Case
Financial
Costs
Community
Development
Benefits
Environmental
Benefits
User
Benefits
Social
Benefits
Total NPV
Financial Costs
Incremental Value
$(2,320,355)
$(2,337,420)
$(17,065)
$23,057
$36,503
$90,889
$92,394
$225,777
33
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
3.5.1: Measurement of benefits – Considerations for natural infrastructure projects
The benefit-transfer technique is often used to estimate the monetary benefits of ecological functions  
(e.g., habitat creation, water storage). This technique relies on borrowing unit values (or benefit functions) 
developed to assess the value of a natural resource at one location and applying this unit value to another location 
of interest. However, caution should be exercised when using a benefit-transfer technique, because no two 
ecosystem sites are identical and the relationships between the total areas and benefits produced are not perfect 
analogues. For example, larger wetlands generally have a greater capacity to reduce runoff and other inflow 
pollutants. Also, the size of a wetland does not have a linear relationship with its capacity to remove pollutants. 
(After a certain point, pollutant removal capacity begins to decrease per unit area of a wetland.)88 The wetland’s 
shape may also influence the effectiveness of its ability to remove pollutants.89
Since natural infrastructure projects are always site specific and not every community values ecosystem services 
in the same manner, the benefit-transfer technique increases the likelihood and magnitude of valuation errors. 
Therefore, this technique should only be used to estimate the natural infrastructure benefits, and such estimates 
should subsequently be confirmed through further analysis. For example, field studies to examine local site 
conditions and community surveys confirmed how local residents value the ecological functions being assessed.90 
3.5.2: Measurement of costs – Considerations for natural infrastructure projects
A variety of factors influence the costs of natural and grey infrastructure projects, including project objectives, 
project size, site selection, engineering and construction complexities, maintenance and monitoring 
requirements. Unlike grey infrastructure projects, for which project costs have been documented over time, 
companies involved in natural infrastructure restoration work rarely disclose detailed breakdowns of the actual 
costs incurred. Accordingly, proponents of natural infrastructure projects should consider retaining expert advice 
(e.g., engineering consulting firms, municipal engineers and conservation authorities) to assess these costs in 
advance of project commencement.
At minimum, the cost analysis should consider the pre-construction, construction and post-construction costs  
(Table 6). Experts recommend reserving 15% of the total project cost for any potential adjustments, which may  
include removal of invasive species, re-planting of wetlands and/or riparian areas, or pest control.91
34
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Table 6: Cost Considerations Associated with Natural Infrastructure Project 
Implementation (by Key Project Phase)
A number of factors can greatly influence the cost of natural infrastructure project implementation, including:
•	
The cost and time for obtaining permits, approvals and authorizations from federal, 
provincial and local governments and Indigenous peoples, if required for the project.
•	
The ownership of land that is optimal for natural infrastructure project implementation 
(the land may be under private ownership).
•	
The availability and quality of baseline data, which can greatly influence the cost of 
project design. For example, if all required data is available for a wetland restoration 
project, the pre-construction phase can represent 20% to 30% of the total project cost. 
If data availability is limited, the cost of pre-construction can range from 50% to 55% of 
the total project cost.92
•	
The development and screening of alternative designs to achieve project objectives – 
for example, primarily flood control, drought mitigation or water quality improvement, 
or multiple objectives – typically require engineering expertise. 
•	
The cost of monitoring, which would be the most intensive during the first five years 
from project implementation, with lower costs for mid-term monitoring (five to 10 years) 
and long-term monitoring (10 years or longer). The cost will vary based on (1) regulatory 
requirements and (2) expected length of time for a natural infrastructure system to 
become established. For example, a restored wetland may take 60 to 100 years to be 
fully established (i.e., to reach the productivity levels of undisturbed wetlands), with the 
possibility of invasive species further delaying this process.93, 94  
PHASE
COST CONSIDERATION
•	
Baseline data collection
•	
Stakeholder consultation
•	
Site identification
•	
Assessment of design alternatives
•	
Detailed engineering design of selected alternative
•	
Land acquisition
•	
Environmental assessment
•	
Permitting and legal fees
•	
Development of construction specifications
•	
Development of monitoring program and KPIs
Pre-construction
•	
Site preparation (e.g., moving earth and debris removal)
•	
Site construction
Construction
•	
Site maintenance
•	
Monitoring against KPIs
•	
Evaluation and reporting
Post-construction
•	
Project management and oversights
Administration
35
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
In addition to the above direct costs, all projects should consider the associated “opportunity costs.”  For example, 
if a natural infrastructure project replaces residential development, the opportunity cost is the foregone economic 
benefit from land development charges and property tax revenues. If a natural infrastructure project takes place 
on agricultural land, then the opportunity cost is foregone income from lost crop areas. In southern Ontario, the 
opportunity cost of agricultural land development was estimated at $385.82 per hectare annually.95 Simply put, an 
accurate estimate of land acquisition costs must be factored into the overall natural infrastructure investment analysis.
A cost estimation example is provided by Ducks Unlimited Canada that considered a 3,647-hectare wetland 
restoration project in the Black River sub watershed in southern Ontario (100 kilometres north of the City of 
Toronto) and found that the total per-hectare cost of restoring the wetland was $27,664, or $100,890,608 for the 
entire 3,647 hectares. Including the opportunity cost of foregone land use ($4,335,459), the total restoration cost 
increased to $105,226,067. Table 7 outlines the composition of this cost estimate.
Table 7: Component Costs of Wetland Restoration on a Per-Hectare Basis in 
Southern Ontario
Source: Ducks Unlimited Canada. 2011. A Business Case for Wetland Conservation: The Black River Subwatershed.
Site-specific characteristics can cause seemingly similar natural infrastructure projects to differ significantly in 
cost, sometimes by a factor of five or 10. Therefore, it is critical to investigate, using baseline data, the unique site 
characteristics and confirm the transferability of cost estimates between sites.96
3.5.3: Calculating NPV
Once the benefits and costs have been quantified in monetary terms, the NPV of the project can be calculated 
to select the optimal investment option. If the NPV is zero or less, then the investment may not be justified. 
Projects with the highest NPV, irrespective of whether they are natural or grey infrastructure solutions, should be 
considered first and foremost for implementation.
WETLAND RESTORATION COMPONENT
WETLAND RESTORATION
COST PER HECTARE
Pre-construction costs                                                                                                           $8,645
Construction costs                                                                                                                $13,832
Future management costs                                                                                                    $3,458
Administration costs                                                                                                               $1,729
Total                                                                                                                                         $27,664
36
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
When calculating NPV, it is important to remember that engineered projects have a limited operational lifetime; 
the average lifetime of a dam constructed for flood mitigation is 50 years before upgrades and major maintenance 
are required.97 Natural infrastructure projects, though, may last longer. Moreover, natural infrastructure projects 
tend to have an uneven distribution of benefits and costs over time. For example, a wetland restoration project 
may have high up-front costs associated with pre-construction and construction phases, during which time no 
benefits are realized (for example, it takes five to 10 years to realize hydrologic benefits for a constructed wetland 
and longer for biochemical benefits to be realized).98
Therefore, a critical element in determining the NPV of a project is the discount rate used in the calculations. 
In Canada, the social time preference rate was estimated at 3%, which can be applied to natural infrastructure 
projects.99 To date, the use of this rate for natural assets remains controversial because discounting reduces the 
importance of events in the distant future as well as the welfare of future generations (which is not fully consistent 
with the sustainable development principles of intergenerational equity).100
The standard formula for calculating NPV is shown below, where Bt and Ct are the benefits and costs, t is an 
arbitrary time in the future, T is the expected lifetime of the project, and r is the discount rate. Note that the costs 
and benefits are discounted using the same rate.
3.5.4: Accounting for uncertainty in calculations
Various factors can have an impact on the accuracy of net benefit calculations for natural and grey infrastructure 
projects. These factors include assumptions about climate change, land use and ecosystem performance.  
For a wetland restoration project, the following risks can represent additional costs to the project and affect  
NPV calculations.
•	
Pollution: This is a leading factor that influences the ability of wetlands to perform 
ecosystem functions. For example, the processes associated with wetland flood 
attenuation interact with nutrient and sediment retention and generally improve 
downstream water quality. On the other hand, fecal deposits from wildlife and birds in 
newly restored habitat may enter floodwaters or infiltrate groundwater, causing water 
quality degradation, groundwater pollution and human health concerns.101
NPV = ∑
t=0
Bt – Ct
(1 + r)t
T
37
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
•	
Climate change: In dry climate conditions, wetland functions may be affected through 
reductions in the water table, leading to increased carbon dioxide production.102 
•	
Changes in vegetation: Invasion by exotic species can alter ecosystem function, when 
invasive sedges, grasses or rushes replace native wetland plants.
To address uncertainty, an emerging best practice is to simulate system performance with as much synthetic  
(i.e., obtained through climate models, not through direct measurement) climate data as possible to estimate the 
probability distribution of NPV (i.e., to estimate the probability of achieving varying levels of NPV). Probabilistic 
simulation techniques (Monte Carlo simulations) can be used to treat the inherent uncertainty in NPV calculations. 
Monte Carlo simulations allow users to perform risk analysis by substituting a range of values – a probability 
distribution – for any variable that has inherent uncertainty, so that multiple project possibilities can be modelled. 
A Monte Carlo simulation can be run in Excel and many other programs. These programs randomly generate 
possible values for each variable, based on the estimated confidence intervals and types of probability distribution. 
The computer then calculates a probability distribution for the outcome (i.e., the NPV). Appendix C outlines some 
readily available programs that address calculation uncertainties for natural infrastructure projects.
3.6: Design, construction and maintenance
Once the natural or grey infrastructure project receives the go-ahead, a detailed engineering design of the selected 
alternatives takes place. Depending on the complexity of the design, the construction phase can span from a couple 
of weeks to several years.103  It is important to note that just like grey infrastructure projects, natural infrastructure 
projects too are season- and weather-sensitive. Accordingly, construction schedules and plans need to reflect these 
realities to ensure that project delivery is on time and on budget. Once the project is constructed, its longer-term 
success often depends on regular operation and maintenance (O&M). The O&M activities and associated costs need to 
be accounted for over the life cycle of the project, irrespective of whether it is a natural or grey infrastructure solution. 
As wetland restoration projects relate to natural infrastructure. Here are the key construction steps:
•	
Mobilization (contractors bring in materials and equipment);
•	
Demolition of structures and moving utilities (e.g., transmission and cable lines);
•	
Clearing and grubbing of trees and brush;
•	
Earthwork excavation and grading (removal of up to six inches of soil);
•	
Soil preparation; and
•	
Planting and irrigation.104
Regular maintenance activities for a wetland restoration project would typically include:
•	
Annually adjusting weirs, vegetation and water-control structures, and mosquito 
and predator control;
38
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
•	
Mowing vegetation and repairing water control structures (e.g., dikes, levees, 
berms) on an as-needed basis; and
•	
Maintaining the water-control structures that are used to achieve the desired 
water level and downstream flow conditions.105
Community volunteers sometimes provide natural infrastructure project maintenance. While this approach is  
cost-effective, there is a risk that community volunteers may not be able to conduct the required maintenance 
over the long term. Moreover, some maintenance activities require professional expertise and should be 
contractually secured. For example, specialized contractors should carry out the regular removal and disposal  
of contaminated sediment from wetland restoration projects requiring remediation.
3.7: Monitoring and reporting
3.7.1: Performance monitoring
A robust monitoring program spans all key phases of the project, from pre-construction to construction and post-
construction. To track project performance against design objectives, KPIs are selected at the onset of the project. 
The literature on KPI selection methods emphasizes the importance of selecting indicators that are relevant, 
analytically sound and measurable (Table 8).106
Table 8: The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) – 
Criteria for Selecting Environmental Indicators
An environmental indicator should:
•	
Provide a picture of environmental conditions and pressures on the environment or society’s responses;
•	
Be simple, easy to interpret and able to show trends over time;
•	
Be responsive to changes in the environment and related human activities;
•	
Provide a basis for international comparisons;
•	
Be either national in scope or applicable to regional environmental issues of national significance; and
•	
Have a threshold or reference value that it can be compared to, so that users can access the significance  
of the values associated with it.
Policy relevance and utility for users
An environmental indicator should:
•	
Be theoretically well founded in technical and scientific terms;
•	
Be based on international standards and international consensus about its validity; and
•	
Lend itself to being linked to economic models, forecasting and information systems.
Analytical soundness
The data required to support the indicator should be:
•	
Readily available or made available at a reasonable cost-benefit ratio;
•	
Adequately documented and of known quality; and
•	
Updated at regular intervals in accordance with reliable procedures.
Measurability
Note: As indicators are used for various purposes, it is necessary to define the general criteria for selecting indicators and validating their choice. Three basic criteria are used in OECD work: policy relevance and 
utility for users, analytical soundness and measurability. These criteria describe the ideal indicator; not all criteria will be met in practice. Adapted from: OECD. 2003. Environmental Indicators. Development, 
Measurement and Use.
39
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Since some natural infrastructure projects have a long time span before becoming self-sustainable (e.g., 50 to 70 
years for wetlands, 75 to 150 years for forests), it is important to consider the cost effectiveness of data collection 
and monitoring programs over the short, medium and long terms, and select the appropriate indicators.
When developing the monitoring program, natural infrastructure project proponents should describe which 
indicators to measure (e.g., where, when and for how long). For example, to track the effectiveness of restored 
wetlands to cycle nutrients and improve water quality, the monitoring programs should indicate the location of 
water sampling locations and the sampling schedule. Indicators tracked may include:
•	
Ultimate biochemical oxygen demand (mg/L);
•	
Five-day biochemical oxygen demand (mg/L);
•	
Dissolved oxygen concentration (mg/L);
•	
Wetland open-water temperature (°C);
•	
Total suspended solids (mg/L); and
•	
Total dissolved solids (mg/L).
Engagement with project funders, partners and key stakeholders is often helpful in selecting relevant indicators. 
Moreover, when project proponents require regulatory permits or environmental assessment, it may be 
necessary to secure external expertise for monitoring performance indicators against the prescribed permit and 
environmental assessment parameters.107
40
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
3.7.2: Risk monitoring
From inception through to the end, each project, whether it involves natural or grey infrastructure, is subject to 
risk. Some risks can be anticipated and assessed from the standpoint of their impact and likelihood to occur.  
For example:
•	
Projects requiring environmental assessment and permits may run the risk of 
delays in the approval process; 
•	
Extreme weather events may affect the construction schedule; and 
•	
A changing economic environment may affect the availability and/or continuity  
of project funding.
Project proponents should monitor and manage relevant risks. A risk register (or risk log) can help keep track of 
new and emerging risks, as well as to document risk mitigation actions and responsible parties. A sample risk 
register is shown in Table 9.
Table 9: Sample Risk Register
3.7.3: Outcome assessment and reporting
The conscious and deliberate use of natural infrastructure for climate adaptation is still a novel approach. 
Accordingly, the documentation of the benefits versus the costs incurred from natural infrastructure conservation 
and restoration projects is critical. This information constitutes the basis of a value-for-money assessment of 
natural versus grey infrastructure solutions and is critical to the business case articulation of either solution.
DESCRIPTION 
OF RISK
LIKELIHOOD
(LOW, MEDIUM, HIGH)
OVERALL 
RATING
MITIGATION 
ACTIONS
IMPACT
(LOW, MEDIUM, HIGH)
STATUS 
(DATE)
ASSIGNED 
TO
ASSIGNED 
BY
enter data here
enter data here
enter data here
enter data here
enter data here
enter data here
enter data here
enter data here
41
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
To advance the perception and uptake of natural infrastructure as a cost-effective, practical means to limit flood 
damage in Canada, consider the following steps.
•	
Assess the TEV of natural infrastructure in land use planning and infrastructure investment decisions. 
Applying the TEV lens can dramatically change the picture of costs and benefits. Considering only the 
financial costs of these projects will likely understate the value of conserving and/or restoring natural 
infrastructure assets. Applying the TEV framework provides a more robust, holistic understanding of 
investment costs and benefits that includes an assessment of broader environmental and social impacts. 
The TEV assessment can be found in the Canadian Cost-Benefit Analysis Guide developed by the  
Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat and in the natural infrastructure assessment framework contained  
in this report.108 
•	
Establish sustainable funding models for natural infrastructure conservation and restoration.  
Tax exemptions for land conservation may be one way to incentivize private landowners to conserve land 
and maintain it in a healthy, natural state. For example, Ontario implemented the Conservation Land Tax 
Incentive Program (CLTIP) to support the long-term private stewardship of Ontario’s provincially important 
natural areas.109. 110 Under the CLTIP, portions of a landowner’s property that have eligible natural heritage 
features may qualify for a 100% property tax exemption. Lessons learned from CLTIP implementation 
should be explored further to understand the utility of the program for wider rollout in Canada. Other 
programs such as Alternative Land Use Services (ALUS) have not only recognized natural infrastructure as 
a municipal asset and incorporated it into municipal asset management decisions, they have effectively 
encouraged landowners to restore, enhance and construct natural areas on agricultural lands. ALUS Canada 
provides programmatic and financial support to farmers and ranchers who restore and maintain wetlands, 
grasslands and riparian areas. Its projects are designed according to the best available science and are 
third-party verified.111 It is important to quantify economic links between the implementation of such 
measures and the associated savings that benefit nearby municipalities. Without such quantification, these 
programs may be difficult to sustain politically.
•	
Establish funding mechanisms and criteria that explicitly recognize the unique programmatic needs 
of implementing effective natural infrastructure solutions within broader infrastructure funding 
frameworks. The smaller scale and distributed nature of natural infrastructure makes it difficult to fit it 
into the structure of traditional infrastructure funding programs. Criteria – including eligibility, time frames, 
investment thresholds and matching requirements – must be created specifically to support natural 
infrastructure proposals from municipalities, provinces and NGOs. However, entirely separate programs 
Chapter 4: Additional 
Mechanisms to Promote 
Natural Infrastructure
42
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
would be an effective response to the reality that municipalities will continue to favour the development 
of capital-intense and larger grey infrastructure projects over smaller-budget natural infrastructure plans 
if they are competing within the same funding streams. Alberta’s Watershed Restoration and Resiliency 
Program, created after the devastating 2013 Calgary flood, is an exemplary model of a natural infrastructure 
fund that supports watershed planning, project design and implementation on public and private lands 
that are high priority for flood and drought mitigation.
•	
Work with municipalities, Canada’s new Infrastructure Bank and the financial sector to develop 
and implement new financial instruments to accelerate natural infrastructure investment and 
implementation. Canada’s new Infrastructure Bank was explicitly created to help municipalities 
fund infrastructure development using a longer-term funding horizon and to provide investors with 
opportunities to fund such infrastructure in innovative ways. Given the longer-term cost-benefit structure 
of natural infrastructure and the long-term higher return on investment that it affords, the Infrastructure 
Bank should consider innovative programming in this area. Furthermore, the G7 has begun examining 
insurance mechanisms that provide explicit premium incentives to recognize the de-risking afforded by 
natural infrastructure in coastal regions. Coral reefs, barrier islands and mangrove forests provide effective 
protection from tropical storms and hurricanes, and global reinsurers have been examining ways to incent 
the protection of this natural coastal infrastructure in order to reduce onshore losses. Catastrophe bonds 
are risk-linked securities that transfer risk to investors in exchange for an investment return. These bonds 
can be priced to provide incentives for protecting natural infrastructure, thereby lowering risk. 
•	
Develop forums for convening groups that are traditionally responsible for natural infrastructure 
preservation (e.g., conservation authorities and environmental NGOs), municipalities, institutional 
investors and insurers to deliver market-based solutions. Currently, expertise in the value of natural 
infrastructure is isolated from the investment community and finance professionals who are capable of 
devising new market-based instruments. Under the auspices of the United Nations’ Environment Program, 
the Convention on Biological Diversity and domestic work on Sustainable Finance, these walls are 
beginning to come down. However, specific forums more clearly rooted in the financial realm are needed 
to attract the financial innovators needed to overcome the challenges that have hindered treating natural 
infrastructure as anything but an externality. Institutional investors can play a significant role in financing 
the uptake of natural infrastructure solutions in Canada. For example, Canada’s major banks already offer 
financial products (e.g., green and climate resilience bonds) that help finance conservation and restoration 
projects in Canada. Research into how those groups that have been traditionally responsible for natural 
infrastructure preservation can interact with institutional investors to deliver market-based solutions is  
a worthwhile next step.
43
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Government efforts to limit flood risk are  consistent with, and reinforcing of,  fiduciary responsibility to administer 
good governance. As this responsibility is likely to increase as climate change and extreme weather events worsen, 
governments should consider the utility of natural infrastructure, alongside grey infrastructure solutions, to  limit 
flood risk across  all jurisdictions.    
In Canada, several factors limit the wider adoption of natural infrastructure solutions for disaster risk reduction 
and climate adaptation. These factors include  lack of detailed guidance to assess the business case of natural 
infrastructure projects, the lack of comparable data on the actual costs and benefits associated with natural 
infrastructure project implementation and maintenance, and the lack of sustainable funding mechanisms and 
programs to scale natural infrastructure adoption. By demonstrating that communities can assess grey and natural 
infrastructure options against a common standard, we hope to encourage widespread use of natural infrastructure 
in circumstances in which it is the best solution.
This report has introduced a natural infrastructure implementation framework that enhances the Value for 
Money analysis of natural infrastructure projects in Canada. The framework benefits natural infrastructure project 
proponents who aim to communicate the business case for their conservation and/or restoration projects, as 
well as potential investors who need to demonstrate diligence and the impact of their natural infrastructure 
investments. Infrastructure Canada could also use the proposed framework to direct green infrastructure 
spending, as could corporate endowment funds and foundations seeking to finance natural infrastructure 
projects.
Despite the range of benefits that natural infrastructure offers for disaster risk reduction and climate adaptation, 
Canada continues to experience the loss of wetlands, forests and vegetation. This loss is particularly prevalent in 
southern areas, where population growth, agricultural expansion and urban development are most pronounced. 
Similarly, investments in natural infrastructure restoration projects are not being made at the scale and rate that 
could remedy and offset the loss of natural infrastructure. This is a significant omission at a time when Canada 
has committed to combatting climate change impacts under the Paris Agreement, the United Nations’ Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, and the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, 
each of which outlines the imperative of preserving natural infrastructure. 
This report profiles one means by which Canada can meet its international and national climate commitments, 
through the preservation and restoration of natural infrastructure that is pervasive by design, cost-effective by 
good fortune, and underutilized to date.
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
44
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers Canada LLP. 2017. Assessing Green Infrastructure Benefits for Mount Pleasant GO Station Parking Lot Infrastructure Project. Prepared for Metrolinx.
In 2017, Metrolinx, a Government of Ontario agency created to improve the coordination and integration of all 
modes of transportation in the greater Toronto and Hamilton areas, engaged PwC to develop a TEV methodology 
for environmental and social capital accounting as applied to the cost-benefit analysis of investments in green 
infrastructure. The table below outlines the financial, environmental, and social costs and benefits associated with 
the TEV approach for green infrastructure that was applied to this analysis.
Appendix A: Green 
Infrastructure – A TEV 
Approach by PwC Canada
IMPACT CATEGORY 
IMPACT 
DESCRIPTION 
Ambience value 
Contingent value of ambience improvements due to green features monetized as a function of user time spent on-site.
User (internal) 
Capital cost 
Difference in capital costs between the green-case and the base case options.
Financial (internal)
Replacement cost 
Air pollution 
Difference in cost of replacing assets as they reach the end of their useful lives within the assessment period 
between the green-case and the base-case options.
Reduction in criteria air contaminant emissions in the green-case option due to the use of vegetation and lower 
energy use, monetized using a social cost of different air pollutants.
Financial (internal)
Environmental (external) 
Operations and 
maintenance cost 
Carbon sequestration 
Difference in operating costs between the green-case and the base-case options over the full assessment period.
Carbon sequestration benefits of on-site vegetation, and lower greenhouse gas emissions resulting from reduced on-site energy 
use and lower embodied energy of construction materials in the green-case option, monetized using a social cost of carbon.
Financial (internal)
Environmental (external)
Residual asset value 
Water quality 
Urban heat island effect 
Community use benefits 
Difference in remaining useful life of assets at the end of the assessment period between the green-case and the 
base-case options.
Improvements in water quality due to the reduction in sewer outflow as a result of increased site/building retention 
and infiltration capacity, monetized through avoided stormwater treatment costs or willingness-to-pay estimates 
for water quality improvements.
Cooling in ambient temperatures resulting from increased vegetation and replacement of asphalt and other 
reflective surface materials with white/non-reflective materials; this leads to positive impacts on heat-related 
morbidity and reductions in health costs.
Contingent value of community-use services associated with green features (e.g., recreational spaces).
Financial (internal)
Environmental (external) 
Social (external) 
Community 
development (external) 
Utility cost 
Flood risk 
Property value 
Shadow wage benefit 
Difference in electricity and natural gas costs between the green-case and the base-case options due to shading 
and the reduced heating and cooling loads for nearby buildings.
Reduction in surface flood risk by replacing impervious surfaces (e.g., asphalt, concrete and roofing) with permeable 
surfaces such as vegetation, turf, trees, porous materials or green roofs, monetized by estimating the percentage of 
city-wide flood volumes and damage mitigated.
Property value uplift in the surrounding area due to improvements in the aesthetic value associated with green infrastructure.
Reduction in local poverty resulting from an increase in jobs due to construction, and operation and maintenance 
associated with the addition of green features.
Financial (internal)
Social (external) 
Community 
development (external) 
Community 
development (external) 
45
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Market-Price Approaches
Revealed-Preference Approaches
Appendix B: Direct-Market 
Valuation, Indirect-Market 
Valuation and Survey-Based 
Valuation Approaches
112
VALUATION METHOD
DESCRIPTION
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
The market-price method estimates the 
economic value of ecosystem products 
or services that are bought and sold in 
commercial markets.
Price, quantity and cost data is relatively 
easy to obtain for established markets.
The true economic value of goods or 
services may not be fully reflected in market 
transactions, due to market imperfections 
and/or policy failures.
Market price
This method evaluates the economic 
benefit of a given ecosystem good or 
service by using the market value of a 
substitute traded on the market, or the 
cost of measures necessary to avoid the 
environmental damage in the first place.
Market data is available and robust.
This is not a true measure of economic welfare.
Cost-based 
The production function approach is a 
common economic technique that relates 
output to different levels of inputs of the 
so-called factors of production (land, 
labour, capital, raw materials). 
This approach has a strong intuitive and 
practical appeal, so it’s popular with policy 
decision-makers.
Specifying a biophysical relationship can be 
complex and/or data-intensive.
Production function
VALUATION METHOD
DESCRIPTION
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
The travel-cost method is predominantly 
used to estimate direct-use values 
associated with recreation sites. Visitor 
time and expenditures to visit a particular 
site are used to represent the value of 
that site.
Useful for observing actual or potential 
behaviour. Can be used to understand 
restoration impact to recreational users. 
Can differentiate between different types 
of users.
Potential bias in choice of dependent variable, 
in multi-purpose trips, with incorrect recording 
of preferences and statistical technique.
Travel cost
The hedonic method is used to value 
environmental amenities that affect 
the price of residential properties. It is 
particularly appropriate for evaluating 
projects in urban settings.
Useful for observing actual consumer 
behaviour. Can be used to assess potential 
impacts to property values, preferences by 
property owners for extent and level  
of restoration.
Very data-intensive and limited mainly to data 
related to property.
Hedonic pricing
This method is similar to the travel-cost 
method, but differs to the extent that 
it infers values from observing how 
individuals change their behaviour in 
response to changes in the quality of the 
environment, health or safety.
Based on actual behaviour and 
expenditures. Relatively easy to estimate.
Not a true measure of economic welfare. 
Averting expenditures and environmental 
quality are rarely perfect substitutes.
Averting behaviour
46
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Stated-Preference Approaches
Example of stated-preference approach for estimating benefits of wetland 
retention and restoration in southern Manitoba
In 2009, researchers from the University of Alberta and Ducks Unlimited Canada estimated the benefits of 
restoring wetlands in Manitoba.113  Wetlands in Broughton’s Creek watershed, Rural Municipality of Blanshard in 
southwestern Manitoba, were assumed to adequately represent the status of the wetlands in the entire Prairie 
Pothole Region of the province. 
First, researchers used satellite imagery and GIS analysis to estimate the rate of wetland loss in Manitoba and 
determined that approximately 7,406 acres of undisturbed wetlands existed in Broughton’s Creek watershed in 
1968, compared with 5,874 acres in 2005. The overall wetland loss of 1,532 acres (77% of the 1968 level) indicated 
an average loss rate of 0.57% per year within the watershed. Extrapolated to the entire Manitoba Prairie Pothole 
Region (1,044,102 acres in 2005), Ducks Unlimited Canada estimated 1,355,977 wetland acres in 1968 declining at 
approximately 7,700 acres per year.114
Second, using wetland monitoring data, researchers established that in Broughton’s Creek watershed, wetlands 
could provide the following benefits (per acre, per year):
•	
Filter approximately 0.043 kg of nitrogen and 0.009 kg of phosphorus;
•	
Store 4 tons of carbon dioxide equivalents;
•	
Control 6.5 tons of soil erosion; and
•	
Retain 1,200 m3 of floodwater.
VALUATION METHOD
DESCRIPTION
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
Involves directly asking people how much 
they would be willing to pay for specific 
environmental services or asking them 
what amount of compensation they would 
be willing to accept to give up specific 
environmental services.
Extremely flexible, allows generating 
dollar values for virtually everything. Has 
been widely used, and a great deal of 
research is being conducted to improve 
the methodology, making results more 
valid and reliable.
Potential bias in response, hypothetical market 
(not observed behaviour).
Contingent valuation 
method (CVM)
Respondents are asked to rank different 
combinations of environmental quality 
and costs from most preferred to least 
preferred.
Easier for respondents to handle 
conceptually when faced with the situation 
of putting a money value on a non-market 
good, relative to the procedure involved in 
contingent valuation.
Requires a larger sample than CVM, and it 
produces a measure of economic welfare  
with difficulty.
Contingent ranking
Participants are asked to work through 
a number of choices between different 
alternatives characterized by the good’s 
main attributes.
Allows the analyst to better understand 
the complexity of consumer choice 
behaviour. The repeated question 
approach may provide additional 
information on response consistency.
Requires specialized expertise to ensure that 
choice modelling generates measures of 
economic welfare.
Choice modelling
47
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Third, these benefits were documented and shared with a group of 1,980 survey respondents who were asked 
to evaluate their willingness to pay (WTP) to receive respective wetland benefits under five different scenarios of 
wetland retention and restoration relative to the 1968 base case:
1.	 Full wetland retention, at 77%;
2.	 Restoration to 80%;
3.	 Restoration to 83%;
4.	 Restoration to 89%; and
5.	 Restoration to 100%.
The survey respondents were selected as a representative of the provincial population in terms of income, gender 
ratio, household size and marital status. 
As a proxy of their WTP, researchers used an increase in income taxes for a five-year period. Therefore, survey 
respondents could make an informed decision about the trade‐offs between personal income tax increases and 
wetland conservation benefits. 
The table below outlines the results of the survey, where survey participants indicated their willingness to accept an 
increase in income taxes for various wetland restoration scenarios (in 2009) for the entire Manitoba Prairie Pothole Region.
Willingness to Accept an Increase in Income Taxes for Various Wetland Restoration 
Scenarios (Broughton’s Creek Watershed, Rural Municipality of Blanshard, 
southwestern Manitoba)
The stream of payments for restoration (level i) were discounted to the present using the NPV formula:
where WTP  is the WTP estimate for wetland program i in time t, and r is the discount rate.
The NPV for retention and restoration of wetlands in the entire Prairie Pothole Region of the province was 
estimated by multiplying the discounted household WTP by the total number of households in Manitoba, 
discounted at 5% for five years. The resulting estimates ranged from $602 million for retention to $729 million 
for 100% restoration to 1968 levels.115
Source: Boxall, P. C., Pattison, J. K. and Shane Gabor, S. T. 2009. Estimates of Passive Use Values of Wetland Restoration and Retention in Southern Manitoba. Proceedings from Ecological Goods & Services 
Technical Meeting, Lord Elgin Hotel, Ottawa, Canada.
t
i
NPV = ∑
t=1
WTPi
(1 + r)t
5
t
77% RETENTION
$294.02
83% RESTORATION
$313.16
80% RESTORATION
$304.36
83% RESTORATION
$329.84
89% RESTORATION
$357.75
Mean annual WTP per household
48
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
A wide range of decision-support tools that integrate ecology, economics and geography are available, from 
simple spreadsheet models to complex software packages. Tools differ in their approaches to economic valuation, 
spatial and temporal representation of services, and incorporation of existing biophysical models. Many of them 
are intended to be transferrable to new geographic and decision-making contexts. 
The International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) is developing an approach for natural infrastructure 
systems design. The IISD’s Distributed Multifunctional Storage (DMFS) model integrates climate change modelling 
with simulation modelling of naturalized retention ponds and engineered wetlands to estimate the investment 
case for natural infrastructure regarding climate adaptation. 
The DMFS model relies on modern, high-resolution climate and topographic data and simulation modelling 
principles. At their core, MFS design methods are closely related to classical water resources engineering 
investment planning based on simulating storage systems (reservoirs) performance with historical or synthesized 
hydrology.117 MFS design for climate adaptation, however, requires three major modifications to conventional 
engineering methods: 
•	
Downscaled global climate modelling data for quantitative climate risk 
assessment using Monte Carlo simulation techniques;
•	
High-resolution terrestrial data for identifying sites with high potential for 
multifunctional storage; and
•	
Environmental economics methods based on ecosystem service valuation to build 
a comprehensive investment case of this style of infrastructure.
First, the MFS design for climate adaptation should make explicit use of ensemble climate projections to generate 
the synthetic, climate-change influenced hydrology necessary for climate risk analysis. Climateatlas.ca is a repository 
of downscaled ensemble climate modelling data that can be used to generate the necessary synthetic hydrology.
Appendix C: Decision-Support 
Tools to Account for Risks 
and Uncertainty in Cost-
Benefit Evaluation of Natural 
Infrastructure Projects
116
49
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Second, the MFS design relies on high-resolution topographic data derived from LiDAR to identify candidate natural 
infrastructure sites. The underlying philosophy is that a large number of small wetland-type landscape features can 
deliver valuable services, such as flood and drought mitigation, which would otherwise be provided by a single, 
large conventional infrastructure project. The MFS sites can therefore be built into watersheds and landscapes, 
and exploit natural ecosystem processes. Selecting multiple sites and designing networks can accomplish multiple 
objectives. LiDAR is the underlying data source that enables the identification and selection of sites.
Third, the MFS design typically includes, to the extent possible, the quantification and monetization of ecosystem 
service benefits. Ecosystem service quantification is still an evolving practice and a typical criticism is that standard 
tools for mapping and valuing ecosystem services such as InVEST (Integrated Valuation of Ecosystem Services and 
Tradeoffs) lack the hydrological detail to be useful.118 The high-spatial resolution analysis largely avoids this pitfall by 
using localized hydrological information to drive the ecosystem service quantification and monetization process.
Several of the key analytical innovations necessary for climate-risk-based natural infrastructure systems design 
and investment planning are described as follows:
Integrating Synthetic Hydrology with Climate-influenced Extreme Precipitation Events 
The time series produced by the high-resolution (downscaled) future climate projections allows for continuous 
modelling to investigate the performance of natural infrastructure in the long term (up to the year 2100). However, 
climate models have some limitations when it comes to predicting extreme events – they usually underestimate 
the magnitude of daily extreme events.119, 120  To this end, Intensity Duration Frequency (IDF) curves, which provide 
information on the return periods (frequency) of different storm events based on historical record, are used to 
model daily extreme events in the hydraulic design of different water-related infrastructures.121   
To integrate precipitation projections from statistically downscaled Global Circulation Models (GCMs) and climate-
modified IDF curves, IISD integrates the University of Western Ontario’s tool for generating climate-adjusted IDF 
curvesvii with the precipitation time series derived from downscaled GCMs. The fundamental logic is that exposure 
to higher frequency extreme events is a key consideration for climate adaptation and natural infrastructure design. 
However, those extreme events should not distort the annual precipitation budget estimated from downscaled GCMs, 
as this could result in an over-estimate of available precipitation. The following are the key steps of this method:
vii  The Computerized Tool for the Development of Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves under Climate Change (IDF-CC) available at: http://www.idf-cc-uwo.ca/
50
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
a)	 Statistically identify the temporal points of extreme events for different return 
periods from the 100-year span:  
	
i)	
M5 = 1:5 	
(20 events) 
	
ii)	
M10 = 1:10 	
(10 events) 
	
iii)	
M20 = 1:20 	
(5 events) 
	
iv)	
M50 = 1:50 	
(2 events) 
	
v)	
M100 = 1:100	
(1 event)
 
b)	 Using the Western University developed IDF-CC tool, the magnitude of the events 
mentioned above will be determined.
c)	 Calculate the cumulative amount of the projected precipitation (for 100):
	
i)	
Total P = 
d)	 Calculate the total amount of extreme events identified in the step above:
	
i)	
M = 20 * M5 + 10 * M10 + 5 * M20 + 2 * M50 + M100
e)	 Calculate the correction factor:
	
i)	
K = Total P / (Total P + M)
f)	 Corrected annual precipitation:
	
i)	
Corr Total P = P * K
	
ii)	
Insert the extreme events (from step a) in the new corrected time series (steps f-i)
This approach allows for simultaneous Monte Carlo simulations of the hydrological performance of natural 
infrastructure in the long term, and under extreme events, without compromising the time series properties 
generated by the climate model that underlies the downscaled GCM data. The illustration below (Figure C.1) 
shows the superposition of extreme events derived from IDF-CC and a representative precipitation time series 
derived from a GCM.
∑i=1 Pi
100
51
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Figure C.1: Superimposed Extreme Precipitation Events on GCM Output (Example)
150
100
50
0
2000
2050
2010
2060
2020
1:50
1:100
2070
2030
2080
2040
2090
IDF-CC (RCP 4.5)
GCM output (RCP 4.5)
Precipitation (mm)
Note: This figure is an illustrative example (Virden, Man.) to show how extreme events from IDF-CC can be incorporated into a GCM outputs (RCP 4.5) 
time series. The figure reveals that projected extreme events may be significantly larger than those generated directly from downscaled GCM outputs. 
The superimposition of extreme events on the GCM output and the continuous simulation-optimization approach captures future risk of high-frequency 
oscillation between flood and drought conditions and the modulating effect of natural infrastructure.
52
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Figure C.2: Monte Carlo simulation of a hypothetical multifunctional site at Virden, 
Manitoba (storage volume in millions of cubic meters) using output for 12 GCMs 
(RCP4.5)
Proposed natural infrastructure project designs can then be evaluated using Monte Carlo–based methods that 
simulate the performance of the system using an ensemble of hydrologic data derived from downscaled GCM 
data. Figures C.2 and C.3 show examples of multiple traces of daily, simulated MFS behaviour for 12 different GCMs 
for two different reference climate change scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5).
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
2095
2096
Volume (Million m3)
Year
Scenario 4.5
53
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Figure C.3: Monte Carlo simulation of a hypothetical multifunctional site at Virden, 
Manitoba (storage volume in millions of cubic meters) using output for 12 GCMs 
(RCP8.5).
The Monte Carlo approach essentially evaluates many simulation years to estimate the probability distribution of 
future benefits, which is essential for the climate-risk-based estimation of the natural infrastructure investment 
value proposition.
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Jan - 2095
Jan - 2096
Volume (Million m3)
Year
Scenario 8.5
Note that the RCP8.5 scenario represents a hotter climate than RCP4.5. The MFS site therefore operates at a lower supply level or is empty more frequently than in the RCP4.5 scenario due primarily 
to increased evaporation.
54
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Other Tools
The IISD multifunctional storage model utilizes three-dimensional reservoir storage modelling based on LiDAR-
derived topography for high spatial resolution modelling that allows modelling of critical ecosystem services such 
as nutrient interception, biomass harvesting and carbon sequestration. 
InVEST and ARIES (ARtificial Intelligence for Ecosystem Services) are other public-domain tools for modelling 
ecosystem services, key features of which could be integrated into natural infrastructure design methods. Both 
use a variety of spatial data as model inputs and encode ecological production functions in deterministic models 
(InVEST and ARIES) and in probabilistic models (ARIES).
EcoServ is a web-based tool under development in the U.S. and Canadian Prairie Pothole Region, with the intent 
to eventually develop additional case studies, then nationally or globally generalized models.122 EcoServ links 
external ecosystem process models and spatial data and will make these accessible to the public via a web 
tool. EcoServ accounts for temporal climate variability and can provide output maps of service provision under 
scenarios for climate and land-use change.
ARIES is a software platform that provides an intelligent modelling platform capable of composing complex 
ecosystem service models from a collection of models specified by the user. These component models can be 
defined within ARIES using its native modelling language or developed independently in another language or 
architecture and used by ARIES via its model-wrapping mechanism. Once properly wrapped, ARIES is capable of 
automatically negotiating the differences in input data, units, modelling paradigms and applicable scales between 
component models.
55
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Biodiversity: the variability among living organisms from all sources, including terrestrial, marine and other 
aquatic ecosystems, and the ecological complexes of which they are a part; this includes diversity within species, 
between species and of ecosystems. 
Carbon sequestration: the removal and storage of carbon from the atmosphere in carbon sinks (such as wetlands, 
oceans, forests or soils) through physical or biological processes, such as photosynthesis.
Drought: sustained and regionally extensive occurrence of appreciably below-average natural water availability in 
the form of precipitation, streamflow or groundwater.
Grey infrastructure (water resources): human-engineered infrastructure for water resources such as water and 
wastewater treatment plants, pipelines and reservoirs.
Flood plain: an area adjacent to a lake, river or coast, which can be regularly inundated or covered with water. It 
typically includes two zones: 
•	
Floodway: the channel of the river or stream and the adjacent land that  
must remain free from obstruction so that the regulatory flood can be safely 
conveyed downstream.
•	
Flood fringe: the remaining portion of the flood plain, where flood depths,  
flow velocities, or wave energies are relatively low and some development may  
be permitted, if adequate levels of flood protection are provided.
Flood mitigation: a sustained action taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from 
flood hazards and their effects. Mitigation distinguishes actions that have a long-term impact from those that 
are more closely associated with preparedness for, immediate response to, and short-term recovery from specific 
events.
Flood risk: flood risk is a combination of the likelihood of occurrence of a flood event (flood frequency) and the 
social or economic consequences of that event when it occurs (through exposure to the flood hazard).
Habitat: an area on which a species depends, directly or indirectly, to carry out its life processes such as 
reproduction, rearing, hibernation, migration or feeding.
Hydrologic function: the occurrence, circulation, distribution, and chemical and physical properties of water 
in the atmosphere, on the surface of the land, in soil and in underlying rocks; and water’s interaction with the 
environment, including its relation to living things.
Definitions
123
56
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
Hydraulic analysis: an engineering analysis of flow scenarios carried out to provide estimates of the water surface 
elevations and velocity for selected recurrence intervals.
Hydrologic analysis: estimation of flood magnitudes as a function of precipitation.
Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF) curve: a graphical representation of the probability that a given depth  
of rainfall will occur, shown in rainfall intensity (e.g., in millimetres per hour) with respect to rainfall duration  
(e.g., hour).
Invasive species: species that are not native to an area and whose introduction or spread threatens the 
environment, the economy or society, including human health.
Natural infrastructure: a strategically planned and managed network of natural lands, such as forests and 
wetlands, working landscapes, and other open spaces that conserves or enhances ecosystem values, and 
functions and provides associated benefits to human populations.
Surface water flooding: flooding that occurs when runoff water exceeds the capacity of the storm sewer (minor 
system) and flows along streets and in adverse circumstances onto private properties causing flood damages. It 
can happen anywhere in the community, independent of an overflowing water body. 
Riparian buffers: vegetated areas adjacent to waterbodies (e.g., lakes, rivers, streams) that can reduce pollution 
from stormwater runoff and provide bank stabilization and aquatic and wildlife habitat.
Riverine flooding: excess stream flow in a watercourse, such that land outside the normal banks is submerged or 
inundated. Can be caused by extreme rainfall or snowmelt, or physical conditions (such as ice jams and undersized 
watercourse crossings) associated with a watercourse. 
Runoff: the amount of water deriving from precipitation/snowmelt, not otherwise evapotranspirated or stored, 
that flows across the landscape.
Watershed: the area of land that drains into a river, lake or other water body. 
Wetland: lands that are seasonally or permanently covered by shallow water, as well as lands where the water 
table is close to or at the surface. In either case, the presence of abundant water has caused the formation of 
hydric soils and has favoured the dominance of either aquatic or water tolerant plants. The four major types of 
wetlands are swamps, marshes, bogs and fens. 
Wetland complex: a group of wetlands that are functionally linked to one another and no more than  
750 metres apart.
Definitions
123
57
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
ALUS - Alternative Land Use Services
CapEx - capital expense
CLTIP - Conservation Land Tax Incentive Program
DFAA - Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements
GIS - Geographic Information System
GCMs - global circulation models 
GDP - gross domestic product
IBC - Insurance Bureau of Canada
IDF - Intensity Duration Frequency
IFC - Intact Financial Corporation
Intact Centre - Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
IPCC - Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRR - internal rate of return
KPI - key performance indicator
LiDAR - light detection and ranging
MNAI - Municipal Natural Assets Initiative
nBCR - net Benefit-Cost Ratio
NPV - net present value
O&M - operation and maintenance
OECD - Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OpEx - operating expense
PwC - PricewaterhouseCoopers Canada
TEV - total economic value
VfM - value for money
WTP - willingness to pay
Acronyms
58
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
1 Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2017. Facts of the Property and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada 2017. 
Accessed at: www.assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2017/Fact-Book-2017.pdf
2 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to 
Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. Accessed at: www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/srex/SREX_Full_Report.pdf 
3 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2013. Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment 
Report. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Accessed at: www.climatechange2013.org/images/
uploads/WGIAR5_WGI-12Doc2b_FinalDraft_Chapter14.pdf  
4 Environment and Climate Change Canada. 2017. Climate Data and Scenarios for Canada: Synthesis of Recent 
Observation and Modelling Results. Chapter 3.3: Extremes. Accessed at: www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-
change/services/climate-change/publications/data-scenarios-synthesis-recent-observation/chapter-3-3.html 
5 Public Safety Canada. 2016–2017 Evaluation of the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements. Accessed at: 
www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/vltn-dsstr-fnncl-ssstnc-2016-17/vltn-dsstr-fnncl-ssstnc-2016-17-en.pdf 
6 Office of the Auditor General of Canada. 2016. Spring 2016 Reports of the Commissioner of the Environment and 
Sustainable Development. Report 2: Mitigating the Impacts of Severe Weather. Accessed at: www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/
internet/docs/parl_cesd_201605_02_e.pdf 
7 Parliamentary Budget Officer of Canada. 2016. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial 
Assistance Arrangements due to Weather Events. Accessed at: www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/
Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf 
8 Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2017. Facts of the Property and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada 2017. 
Accessed at: www.assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2017/Fact-Book-2017.pdf 
9 Forbes. 2012. Flood Insurance: Protection Against Storm Surge. Accessed at: www.forbes.com/sites/
realtorcom/2012/07/10/flood-insurance-protection-against-storm-surge/ 
10 Business News Network. 2017. Half of Working Canadians “Overwhelmed” by Debt and Living Paycheque to 
Paycheque: Survey. Accessed at: www.bnnbloomberg.ca/half-of-working-canadians-overwhelmed-by-debt-and-
living-paycheque-to-paycheque-survey-1.562284 
11  Moody’s Investors Service. 2017. Environmental Risks – Evaluating the Impact of Climate Change. Accessed 
at: www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-
change-on-US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf 
Standards & Poor’s Ratings Services. 2015. How Environmental and Climate Risks Factor into Global Corporate 
Ratings. Accessed at: www.environmental-finance.com/assets/files/How%20Environmental%20And%20
Climate%20Risks%20Factor%20Into%20Global%20Corporate%20Ratings%20Oct%2021%202015%20(2).pdf 
12 Climate Disclosure Project (CDP). 2015. How CDP Data Can Inform Investors About Risk and Opportunities in U.S. 
Municipal Bonds. Accessed at: b8f65cb373b1b7b15feb-c70d8ead6ced550b4d987d7c03fcdd1d.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.
com/cms/reports/documents/000/001/613/original/White-paper-muni-bonds.pdf?1486720635 
Endnotes
59
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
13 Moody’s Investors Service. 2017. Environmental Risks – Evaluating the Impact of Climate Change. Accessed 
at: www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-
change-on-US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf 
14 Ibid.
15 Globe and Mail. 2015. Leaky Basement Lawsuit Drags on in Maple Ridge. Accessed at: www.theglobeandmail.
com/news/british-columbia/leaky-basement-lawsuit-drags-on-in-maple-ridge/article25051951/ 
16 Hutton, D. 2004. Psychosocial Effects of a Natural Disaster: A Post-Flood Assessment in Red River Valley. 
Environments, 32(2), 27–43.
17 Santé Montréal. 2017. Montréal’s Director of Public Health Presents Findings from the Health Survey Flood 
Victims. Accessed at: santemontreal.qc.ca/en/public/inondations-printanieres-2017/
18 Hutton, D. 2004. Psychosocial Effects of a Natural Disaster: A Post-Flood Assessment in Red River Valley. 
Environments, 32(2), 27–43.
19 Sahni, V., Scott, A. N., Beliveau, M., Varughese, M., Dover, D. C., & Talbot, J. 2016. Public Health Surveillance 
Response Following the Southern Alberta floods, 2013. Can J Public Health, 107(2), 142–148.
20 Santé Montréal. 2017. Montréal’s Director of Public Health Presents Findings from the Health Survey Flood 
Victims. Accessed at: santemontreal.qc.ca/en/public/inondations-printanieres-2017/
21 Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation. 2018. After the Flood: The Impact of Climate on Mental Health and Lost 
Time From Work. Accessed at: www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/After-The-
Flood.pdf 
22 Government of Canada. 2016. Canada’s Way Forward on Climate Change: The Paris Agreement. Accessed at: 
www.climatechange.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=24700154-1 
23 Government of Canada. 2017. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) 2015–2030. Accessed at: 
www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-prvntn-mtgtn/pltfrm-dsstr-rsk-rdctn/snd-frmwrk-en.aspx 
24 United Nations. 2015. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. Accessed at: www.unisdr.org/
files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf 
25 Government of Canada. 2017. Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change. Adaptation and 
Climate Resilience. Accessed at: www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/climatechange/pan-canadian-
framework/adaptation-climate-resilience.html 
26 Goodale, R. 2017. Dealing with the Consequences of Climate Change. Accessed at: ralphgoodale.ca/news-
nouvelles/dealing-with-the-consequences-of-climate-change/ 
27 Benedict, M., & McMahon, E. 2006. Green Infrastructure: Linking Landscapes and Communities. 2nd edition. 
Washington, DC: Island Press.
28 Gartner, T., Mulligan, J., Schmidt, R., & Gunn, J. (eds.). 2013. Natural Infrastructure: Investing in Forested Landscapes 
for Source Water Protection. World Resources Institute. Accessed at: www.wri.org/publication/natural-infrastructure 
Endnotes
60
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
29 Ducks Unlimited Canada. 2012. Water Quantity and Quality Benefits from Wetland Conservation and Restoration 
in the Broughton’s Creek Watershed. Accessed at: www.ducks.ca/assets/2012/06/broughtons.pdf 
30 Ducks Unlimited Canada. 2013. A Business Case for Wetland Conservation and Restoration in the Settled Areas of 
Alberta Vermilion River Subwatershed Case Study. Accessed at: www.ducks.ca/assets/2012/06/DUC-AB-Business-
Case_Final.pdf 
31 Costanza, R., d’Arge, R., De Groot, R., Farber, S., Grasso, M., Hannon, B., Limburg, K., Naeem, S., O’Neill, R. V., 
Paruelo, J., & Raskin, R. G. 1997. The Value of the World’s Ecosystem Services and Natural Capital. Nature, 387(6630), 
253–260.
32 Wilson, M. A., & Browning, C. J. 2012. Investing in Natural Infrastructure: Restoring Watershed Resilience and 
Capacity in the Face of a Changing Climate. Ecological Restoration, 309(2), 96–98. Project MUSE.
33 Pattison-Williams, J. K., Pomeroy, J. W., Badiou, P., & Gabor, S. 2018. Wetlands, Flood Control and Ecosystem 
Services in the Smith Creek Drainage Basin: A Case Study in Saskatchewan, Canada. Accessed at: www.usask.ca/
hydrology/papers/Pattison-Williams_et_al_2018.pdf 
34 Green, T. L. 2002. Accounting for Old Forests: A Methodology for Assessing the Economic Benefits of Retaining 
Old Forests in B.C. Report to Biodiversity Branch Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection (Volume 1). Province 
of British Columbia. Accessed at: www.env.gov.bc.ca/wld/documents/techpub/Green_Valuation_Old_Forest_BC_
Vol_I.pdf 
35 Bennett, G., Cassin, J., & Carroll, N. 2015. Natural Infrastructure Investment and Implications for the Nexus: A 
Global Overview. Ecosystem Services, 17: 293–97.
36 Silva, J. M. C., & Wheeler, E. 2017. Ecosystems as Infrastructure. Perspectives. Ecology and Conservation. 15: 
32–35.
37 Ozment, S., DiFrancesco, K., & Gartner, T. 2015. The Role of Natural Infrastructure in the Water, Energy and Food 
Nexus. Nexus Dialogue Synthesis Papers. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. Accessed at: www.iwa-network.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/12/1438066960-Natural-Infrastrucure-in-the-Nexus_Final-Dialogue-Synthesis-Paper-2015.
pdf 
38 Baker, J. M., Griffis, T. J., & Ochsner, T. E. 2012. Coupling Landscape Water Storage and Supplemental Irrigation 
to Increase Productivity and Improve Environmental Stewardship in the U.S. Midwest. Water Resources Research, 
48(5).
39 Swystun, K., Chen, X., & Venema, H. 2013. Feasibility of Integrated Surface Water Management on Agricultural 
Land in Manitoba. 21st Canadian Hydrotechnical Conference. Banff, Alberta.
40 Grosshans, R. E. 2014. Cattail (Typha spp.) Biomass Harvesting for Nutrient Capture and Sustainable Bioenergy 
for Integrated Watershed Management. PhD Thesis. University of Manitoba. Accessed at: mspace.lib.umanitoba.ca/
xmlui/handle/1993/23564 
41 Berry, P., Yassin, F., Belcher, K., & Lindenschmidt, K.E. 2017. An Economic Assessment of Local Farm Multi-Purpose 
Surface Water Retention Systems in a Canadian Prairie Setting. Applied Water Science, 7(8), 4461–4478.
Endnotes
61
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
42 Statistics Canada. Human Activity and the Environment: The Changing Landscape of Canadian Metropolitan 
Areas. Accessed at: www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/16-201-x/16-201-x2016000-eng.htm 
43 Ontario Biodiversity Council (OBC). 2015. State of Ontario’s Biodiversity 2015. A Report of the Ontario Biodiversity 
Council, Peterborough, Ontario.
44 Wetlands Alberta. Wetlands Loss. Accessed at: www.wetlandsalberta.ca/wetland-loss/ 
45 British Columbia Ministry of Environment. Wetlands in BC. Accessed at: www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/
environment/air-land-water/water/water-planning-strategies/wetlands-in-bc 
46 Secretariat to the North American Wetlands Conservation Council (Canada). 1999. Issues Paper. Wetlands and 
Government Policy and Legislation for Wetland Conservation in Canada. Accessed at: www.publications.gc.ca/site/
archivee-archived.html?url=http://www.publications.gc.ca/collections/Collection/CW69-10-1999-1E.pdf 
47 Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry. 2017. A Wetland Conservation Strategy for Ontario 2017–
2030. Accessed at: www.ontario.ca/page/wetland-conservation-strategy 
48 Alberta Environment and Parks. 2013. Alberta Wetland Policy. Accessed at: aep.alberta.ca/ 
49 Brooke, R., Cairns, S., Machado, E., Molnar, M., & O’Neill, S. J. 2017. Municipal Natural Asset Management as a 
Sustainable Infrastructure Strategy: The Emerging Evidence.
50 Town of Gibsons. 2014. Towards an Eco-Asset Strategy. Accessed at gibsons.ca/eco-assets 
51 Ibid.
52 Ibid.
53 Ibid.
54 Moudrak, N., Hutter, A. M., Feltmate, B. 2017. When the Big Storms Hit: The Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and 
Rural Flood Damage. Prepared for the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry. Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: www.intactcentre.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/When-the-
Big-Storms-Hit.pdf 
55 Environmental Systems Research Institute. 2008. ArcGIS 9.2 Desktop Help: What is Raster Data? Accessed at: 
webhelp.esri.com/arcgisdesktop/9.2/index.cfm?TopicName=welcome 
56 Environmental Systems Research Institute. 1998. ESRI Shapefile Technical Description. Accessed at: www.esri.
com/library/whitepapers/pdfs/shapefile.pdf 
57 IBI Group. 2015. Alberta’s Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study. Prepared for Government of Alberta  
ESRD – Resilience and Mitigation. Accessed at: http://aep.alberta.ca  
58 Ibid.
59 Ibid.
60 Grosshans, R. E. 2014. Cattail (Typha spp.) Biomass Harvesting for Nutrient Capture and Sustainable Bioenergy 
for Integrated Watershed Management. PhD Thesis. University of Manitoba. Accessed at: http://hdl.handle.
net/1993/23564 
Endnotes
62
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
61 Berry, P., Yassin, F., Belcher, K., & Lindenschmidt, K. E. 2017. An Economic Assessment of Local Farm Multi-Purpose 
Surface Water Retention Systems Under Future Climate Uncertainty. Sustainability, 9(3), 456.
62 Berry, P., Yassin, F., Belcher, K., & Lindenschmidt, K. E. 2017. An Economic Assessment of Local Farm Multi-Purpose 
Surface Water Retention Systems in a Canadian Prairie Setting. Applied Water Science, 7(8), 4461–4478.
63 Berry, P., Yassin, F., Grosshans, R., & Lindenschmidt, K. E. (2017). Surface Water Retention Systems for Cattail 
Production as a Biofuel. Journal of Environmental Management, 203, 500–509.
64 HM Treasury, UK Government. Value for Money Assessment for Using Private Finance. Accessed at: http://
webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130102211853/http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/infrastructure_ppp_vfm.htm  
65 Department for Transport, UK Government. 2013. Value for Money Assessment: Advice Note for Local Transport 
Decision Makers. Accessed at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/267296/vfm-advice-local-decision-makers.pdf  
66 Schuyt, K., & Brander, L. 2004. The Economic Values of the World’s Wetlands. Gland, Switzerland: WWF. 
67 Brander, L., Brouwer, R., & Wagtendonk, A. 2013. Economic Valuation of Regulating Services Provided by 
Wetlands in Agricultural Landscapes: A Meta-Analysis. Ecological Engineering, 56, 89–96.
68 Wood Pellet Association of Canada. Global Pellet Market Outlook in 2017. Accessed at: https://www.pellet.org/
wpac-news/global-pellet-market-outlook-in-2017  
69 XCG Consultants Ltd. 2010. Review of Phosphorus Removal at Municipal Sewage Treatment Plants Discharging 
to the Lake Simcoe Watershed. Kingston, Ontario: Water Environment Association of Ontario. Accessed at: https://
weao.memberclicks.net/assets/docs/resources-links/reports/review-of-phosphorus-removal-to-lake-simcoe.pdf  
70 Walter, M. 2018. Lake Simcoe Phosphorus Offset Program. Presented at the National Nutrient Recovery and 
Reuse Forum, Toronto, Ontario, March 8, 2018.
71 Statistics Canada. 2017. Focus on Geography Series, 2016 Census. Accessed at: /www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-
recensement/2016/as-sa/fogs-spg/Facts-csd-eng.cfm?GC=3524001&GK=CSD&LANG=Eng&TOPIC=1 
72 Amec Foster Wheeler has been acquired and merged with Wood Group.
73 Ozment, S., DiFrancesco, K., & Gartner, T. 2015. The Role of Natural Infrastructure in the Water, Energy 
and Food Nexus. Nexus Dialogue Synthesis Papers. Accessed at: www.iwa-network.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/03/1438744856-Natural-Infrastrucure-in-the-Nexus_Final-Dialogue-Synthesis-Paper-2015.pdf   
74 Moreno-Mateos, D., Power, M. E., Comin, F. A., & Yockteng, R. 2012. Structural and Functional Loss in Restored 
Wetland Ecosystems. PLoS Biol 10(1): e1001247. Accessed at: journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pbio.1001247 
75 Pinno, B. D., & Hawkes, V. C. 2015. Forests. Temporal Trends of Ecosystem Development on Different Site Types in 
Reclaimed Boreal Forests. Accessed at: cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pubwarehouse/pdfs/36120.pdf 
76 IDF_CC Tool, Version 3.0. (Computerized Tool for the Development of Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves under 
Climate Change). Accessed at: www.idf-cc-uwo.ca 
77 Williams, L., Harrison, S., & O’Hagan, A. M. 2012. The Use of Wetlands for Flood Attenuation. Report prepared for 
An Taisce. Accessed at: www.antaisce.org/sites/antaisce.org/files/final_wetland_flood_attenuation_report_2012.pdf 
Endnotes
63
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
78 Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). Defining What Matters: Do Companies and Investors Agree on What Is Material? 
Accessed at: www.globalreporting.org/resourcelibrary/GRI-DefiningMateriality2016.pdf
ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability. 2000. Changing Climate, Changing Communities: Guide and 
Workbook for Municipal Climate Adaptation. Accessed at: www.icleicanada.org/images/icleicanada/pdfs/
GuideWorkbookInfoAnnexes_WebsiteCombo.pdf
79 Talberth, J., Gray, E., Yonavjak, L., & Gartner, T. 2013. Green Versus Gray: Nature’s Solutions to Infrastructure 
Demands. Solutions for a Sustainable and Desirable Future, 4(1), 40–47. Accessed at: www.thesolutionsjournal.
com/article/green-versus-gray-natures-solutions-to-infrastructure-demands
80 Government of Canada. 2017. Federal Floodplain Mapping Framework. Accessed at: ftp.maps.canada.ca/pub/
nrcan_rncan/publications/ess_sst/299/299806/gip_112_e.pdf 
81 Li, S., MacMillan, R. A., Lobb, D. A., McConkey, B. G., Moulin, A., & Fraser, W. R. 2011. Lidar DEM Error Analyses 
and Topographic Depression Identification in a Hummocky Landscape in the Prairie Region of Canada. 
Geomorphology, 129(3), 263–275.
82 Green, T. L. 2002. Accounting for Old Forests: A Methodology for Assessing the Economic Benefits of Retaining 
Old Forests in B.C. Report to Biodiversity Branch Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection (Volume 1). Province 
of British Columbia. Accessed at: www.env.gov.bc.ca/wld/documents/techpub/Green_Valuation_Old_Forest_BC_
Vol_I.pdf 
83 United States Environment Protection Agency. 2009. Valuing the Protection of Ecological Systems and Services: 
A Report of the EPA Science Advisory Board. Accessed at: https://yosemite.epa.gov/sab%5CSABPRODUCT.NSF/
F3DB1F5C6EF90EE1852575C500589157/%24File/EPA-SAB-09-012-unsigned.pdf 
84 PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2017. Assessing the Business Case for Green Infrastructure through a Total Economic 
Valuation Approach. Prepared for Metrolinx.
85 Ibid.
86 Ibid.
87 Ibid.
88 National Research Council. 2001. Compensating for Wetland Losses Under the Clean Water Act. Washington, DC: 
The National Academies. Accessed at: www.nap.edu/read/10134/chapter/1 
89 Ibid.
90 Johnston, R. J., Rolfe, J., Rosenberger, R. S., & Brouwer, R. 2015. The Economics of Non-Market Goods and 
Resources. Volume 14. Chapter 2: Introduction to Benefit Transfer Methods. Benefit Transfer of Environmental 
and Resource Values. Springer Science+Business Media. Dordrecht. Accessed at: www.springer.com/gp/
book/9789401799294
91 Wetland Ways. 2009. Interim Guide for Wetland Protection and Conservation. Chapter 11: Wetland Enhancement 
and Restoration. Accessed at: www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/environment/natural-resource-stewardship/standards-
guidelines/best-management-practices/wetland_ways_ch_11_enhancement.pdf   
Endnotes
64
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
92 Steere, J. Estimating Wetland Restoration Costs at an Urban and Regional Scale: The San Francisco Bay Estuary 
Example. Accessed at: www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/st5/Salmon_Workshop/23_Steere.pdf 
93 Kentula, M. E., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Restoration, Creation, and Recovery of Wetlands: Wetland 
Restoration and Creation. United States Geological Survey Water Supply Paper 2425.  
Accessed at: water.usgs.gov/nwsum/WSP2425/restoration.html 
94 Larratt Aquatic. 2014. Logan Lake Inflow Wetland Phase I and II Interim Report. Prepared for Logan Lake 
Enhancement Working Group and BC Habitat Conservation Trust Fund. Accessed at: www.loganlake.ca/files/
documents/218/ll-wetland-ii-report-june-11-2014.pdf 
95 Ducks Unlimited Canada. 2011. A Business Case for Wetland Conservation: The Black River Subwatershed. 
Accessed at: www.ducks.ca/assets/2012/06/duc_blackriver_case.pdf 
96 King, D., & Bohlem, C. 1994. Making Sense of Wetland Restoration Costs. University of Maryland. Prepared for U.S. 
EPA, Office of Policy Analysis, and the U.S. Department of Energy, CEES Contribution # UMCEES-CBL- 94-045.
97 Alberta Water Portal Society. 2017. Flood Mitigation: Dams. Accessed at: albertawater.com/flood-mitigation/dams 
98 Moreno-Mateos, D., Power, M. E., Comín, F. A., & Yockteng, R. 2012. Structural and Functional Loss in Restored 
Wetland Ecosystems. PLoS Biol 10(1): e1001247. Accessed at: journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pbio.1001247 
99 Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat. 2007. Canadian Cost-Benefit Analysis Guide: Regulatory Proposals. 
Accessed at: www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/rtrap-parfa/analys/analys-eng.pdf 
100 Green, T. L. 2002. Accounting for Old Forests: A Methodology for Assessing the Economic Benefits of Retaining 
Old Forests in B.C. Report to Biodiversity Branch Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection (Volume 1). Province 
of British Columbia. Accessed at: www.env.gov.bc.ca/wld/documents/techpub/Green_Valuation_Old_Forest_BC_
Vol_I.pdf 
101 Schijven, J., Derx, J., de Roda Husman, A. M., Blaschke, A. P., & Farnleitner, A. H. 2015. QMRAcatch: Microbial 
Quality Simulation of Water Resources Including Infection Risk Assessment. Journal of Environmental Quality, 
44(5), 1491–1502. Accessed at: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4884445/ 
102 Hotte, N., Kennedy, M., & Lantz, V. 2009. Valuing Wetland Ecosystem Services in the Credit River Watershed, 
Ontario: Phase 1. Pembina Institute and Credit Valley Conservation. Accessed at: cvc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2011/01/ValuingWetlandsPhase1-final.pdf 
103 Larratt Aquatic. 2014. Logan Lake Inflow Wetland Phase I and II Interim Report. Prepared for Logan Lake 
Enhancement Working Group and BC Habitat Conservation Trust Fund. Accessed at: www.loganlake.ca/files/
documents/218/ll-wetland-ii-report-june-11-2014.pdf
104 Steere, J. Estimating Wetland Restoration Costs at an Urban and Regional Scale: The San Francisco Bay Estuary 
Example. Accessed at: www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/st5/Salmon_Workshop/23_Steere.pdf 
105 Ibid. 
Endnotes
65
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
106 The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2003. Environmental Indicators. 
Development, Measurement and Use. Accessed at: www.oecd.org/env/indicators-modelling-outlooks/24993546.pdf 
107 BC Ministry of Environment. 2007. Compliance Management Framework: The Ministry of Environment’s Approach 
to Ensuring Compliance. Accessed at: www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/environment/research-monitoring-and-reporting/
reporting/reporting-documents/environmental-enforcement-docs/compliance_mgmt_framework.pdf 
108 Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat. 2007. Canadian Cost-Benefit Analysis Guide. Accessed at: www.tbs-sct.
gc.ca/rtrap-parfa/analys/analys-eng.pdf
109 Government of Ontario. 2018. Conservation Land Tax Incentive Program. Accessed at: www.ontario.ca/page/
conservation-land-tax-incentive-program  
110 Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry. 2010. Conservation Land Tax Incentive Program: Community 
Conservation Lands Guide. Accessed at: www.web2.mnr.gov.on.ca/cltip/CLTIP_Community_Conservation_Lands_
Guide.pdf 
111 ALUS Canada. 2018. Accessed at: alus.ca 
112 Robbins, A. S. T., & Daniels, J. M. 2012. Restoration and Economics: A Union Waiting to Happen? Restoration 
Ecology. 20(1) 10–17. Accessed at: www.missioncreek.ca/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/2012-Restoration-and-
Economics.pdf 
Green, T. L. 2002. Accounting for Old Forests: A Methodology for Assessing the Economic Benefits of Retaining 
Old Forests in B.C. Report to Biodiversity Branch Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection (Volume 1). Province 
of British Columbia. Accessed at: www.env.gov.bc.ca/wld/documents/techpub/Green_Valuation_Old_Forest_BC_
Vol_I.pdf 
113 Boxall, P. C., Pattison, J. K., & Shane Gabor, S. T. 2009. Estimates of Passive Use Values of Wetland Restoration and 
Retention in Southern Manitoba. Proceedings from Ecological Goods & Services Technical Meeting, Lord Elgin 
Hotel, Ottawa, Canada.
114 Ibid
115 Ibid.
116 Bagstad, K. J., Semmens, D. J., Waage, S., & Winthrop, R. 2013. A Comparative Assessment of Decision-Support 
Tools for Ecosystem Services Quantification and Valuation. Ecosystem Services, 5, 27–39. Accessed at: anth.
umd.edu/sites/anth.umd.edu/files/Bagstad%20et%20al.%20-%20A%20comparative%20assessment%20of%20
decision-support%20tools%20-%202013.pdf 
117 Yeh, W. W. G. 1985. Reservoir Management and Operations Models: A State‐of‐the‐Art Review. Water Resources 
Research, 21(12), 1797–1818.
118 Baveye, P. 2017. Quantification of Ecosystem Services: Beyond All the “Guesstimates,” How Do We Get Real Data? 
Ecosystem Services, 24, 47–49. ISSN 2212-0416.
119 Mladjic, B., Sushama, L., Khaliq, M. N., Laprise, R., Caya, D., & Roy, R. 2011. Canadian RCM Projected Changes to 
Extreme Precipitation Characteristics over Canada. Journal of Climate, 24(10), 2565–2584.
Endnotes
66
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
120 Tabari, H., Troch, R. D., Giot, O., Hamdi, R., Termonia, P., Saeed, S., & Willems, P. 2016. Local Impact Analysis of 
Climate Change on Precipitation Extremes: Are High-Resolution Climate Models Needed for Realistic Simulations? 
Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 20(9), 3843–3857.
121 Mailhot, A., Duchesne, S., Caya, D., & Talbot, G. 2007. Assessment of Future Change in Intensity–Duration–
Frequency (IDF) Curves for Southern Quebec Using the Canadian Regional Climate Model (CRCM). Journal of 
Hydrology, 347(1), 197–210.
122 Feng, M., Liu, S., Euliss N. H., Young, C., & Mushet, D. M. 2011. Prototyping an Online Wetland Ecosystem Services 
Model Using Open Model Sharing Standards. Environmental Modelling & Software, 26, 458–468.
123 Benedict, M., & McMahon, E. 2006. Green Infrastructure: Linking Landscapes and Communities. 2nd edition. 
Washington, DC: Island Press. Accessed at: islandpress.org/book/green-infrastructure 
Natural Resources Canada and Public Safety Canada. 2017. Federal Floodplain Mapping Framework. Accessed at: 
www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-prvntn-mtgtn/ndmp/fldpln-mppng-en.aspx 
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry. 2017. A Wetland Conservation Strategy for Ontario 2017–2030. 
Queen’s Printer for Ontario. Toronto, Ontario. 52 pp. Accessed at: www.ontario.ca/page/wetland-conservation-strategy
Endnotes
67
COMBATTING CANADA’S RISING FLOOD COSTS
ibc.ca
1-844-2ask-IBC
@InsuranceBureau
@InsuranceBureau
Facebook.com/insurancebureau
Youtube.com/insurancebureau
