International  Journal  of
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Review
Climate Change and Child Health Inequality: A Review
of Reviews
Emmanuelle Arpin 1, Karl Gaufﬁn 2,*
, Meghan Kerr 3, Anders Hjern 2,4, Angela Mashford-Pringle 5
,
Aluisio Barros 6
, Luis Rajmil 7, Imti Choonara 8
and Nicholas Spencer 9


Citation: Arpin, E.; Gaufﬁn, K.; Kerr,
M.; Hjern, A.; Mashford-Pringle, A.;
Barros, A.; Rajmil, L.; Choonara, I.;
Spencer, N. Climate Change and
Child Health Inequality: A Review of
Reviews. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public
Health 2021, 18, 10896. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182010896
Academic Editors:
Jacques Oosthuizen, Neil J. Hime,
Peng Bi and Andrew Mathieson
Received: 20 September 2021
Accepted: 14 October 2021
Published: 17 October 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1
Canadian Center for Health Economics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 3M6, Canada;
emmanuelle.arpin@mail.utoronto.ca
2
Centre for Health Equity Studies, Department of Public Health Sciences, Stockholm University,
10691 Stockholm, Sweden; anders.hjern@su.se
3
Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada;
meghan.kerr@mail.utoronto.ca
4
Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Solna, Sweden
5
Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 3M7, Canada;
angela.mashford.pringle@utoronto.ca
6
Center for Epidemiological Research, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, Pelotas 96010-610, RS, Brazil;
abarros@equidade.org
7
Independent Researcher, Homer 22, 1rst 1, 08023 Barcelona, Spain; 12455lrr@comb.cat
8
School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Derby DE22 3DT, UK; imti.choonara@nottingham.ac.uk
9
Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 9JD, UK; n.j.spencer@warwick.ac.uk
*
Correspondence: karl.gaufﬁn@su.se
Abstract: There is growing evidence on the observed and expected consequences of climate change
on population health worldwide. There is limited understanding of its consequences for child health
inequalities, between and within countries. To examine these consequences and categorize the state
of knowledge in this area, we conducted a review of reviews indexed in ﬁve databases (Medline,
Embase, Web of Science, PsycInfo, Sociological Abstracts). Reviews that reported the effect of climate
change on child health inequalities between low- and high-income children, within or between
countries (high- vs low–middle-income countries; HICs and LMICs), were included. Twenty-three
reviews, published between 2007 and January 2021, were included for full-text analyses. Using
thematic synthesis, we identiﬁed strong descriptive, but limited quantitative, evidence that climate
change exacerbates child health inequalities. Explanatory mechanisms relating climate change to
child health inequalities were proposed in some reviews; for example, children in LMICs are more
susceptible to the consequences of climate change than children in HICs due to limited structural and
economic resources. Geographic and intergenerational inequalities emerged as additional themes
from the review. Further research with an equity focus should address the effects of climate change
on adolescents/youth, mental health and inequalities within countries.
Keywords: climate change; children; health inequality; scoping review; global health
1. Introduction
The uneven distribution of social and environmental factors on birth and early life
give rise to avoidable child health inequalities [1]. Differences in child survival, health,
development and well-being are stark between low- and middle-income countries (LMICs)
and high-income countries (HICs) [2]. Many children in LMICs live in circumstances in
which they are deprived of essential determinants of health such as clean air, adequate
shelter, nutrition, safe water and sanitation [3], all of which contribute to the higher risk
of adverse child health outcomes such as stunting secondary to malnutrition [4], acute
respiratory illness [5], diarrheal disease [6] and vector-borne diseases such as malaria [7].
Despite improvement in child survival rates within these countries, children from poorer
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182010896
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
2 of 17
households remain disproportionately vulnerable: on average, the risk of dying before
age 5 is twice as high for children born into the poorest households as it is for those born
into the richest [3]. Inequalities within HICs exist as well with many children in low-
income households experiencing high levels of air pollution [8], food insecurity [9] and
poor housing conditions [10].
Climate change is an ongoing urgent global problem. The recently published sixth
assessment Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [11] asserts that anthro-
pogenic greenhouse gas emissions have been responsible for an increase in yearly average
temperatures across the world currently estimated at 1.2 ◦C over pre-industrial temperature
levels. Without mitigation, global temperature change will likely increase by 1.5 ◦C by 2030
and may increase 4.8 ◦C by 2100. Observable planetary changes due to climate change
including glaciers melting, water levels rising, prolonged heat waves, ﬂoods, droughts and
rainfall have accelerated in 2020–21 with uncontrolled wild ﬁres in the west coast of North
America, parts of Australia and southern Europe and unprecedented ﬂooding in China
and central Europe.
Global warming and its consequences are now accepted as a signiﬁcant threat to
global health and well-being, and children are known to be particularly vulnerable to its ef-
fects [12]. In 2009, Lancet Commission on Climate Change determined that climate change
is the biggest global health threat of the 21st century [13]. The commission concluded that
most health impacts will be adverse and will occur via direct exposures (e.g., heat waves,
extreme weather events) but also by signiﬁcantly impacting basic social determinants of
health. The commission further identiﬁed certain populations as “vulnerable” to climate
change such as the elderly, children, individuals with underlying health conditions and
populations in LMICs. Focusing on children more speciﬁcally, a scoping review published
after the end date of our search [14], identiﬁed the range of childhood conditions exac-
erbated by direct and indirect effects of climate change, for example, vector-, water- and
food-borne infectious diseases and mental health problems.
We conducted a scoping review of published review articles with the aim of assessing
the strength of evidence for the extent and mechanisms by which climate change and its
consequences differentially impact children in social groups within countries and in poorer
compared with richer countries and identify knowledge gaps. The main research questions
of the review were: What is the current state of knowledge on the impact of climate change
and its consequences on child health inequalities? What is the evidence that climate change
exacerbates child health inequalities? Is the evidence reported in the reviews supported
by quantitative data comparing the impact of climate change and its consequences on
different social groups within countries and/or between countries? Are the mechanisms by
which climate change and its consequences may exacerbate and/or generate child health
inequalities addressed in the included reviews?
2. Materials and Methods
We conducted a scoping review, guided by the methodology outlined by Arksey and
O’Malley [15], to examine the main research questions listed above. The population of
interest is children aged 0–18 years, the key concepts are climate change and inequali-
ties in child health and the contexts of interest are social groups within countries, low-
and middle-income countries (LMICs) compared to high-income countries (HICs) and
geographical locations.
The scoping review approach was favored as it allows researchers to, “identify, re-
trieve and summarize literature relevant to a particular topic for the purpose of identifying
the key concepts underpinning a research area and the main sources and types of evidence
available” [15] ( p. 14). In recent years there have been advancements in the methodol-
ogy [16] and a rapid increase in its application due to its wide range of uses [17]. According
to Arksey and O’Malley, two features of a scoping review contrast it from a systematic
review. First, where systematic reviews have a well-deﬁned question and may examine a
particular type of study design, a scoping review addresses broader questions, allowing
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
3 of 17
the researcher to identify and map key concepts of an area, and may include various
study designs. Second, unlike a systematic review, a scoping review does not include
a quality assessment of the included studies. Arksey and O’Malley further suggest that
scoping reviews may have one of two purposes, either to serve as a ﬁrst step towards a
subsequent systematic review or research project, or it may be conceived as a method in its
own right, to identify key concepts or gaps in the existing evidence and deﬁne the main
sources of evidence.
Building on the scoping review approach, we chose to scope reviews rather than
primary literature. The ”review of reviews” approach is efﬁcient when aiming to capture
how a concept is described in the literature and to map out emerging themes, rather
than relying on primary literature. Examples of applications are in the examination
of loneliness and social isolation interventions for older adults [18] and mental health
promotion interventions [19].
In partnership with the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, we led a review of peer-
reviewed reviews indexed in ﬁve databases (Medline, Embase, Web of Science, PsycInfo,
Proquest). The search was conducted from database start dates to 21 January 2021. Search
terms used for all databases are shown in the supplementary ﬁles (Tables S1 and S2). We
deﬁned climate change in broad terms. Examples of search terms were “Climate Change”,
“Greenhouse Effect”, “Hot Temperature”, “Natural disaster”, “Heat wave” and “Wildﬁre”.
The population of interest was children and young people less than 18 years old which
we deﬁned according to the age deﬁnition of the UN Convention of the Child [20]. We
considered a range of health conditions, including physical ailments, infectious diseases
and mental health conditions. Mental health was deﬁned broadly with the inclusion of
disorders as well as psychological consequences of climate change. We deﬁned inequalities
in relation to speciﬁc indicators such as socioeconomic status, income, wealth, poverty,
ethnicity and indigenous status within and between countries. There were no limits on
years of publication nor languages.
The inclusion and exclusion criteria are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Inclusion Criteria:
Reviews, published to present, reviewing the literature on the relationship of climate change and
its consequences and inequality in health outcomes among children aged 0–18 years. Reviews
must report on the effect of climate change and its consequences on one or more health outcomes
in different social groups and/or between high and low/middle income countries or
geographical locations
Exclusion Criteria:
Reviews of literature on the general effects of climate change on child health without addressing
the differential effect on social groups, different countries or geographical locations
Reviews of literature on health outcomes among children and adults which do not report child
health outcomes separately
Reviews of literature on the effects of climate change on disadvantaged populations without
reference to health effects on children aged 0–18 years
Our search strategy retrieved 743 reviews, with 520 reviews after deduplication.
Though not retrieved in the initial search, one additional review article was included for its
relevance to the topic and objective. Title and abstract evaluations rendered 114 reviews
eligible for full-text analysis. Papers for full text analysis were allocated to groups of
two researchers, each to undertake review and reach consensus. Disagreements were
resolved by whole group decision. Following this, 91 articles were excluded leaving
23 reviews that were included for synthesis. The results of the review process are presented
as a PRISMA ﬂow diagram in Figure 1. In addition, we followed the charting approach
described by Arksey and O’Malley and Levac et al. to synthesize results and comment on
emerging themes.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
4 of 17
Figure 1. PRISMA Flow Diagram.
The primary theme of interest in the scoping review was the association of climate
change and child health inequalities reported in three speciﬁc dimensions; within country
differences by social groups, between country differences (LMICs vs. HICs), and living in
speciﬁc geographical locations. For within country inequalities, we sought evidence that
reviews identiﬁed the impact of climate change on children in social groups by relative
advantage versus disadvantage. For between country inequalities, we explored how
reviews reported and explained the differential impact of climate change on child health
in LMICs compared with HICs. Geographical location was explored as a dimension of
inequality as children living in these areas were identiﬁed as at increased risk of adverse
health outcomes resulting from climate change. In all these dimensions of inequality, we
sought supporting quantitative and/or descriptive evidence of exacerbation of existing
child health inequalities by climate change and evidence of the mechanisms by which
climate change impacts child health inequalities. Deﬁnitions and descriptions of climate
change and of child health in the reviews were explored as secondary themes.
3. Results
3.1. Characteristics of the Studies
Of the included reviews, four were systematic reviews (Table 2) [21–24], three were
technical and commissioned reports (Table 3) [13,25,26] and 16 were narrative reviews, or
opinion pieces with substantive literature reviews (Table 4) [27–42]. All reviews and reports
were published in international peer-reviewed journals with the exception of the Assembly
of First Nations Report which was included as the challenges faced by indigenous children
and their families are under-represented in the literature. Sixteen reviews had a global
focus incorporating LMICs and HICs [13,23–25,27–32,34,35,37,39,40,42], four reviews had a
speciﬁc country focus (US [21], Canada [26,33], Cambodia [41]) and three reviews focused
on grouped nations of a speciﬁc world region (LMICs [22,24], Sub-Saharan Africa, North
America). Reviews were published from 2007 to 2020 and all were published in English.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
5 of 17
Table 2. Systematic reviews.
Authors
Journal
Research Question/Objective
Age of Study
Population(s)
Context
Types of
Climate Change
Child Health
Outcomes
Dimension of
Child Health
Inequity
Summary of Review Findings Reinequalities and Type of
Evidence (Quantitative and/ or Descriptive)
Benevolenza MA
and DeRigne
2018 [21]
J Human
Behavior Soc
Env
Evaluate and summarize the
research in peer-reviewed
literature that pertains to
climate change and natural
disasters acting as
destabilizing forces hampering
the mental and physical health
of vulnerable populations
0–18 years
US
Weather events;
hurricanes;
increase in
annual numbers
and intensity
Emotional and
cognitive health,
depression and
anxiety
Within country— low
v. high-income
households
Low-income households at increased risk of maternal stress
and child anxiety due to natural disasters compared with
high-income households. Descriptive evidence only.
Phalkey RK, et al.
2015 [22]
PNAS
Assess the scientiﬁc evidence
base for the impact of climate
change on childhood
undernutrition (particularly
stunting) in subsistence
farmers in low- and
middle-income countries.
0–5 years
LMICs
Weather events,
e.g., rainfall,
extreme weather
events
(ﬂoods/droughts),
seasonality, and
temperature
Childhood
undernutrition
(stunting)
Within
country—Low
household income,
low education
Geographic—semi-arid
conditions
Current evidence is limited but suggests a signiﬁcant link
between weather variables and stunting at household level
in LMICs. Agricultural, socioeconomic, and demographic
factors at the household and individual level play a
substantial role in mediating the nutritional impacts of
climate changes. Descriptive evidence only
Chersich et al.
2020 [23]
BMJ
Assess whether exposure to
high temperatures in
pregnancy is associated with
increased risk for preterm
birth, low birth weight, and
stillbirth.
Perinatal
Global *
Increased
temperatures,
heat waves
Preterm birth,
birth weight, and
stillbirths
Within country:
women in low SES,
low educated
groups.
Between
country—LMICs v.
HICs
Associations between temp and outcomes were largest
among women in lower SES groups, e.g., women in Korean
study with both
low education levels and low socioeconomic status
had a 1.1-fold increased hazard ratio of preterm birth
for each quartile increase in temperature, considerably
higher than that in other women in the study. Some evidence
suggested that pregnant women in low and middle income
countries were vulnerable to heat exposure throughout
pregnancy, whereas vulnerability among women in high
income countries was largely conﬁned to the last weeks of
pregnancy. Descriptive and quantitative evidence.
Lieber et al.
2020 [24]
Global Public
Health
Summarize evidence on
relationship between climate
change and malnutrition
0–18 years
Global *
Droughts,
ﬂooding and
climate
variability (CC
proxies)
Malnutrition
(wasting, stunting,
or underweight)
Within
country—low v.
high maternal
education; low v.
high SES
Pooled estimates for wasting (OR 1.46 (95%CI 1.05,2.04)) and
underweight (OR 1.46 (95%CI1.01,2.11) prevalence
associated with drought
Factors moderating impact of drought/ﬂooding on
malnutrition: 4 included studies found that higher levels of
maternal education were protective against the development
of malnutrition in children. and 5 studies found poorest
families were most vulnerable to malnutrition.
Descriptive and quantitative evidence
* Global = LMICs and HICs.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
6 of 17
Table 3. Technical and commissioned reports.
Authors
Journal
Research Question/Objective
Age of Study
Population(s)
Context
Types of
Climate
Change
Child Health Outcomes
Dimension of Child Health
Inequity
Summary of Review Findings Reinequalities and Type
of Evidence (Quantitative and/ or Descriptive)
Costello A, et al.
2009 [13]
The Lancet
Deﬁne climate change, deﬁne
changes to patterns of illnesses
that are affected by
climate change.
0–18 years
Global *
Rising tem-
peratures
Malnutrition, diarrhoea,
infectious diseases,
respiratory diseases,
vector-borne diseases,
deaths.
Within country—Poor
children in urban areas,
those in traditional societies
and children of subsistence
farmers
Between country— LMICs v.
HICs
Geographic—coastal
populations
Climate change will have its greatest effect on those who
have the least access to the world’s resources and who
have contributed least to its cause. Without mitigation
and adaptation, it will increase health inequity
especially through negative effects on the social
determinants of health in the poorest communities.
Descriptive and quantitative evidence
Ahdoot S, and
Pacheco. 2015 [25]
Pediatrics
To educate pediatricians on
the current knowledge of
climate change and its effects
on children’s health.
0–18 years
Global *
Rising tem-
peratures
Heat-related mortality and
morbidity including
preterm birth; asthma and
respiratory disease;
infectious diseases; death
and injury due to extreme
weather events;
malnutrition; diarrhoea
Within country—poorest
households
Between country—LMICs v,
HICs
Children in the world’s poorest countries, where the
disease burden is already disproportionately high, are
most affected by climate change. Studies have projected
a 7% to 20% increase in the number
of malnourished children globally
because of climate change primarily in LMICs.
Descriptive and quantitative evidence
Assembly of First
Nations (AFN)
2008 [26]
AFN Reports
Describe the vulnerability of
FN children to environmental
hazards including
climate change
0–18 years
Canada
Rising tem-
peratures
Infant mortality, respiratory
infections, skin conditions,
diarrhoea, mental health
problems
Within country—First
Nation children
Poverty, poor housing, over-crowding among ﬁrst
nation families Descriptive evidence
* Global = LMICs and HICs.
Table 4. Narrative reviews and opinion pieces.
Authors
Journal
Research Question/Objective
Age of Study
Population(S)
Context
Types of Climate
Change
Child Health
Outcomes
Dimension of Child Health
Inequity
Summary of Review Findings Reinequalities and Type
of Evidence (Quantitative and/or Descriptive)
Clemens et al.
2020 [27]
European Child
and Adolescent
Psychiatry
Summarize evidence on direct
and indirect pathways of
climate change on child and
adolescent mental health
0–18 years
Global *
Warming and natural
disasters
Mental health,
post-traumatic
stress disorder
Within country—Adversity.
Low income and
disadvantaged families
Between countries—low
HDI V. high HDI
Geographic—low
lying areas
Mental health
consequences of climate change will particularly affect
children and adolescents
who are already disadvantaged—those with low or no
social support by families and peers, those from families
with low socio-economic status.
Socioeconomic factors such as, the human development
index of the country are relevant
pointing towards more severe effects in poverty on
internal or external disorder or distress
Descriptive evidence
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
7 of 17
Table 4. Cont.
Authors
Journal
Research Question/Objective
Age of Study
Population(S)
Context
Types of Climate
Change
Child Health
Outcomes
Dimension of Child Health
Inequity
Summary of Review Findings Reinequalities and Type
of Evidence (Quantitative and/or Descriptive)
Ebi and Paulson,
2007. [28]
Pediatr Clin N
Am
Review the key issues related
to climate change, then
reviews climate-sensitive
health determinants and
outcomes in the context of
children’s health, considers
intergenerational equity issues
0–18 years
Global *
Rising temperatures;
changes in global
precipitation
patterns, rising sea
levels, and increases
in the frequency and
intensity of some
extreme weather
events
Mortality from
heat events,
infectious disease
(e.g., Lyme
disease),
malnutrition,
respiratory
illnesses
Within country—Wealth
and income distribution as
key determinants of health
impact of climate change
Between
country—LMICs v. HICs
Particular vulnerability of children (vs adults) to the
adverse effects of climate change interact with poverty,
race and class.
Also introduces concept of ‘intergenerational inequity’,
where children are considered to be a particularly
disadvantaged population, not only on account of their
present age-related vulnerability, but also because the
higher likelihood of experiencing severe effects of
climate change in the future.
Descriptive evidence
Goldhagen JL,
et al. 2019 [29]
The Lancet
Child and
Adolesc
Present a global agenda for
child health and wellbeing as
a blueprint for the practice of
pediatrics and child health in
the domains of clinical care,
systems development, and
policy formulation.
0–18 years
Global *
Climate change is
increasing the
frequency and
intensity of extreme
weather events,
Malaria, dengue,
lepto-spirosis, and
leishmaniosis;
children’s stress,
anxiety,
depression, and
post-traumatic
stress disorder;
Diarrhea, stunting,
vector-borne
disease
Between and within country,
climate change as one of
determinants of child health,
basics human needs, and
children’s rights
A disproportionate effect of climate change on the rights
of speciﬁc groups of vulnerable children, including
displaced children, children living in poverty,
indigenous
children, and children with developmental disabilities.
Descriptive evidence
Kistin et al.
2010 [30]
Arch Dis Child
To evaluate how the rise in
temperature, precipitation,
droughts, ﬂoods, glacier melt
and sea levels resulting from
human-induced climate
change is affecting the
quantity, quality and ﬂow of
water resources worldwide
and impacting child health
through dangerous effects on
water supply and sanitation,
food production and human
migration.
0–18 years
Global *
Floods, storms,
drought and extreme
weather events
Water related
illnesses -
malnutrition,
diarrhea,
Between
country—LMICs vs. HICs
Climate change estimate to cause approximately
5.5 million of disability adjusted life years in 2000, and
predictions of an increase of 16% of malnutrition, 5%
diarrhea and 17% of malaria by 2030. The risk will
potentially be highest on the poorest and more
vulnerable populations particularly among children
Descriptive evidence
Levy and Patz,
2015. [31]
Ann Global
Health.
Present overview of climate
change manifestation and
populations who will be most
affected
0–18 years;
general
population
Global *
Heat waves, heavy
precipitation events,
intensity and
duration of droughts,
intense tropical
cyclone, sea level
Heat-related
disorders,
vector-borne
diseases,
foodborne and
waterborne
diseases,
respiratory and
allergic disorders,
malnutrition,
collective violence,
and mental health
problems.
Within country—poor and
marginalized in poor
countries. Minority status
Between
country— HICs vs. LMICs
Geographic—low altitude
Climate change disproportionately affects poor
countries and poor people within these countries.
Socioeconomic, demographic, health-related,
geographic, and other risk factors make subgroups
within populations more vulnerable to the adverse
health effects of climate change. Adverse health effects
caused by climate change likely to be heavily
concentrated in low-income populations at low latitudes
Descriptive evidence
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
8 of 17
Table 4. Cont.
Authors
Journal
Research Question/Objective
Age of Study
Population(S)
Context
Types of Climate
Change
Child Health
Outcomes
Dimension of Child Health
Inequity
Summary of Review Findings Reinequalities and Type
of Evidence (Quantitative and/or Descriptive)
McMichael 2014
[32]
Children
Provide overview of climate
change manifestation and
populations that will be most
affected
0–18 years
Global *
Heat waves, heavy
precipitation events,
intensity and
duration of droughts,
intense tropical
cyclone, sea level
Under-nutrition
and stunting;
diarrheal, parasitic,
vector-borne and
other infectious
diseases; and
allergic respiratory
disorders [3,4].
Social and
emotional
development
Between country—LMICs v.
HICs - initially LMICs most
affected but increasingly
effects will be felt across the
world
Children in lower-income countries, especially in
tropical areas, will suffer the most from climate change
due to further ampliﬁcation of health risks by persistent
poverty, crowded living, lack of access to clean water,
poor sanitation and inadequate healthcare systems
Includes a summary of direct risks, less direct
(secondary risks) and tertiary (diffuse) health
consequences
Descriptive evidence
Parkes M, et al.
2010 [33]
Int Public
Health J.
Review key social
determinants of health for
Indigenous children and
ultimately argue for a broader
SDoH framework for
Indigenous children.
0–18 years
Canada
Warming, loss of
permafrost,
degradation of
habitats and species
Ecological and
socio-cultural
determinants of
health of First
Nations children.
Speciﬁc outcomes
not stated
Within country—Indigenous
status with associated
poverty, disadvantage,
Geographic—vul-nerability
in their homelands
Indigenous children have poor health outcomes and
weaker material infrastructure than non-Indigenous
children; argue also that full wellbeing of Indigenous
children is more broadly deﬁned
Descriptive evidence
Patz JA, et al. 2007
[34]
Eco Health
Provide overview of climate
change manifestation and
populations who will be most
affected
0–18 years;
general
population;
focus on
under 5 child
population
Global *
Undeﬁned; rising
temperatures
Malaria,
malnutrition
diarrhea
Between
countries—LMICs vs. HICs
Existing health disparities for many people already
struggling with poverty, malnutrition, and the effects of
natural disasters will be exacerbated by climate change.
Countries producing fewer emissions at higher risk from
climate change. Example of malaria-endemic countries
Descriptive evidence
Philipsborn RP
and Chan, 2018.
[35]
Pediatrics
Overview of climate change
manifestation and populations
who will be most affected
0–18 years
Global *
Warming, rising sea
levels, increasing
natural disasters, air
pollution,
desertiﬁcation
Heat stress,
malnutrition,
diarrhea,
vector-borne
diseases, allergies
Within
country—Poor vs. non-poor.
Between
country—LMICs vs. HICs
Children in resource-limited settings - households,
countries - most affected by respiratory-related illness.
These children also most vulnerable to droughts and
ﬂooding—magnifying existing disparities in social
determinants of health
Descriptive evidence
Rylander C, et al.
2013 [36]
Global Health
Review how climate change
will increase the risk of infant
and maternal mortality, birth
complications, and poorer
reproductive health, especially
in tropical, developing
countries.
Pregnant
women, the
developing
fetus, and
young
children
LMICs
Global warming and
extreme weather
events
Infant mortality,
preterm birth, low
birth weight,
malnutrition and
stunting, diarrhea,
malaria,
Between
country—LMICs v. HICs;
tropical most vulnerable
Climate change will have a substantial impact on the
health and survival of the next generation among
already challenged populations through impact of
malnutrition on maternal health and pregnancy
outcomes
Descriptive evidence
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
9 of 17
Table 4. Cont.
Authors
Journal
Research Question/Objective
Age of Study
Population(S)
Context
Types of Climate
Change
Child Health
Outcomes
Dimension of Child Health
Inequity
Summary of Review Findings Reinequalities and Type
of Evidence (Quantitative and/or Descriptive)
Shefﬁeld and
Landrigan, [37]
Env Health
Perspect
Review the projected impacts
of climate change on children’s
health, the pathways involved
in these effects, and
prevention strategies.
Fetus and
0–18 years
Global *
Warming, extreme
weather events,
rising sea levels, air
pollution
Vector-borne
diseases such as
malaria and
dengue; increased
diarrheal and
respiratory disease;
increased
morbidity and
mortality from
extreme weather;
changed exposures
to toxic chemicals;
worsened poverty;
food and physical
insecurity; and
threats to human
habitation.
Heat-related
health effects for
which research is
emerging include
diminished school
performance,
increased rates of
pregnancy
complications, and
renal effects.
Within country—Poor,
disadvantaged children
Between countries—LMICs
V. HICs
The health impacts of global climate change are
expected to be widespread, geographically variable, and
profoundly inﬂuenced by preexisting social and
economic disparities. Stark variation in these outcomes
is evident by geographic region and socioeconomic
status, and these impacts will exacerbate health
disparities Increased morbidity and mortality,
vector-borne diseases, exposure to toxic chemical,
threats to human habitation. Heat-related health effects
and its relationship with school performance, increased
rates of pregnancy complications, and renal effects.
Descriptive evidence
Anderko et al.
2020 [38]
Pediatric
research
Provide an overview of
research exploring the impact
of climate change on
children’s health impacts, as
well as provide
recommendations for pediatric
research moving forward.
Fetal and
perinatal
periods and
0–18 years
Global *
Warming, extreme
weather events,
rising sea levels, air
pollution (CO2)
Asthma, allergies,
vector-borne
diseases,
malnutrition, low
birth weight,
post-traumatic
stress
Between
countries—LMICs vs. HICs
Children in low-income countries that already
experience a higher burden of disease and limited
capability to adapt are affected even more by climate
change. They are at high risk of vector-borne disease,
malnutrition, worse perinatal outcomes, mental health,
decreased school attendance
Descriptive evidence
Wooldridge G and
Murthy S. 2020
[39]
Frontiers in
Pediatrics
Explore impact of climate
change on pediatric critical
care (PCC) and focusing on
the health care sector’s impact
on CC
0–18 years
Global *
Warming, extreme
weather events
Critical illness
related to heat
stress,
vector-borne
disease, diarrhea,
malnutrition,
pneumonia
Between
countries—LMICs vs. HICs
Climate change will increase burden of pediatric critical
illness and disruption to health care systems and LMICs
least able to cope.
Descriptive evidence
Olson and Metz
2020 [40]
Faculty Reviews
Explore relationship between
prenatal maternal stress
(PNMS) and paternal stress,
allostatic load, and the
degradation of the
environment on individuals.
Fetal,
perinatal and
0–18 years
Global *
Warming, air and
land pollution,
extreme weather
events, rising sea
levels, ocean
acidiﬁcation
Preterm birth, low
birth weight,
mental health
problems
Within country—Poor and
indigenous newborns and
children.
Between
countries—LMICs vs. HICs
Climate crisis as a health threat multiplier - ampliﬁes the
health inequities of the most at-risk populations and
individuals. It accelerates the increase in allostatic load
of those at risk leading to increased pre-term-birth, and
developmental, and mental health problems
Descriptive evidence
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
10 of 17
Table 4. Cont.
Authors
Journal
Research Question/Objective
Age of Study
Population(S)
Context
Types of Climate
Change
Child Health
Outcomes
Dimension of Child Health
Inequity
Summary of Review Findings Reinequalities and Type
of Evidence (Quantitative and/or Descriptive)
Davies GI, et al.
2014 [41]
Int J Env Res
Public Health
Characterize the impact of
weather events in Cambodia
0–18 years;
general
population
Cambodia
Weather events,
especially ﬂoods,
droughts and
typhoons; Climate
change is predicted
to increase the
frequency and
intensity of such
events.
Water-borne
diseases, primarily
diarrheal disease
(i.e., viral and
bacterial
gastroenteritis,
dysentery, cholera
and other
manifestations of
gastrointestinal
infections)
Within country—Poverty,
lower level of education
Geographic—Pop-ulations
in low-lying areas
Pre-existing vulnerabilities and low adaptive capacity of
the population relate to widespread poverty, poor health
and
malnutrition; settlements in ﬂood-prone areas; reliance
on agriculture for food security and income; low
education levels; inadequate warning systems; and
resource, governance and public health limitations
Descriptive and quantitative evidence
Bennett and Friel
2014 [42]
Children
To address the ampliﬁcation of
existing child health inequities
by climate change
0–18 years
Global *
Global heating,
extreme weather
events, changing
precipitation patterns
Heat stress,
vector-borne
diseases and
undernutrition
Within country—poorest
and socially-disadvantaged
Between
country—LMICs v. HICs
The burden of climate change-related ill-health will fall
heavily on the world’s poorest and
socially-disadvantaged children, who already have poor
survival rates and low life expectancies due to issues
including poverty, endemic disease, undernutrition,
inadequate living conditions and socio-economic
disadvantage.
Descriptive evidence
* Global = LMICs and HICs.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
11 of 17
3.2. Child Health Inequalities
3.2.1. Within Country Inequalities
Within country inequalities in child health related to climate change were reported in
16 reviews [13,21–24,26–29,31,33,35,37,40–42]. All reviews included descriptive evidence
and ﬁve included quantitative evidence [13,23–25,41]. Compared with more advantaged
groups, children in poor, low income, low educated, socioeconomically marginalized
households and those in indigenous and traditional societies, were identiﬁed as more likely
to suffer consequences of climate change. Bennett and Friel [42] concluded that climate
change acts as an ampliﬁer of existing inequities with the result that the world’s poorest
and socially-disadvantaged children will bear the greatest burden of climate change-related
ill-health. Chersich et al. [23] reported that Korean women with both low education
levels and low socioeconomic status had a 1.1-fold increased hazard ratio of preterm
birth for each quartile increase in temperature compared with more socioeconomically
advantaged women. Ahdoot and Pacheco [25] stated that the world’s poorest children are
up to 10 times more likely to be affected by climate change associated weather disasters
compared to children in higher-income families due to limited material and ﬁnancial
resources. Following ﬂoods in 2011, Cambodian children from households with poor
sanitation and untreated drinking water as well as having a mother who lacked education
experienced higher rates of diarrhea than households with treated water, soap and more
highly educated mothers [41]. Lieber et al. [24] quantify the moderating effects of low
socioeconomic status (−0.6) and high maternal education (+0.9) on childhood malnutrition
although the exact metric used is not stated.
Four of the 13 included articles in Benevolenza and DeRigne’s systematic review [21]
discussed the negative impact of climate change, speciﬁcally increased frequency and
severity of hurricanes, on low-resourced/low-income parents and children. The authors
found that children from low-income families and families led by single mothers are likely
to suffer from more adverse mental, emotional and physical health problems than their
more advantaged peers although, as the authors acknowledge, there was an absence, in all
included studies, of statistics comparing disadvantaged with advantaged populations.
3.2.2. Between Country Inequalities
Between country inequalities, comparing LMICs with HICs, were reported in 16 reviews
[13,23–25,27,31,32,34–36,38–40]. All reported descriptive evidence and three reported quan-
titative evidence [13,23,25]. Ahdoot and Pacheco [25] reported climate change will increase
the diarrheal disease burden leading to an estimated 48,000 additional deaths attributable
to diarrheal disease in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa by 2030. In African populations, loss
of healthy life years is predicted to be 500 times greater than in European populations as
a result of climate change with devastating effects on African children’s life chances [13].
Anderko et al. [38] identify food insecurity as a consequence of extreme weather events and
changes in temperature and precipitation patterns damaging and destroying crops, leading
to increased malnutrition especially in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. Philipsborn and
Chan [35], based on the projected increase in diarrhea, malaria and nutritional deficiencies
due to climate change, predict that LMICs will experience an increased burden of avoidable
death among under 5-year-old children. Rylander et al. [36] predict an increase in the risk of
pregnancy complications, preterm delivery and low birthweight due to the expected increase
in incidence of malaria, dengue fever and schistosomiasis among pregnant women in LMICs
due to climate change.
3.2.3. Geographic Inequality
The differential impact of climate change on child health was also deﬁned along
geographic lines [28,30,31,41]. Kistin et al. [30] discussed an increasing risk of ﬂooding
and water scarcity as a result of increasing temperatures, earlier thawing of snowpack
and glaciers melting among communities in mountainous regions. Levy and Patz [31]
highlighted climate change threats to coastal regions from rising sea levels. Another study
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
12 of 17
found that children living in usually cooler climates will begin to become more vulnerable
to climate change related illnesses and infections, such as Lyme disease and Dengue [28].
3.2.4. Intergenerational Inequity
An additional dimension of inequality affecting children was identiﬁed by Ebi and
Paulson [28] who deﬁned ‘intergenerational inequity’, where children are considered
to be a particularly disadvantaged population, not only because of physiological and
developmental vulnerability, but also because their higher likelihood of experiencing
severe effects of climate change in the future. McMichael [32] suggests that children will
inevitably be exposed to adverse health effects for a greater portion of their lives than
adults and will suffer the consequences of actions in which they have played little or no
part. As such, the particular vulnerability of children to the detrimental effects of climate
change may be regarded, not only as a result of young age, but also as a cohort effect.
3.3. Explanatory Mechanisms
Bennett and Friel [42] demonstrate how differential access to protective factors deter-
mined by family ﬁnancial and social resources ensure that the child from a high-income
family is less likely to be exposed to the worst effects of heat, ﬂooding and other conse-
quences of extreme weather events. As vector-borne diseases become more prevalent as
a result of climate change, poor and disadvantaged children are at increased risk due to
lifelong poverty, persistent malnutrition, insanitary living conditions and lack of preventive
health measures.
The increased impact of climate change on child health in LMICs is attributed in the
reviews to factors such as low levels of maternal education and poor water sanitation, poor
infrastructure (e.g., air quality control, pollution control), weak economy, as well as poor
political leadership and democratic institutions. Some reviews characterized LMICs as
having a “double burden” of climate change based on their higher exposure to extreme
weather events and on their limited capacity to mitigate the negative effects of climate
change due to scarce structural economic and political resources [13,22,32,35,39].
A number of reviews postulated ‘direct’ effects and ‘indirect’ effects of climate change
on child health [24,25,27,32]. Direct effects are the immediate impacts that climate change
will have on children, while indirect effects are the impacts that climate change will have
on important social determinants of health for children with downstream effects on child
health. For example, the reduction in water supply following a severe weather event due to
climate change will impact the food supply which can lead to childhood malnutrition and
stunting over time. McMichael [32] further suggests that there are diffuse or ‘tertiary’ effects
of climate change, which are further downstream effects such as physical displacement,
impaired recreational facilities and limited opportunities for children.
3.4. Climate Change
We identiﬁed the variation in how climate change was deﬁned across included
reviews as a secondary theme. Although deﬁnitions varied, all are recognized as cli-
mate change and/or its consequences in the IPCC report [11]. The majority of reviews
(14 reviews) discussed climate change as a gradual increase in planetary ambient tempera-
ture leading to increases in extreme weather events and summarized their respective health
effects [13,26–29,31,32,34–40]. Few reviews explicitly deﬁned and examined a speciﬁc fea-
ture of climate change. Nine reviews considered discrete weather events that are associated
with climate change: increasing hurricane severity and frequency [21], increasing air pollu-
tion [25], weather events impacting droughts, ﬂoods, rainfalls [22,24,30,31,41,42], and heat
waves [23,31,42]. However, the relationship between speciﬁc weather events and climate
change was not always clear and at times minimized in some of the reviews [21,28].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
13 of 17
3.5. Childhood and Child Health
An additional secondary theme to emerge from the reviews was how childhood and
child health were deﬁned. Most reviews included all ages from birth to 18, while others
focused on children less than 5 years of age [22,34,36] or the antenatal and/or perinatal
periods [23,36–38,40]. Reviews emphasized children’s vulnerability to the health effects of
climate change, compared to adults, due to their incomplete physiological and cognitive
development, as well as their dependence on parents and/or caregivers [29,36–38] and
their higher exposure to air, food and water per unit body weight [27,39].
Multipleadversehealthconditionswerediscussedinthereviews: maln-utrition[24,30,31,37–39],
malnutrition with associated stunting and increased susceptibility to infection [22,32], vector-
borne diseases [13,25,28–32,35,37], respiratory diseases [13,26,28,31,32,37,39], diarrhea mainly
caused by water-borne diseases [13,28,30,41], perinatal health such as gestational age and birth
weight [23,36,38,40], and mortality [28,35]. Only three reviews explicitly considered child mental
health and cognitive development [21,27,40], where anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder and
learning disruptions due to displacements were studied. Finally, two reviews focused on indige-
nous children in Canada considered dimensions of spiritual health, which significantly broadened
the definition of child health compared to other reviews [26,33].
4. Discussion
This scoping review of reviews identiﬁes the current level of knowledge and gaps in
the literature on the effect of climate change on child health inequalities. Figure 2 presents
a graphical representation of the ﬁndings of the scoping review.
Figure 2. Relationship between climate change and child health inequalities.
While inequalities in child health within and/or between countries or geographical
regions are touched upon in all the included reviews, few reviews have inequalities as
their primary focus. We found descriptive evidence of the differential impact of climate
change on children in social groups by relative advantage versus disadvantage within
countries and in LMICs compared with HICs; however, quantitative evidence comparing
advantaged and disadvantaged children was limited.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
14 of 17
Our ﬁndings suggest that although inequalities in child health due to climate change
are recognized, the literature remains descriptive. For example, Benevolenza and De-
Rigne [21] describe the greater impact on the health of low-income households of ﬂooding
and infrastructure destruction resulting from hurricanes compared with high-income
households. However, as the authors acknowledge, none of the studies they reviewed in-
cluded quantitative evidence of the differential impact. Data on direct consequences of the
ﬂooding caused by hurricanes, such as differential hospital admission rates for diarrheal
disease by household income among children exposed to the ﬂooding, would provide a
better measure of the extent to which hurricanes exacerbate child health inequality.
Understanding the mechanisms by which climate change may exacerbate child
health inequalities is key to interventions to minimize its effects. Identiﬁcation of spe-
ciﬁc pathways from climate change to child health inequalities using Bennett and Friel’s
approach [42] is likely to inform interventions to modify ampliﬁcation of inequalities by
climate change. The urgent need for interventions to mitigate the effects of climate change
is illustrated by the recent IPCC report [11] and echoed in the editorials published in
200 medical journals calling for emergency action to limit global temperature increases,
restore biodiversity, and protect health [43]. Our scoping review has identiﬁed the limited
capacity of LMICs to mitigate the negative effects of climate change due to scarce structural
economic and political resources and, as demanded by the medical journal editorials [43],
enhanced interventions by high income countries will be necessary to promote and fund
mitigation and adaptation in LMICs, including improving the resilience of health systems.
Our review ﬁnds that much of the literature examines child physical health and
infectious diseases, with little focus on child mental health and cognitive development.
Most literature is focused on younger children, in particular less than 5 years of age.
Children in these age groups are more vulnerable due to their incomplete physiological
and cognitive development, but older children are more susceptible to climate change
related anxiety.
The strengths of this scoping review of reviews include the development of a robust
search strategy based on agreed protocol, as well as a structured screening and selection
process based on consensus among the authors. In addition, the scoping review approach
enabled us to reach a broad understanding of the state of knowledge and research activity
in the area of child health inequalities and climate change. Following the recommendations
of Arksey and O’Malley, we are conﬁdent that our ﬁndings can encourage a subsequent
systematic review on this topic. Finally, our review had a lot of breadth and depth by
assessing the impact of climate change globally.
Several limitations should be taken into account. The scoping review methodology
precludes assessment of study quality in order to avoid focus on a hierarchy of evidence
at the expense of breadth of evidence in an under-researched ﬁeld. Establishing causal
associations between climate change and inequalities in children’s health was not possible
from existing evidence. The impact of climate change is dynamic with various exposures
acting over long periods of time and few of the included reviews accounted for these
aspects, except for those that emphasized “indirect” mechanisms. However, in the studies
analyzed, a consistent, plausible relationship has been presented.
The review has identiﬁed knowledge gaps, including limited quantitative evidence of
the impact of climate change across socioeconomic groups and between countries, limited
examination and understanding of the mechanisms by which climate change exacerbates
child health inequalities and minimal focus on the effect of climate change on child health
inequalities for older children and on mental health. A program of research to address these
gaps will require the measurement of the impact of climate change on child health across
socioeconomic groups in deﬁned populations in different settings and between countries
and subnational regions. Existing socio-demographic surveys, such as the Demographic
and Health Surveys (DHS) (Available online: https://dhsprogram.com/ (accessed on
8 October 2021)) and other national and regional surveys, could be modiﬁed to include
relevant data.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
15 of 17
Data quality must be considered to improve the validity of results. While maintaining
policy and research focus on the most vulnerable children in poor and low resourced
families and children in LMICs, it must also be recognized that more children are becom-
ing increasingly vulnerable through various climate patterns. The implications of the
relationship of climate change to social determinants of health for policy and research
should be explored further. The interactions between social determinants of health and
climate change are considered as indirect effects in some reviews [24,25,27,32] and climate
change has been characterized as a social determinant of health [44]. Further work should
explore how climate change acts both as a social determinant of health and an ampliﬁer
of other social determinants to increase child health inequalities, as suggested by Bennett
and Friel [42].
5. Conclusions
The ﬁndings of the scoping review of reviews allow us to provide answers to the
research questions we set out to address. There was agreement across the reviews that
children, particularly poor children, and those in LMICs, are vulnerable to climate change;
however, the current state of knowledge of the impact of climate change on child health
inequalities is weak. Despite general acknowledgement in the included reviews of the
likelihood that climate change will exacerbate child health inequalities, the reported ev-
idence was marginal with little in-depth examination of this issue. There was a paucity
of quantitative data comparing children across social groups and countries to support the
evidence for the impact of climate change on child health inequalities and mechanisms by
which climate change generates child health inequalities warrant further exploration. Our
ﬁndings indicate the need for an enhanced program of research to address the knowledge
gaps and provide evidence for effective interventions to mitigate climate change’s impact
on child health inequalities. Further investigation of geographical and intergenerational
inequality is also warranted.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/10
.3390/ijerph182010896/s1, Tables S1 and S2: Search Terms from Scoping Review.
Author Contributions: N.S. convened the research group from members of the International Network
for Research in Inequalities in Child Health (INRICH). All authors contributed to the conceptual-
ization and design of the review. A.H. and K.G. created the search strategy in collaboration with
librarians at Karolinska Institute and screened the titles and then the abstracts identiﬁed by the
search. All authors participated in the assessment of full-text articles for eligibility and selection of
articles for inclusion. E.A. prepared the initial draft of the paper, N.S. prepared subsequent drafts
with contributions from all authors. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: The APC was funded by Stockholm University Library.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge the search and technical support from Gun Brit
Knutssön at the Karolinska Institute and Helen Roberts for her suggestions in the early stages of
this work.
Conﬂicts of Interest: Author IC is on the Editorial Board of IJERPH. All other authors declare no
conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
WHO Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Closing the Gap in a Generation: Health Equity Through Action on the Social
Determinants of Health. Final Report of the Commission on Social Determinants of Health; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2008.
2.
Spencer, N.; Raman, S.; O’Hare, B.; Tamburlini, G. Addressing inequities in child health and development: Towards social justice.
BMJ Paediatr. Open 2019, 3, e000503. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
16 of 17
3.
UNICEF. Progress for Children No.11. Beyond Averages: Learning from the MDGs; UNICEF: New York, NY, USA, 2015.
4.
da Silva, I.C.M.; França, G.V.; Barros, A.J.; Amouzou, A.; Krasevec, J.; Victora, C. Socioeconomic Inequalities Persist Despite
Declining Stunting Prevalence in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. J. Nutr. 2018, 148, 254–258. [CrossRef]
5.
Yaya, S.; Bishwajit, G. Burden of Acute Respiratory Infections Among Under-Five Children in Relation to Household Wealth and
Socioeconomic Status in Bangladesh. Trop. Med. Infect. Dis. 2019, 4, 36. [CrossRef]
6.
Pinzón-Rondón, A.M.; Zárate-Ardila, C.; Hoyos-Martínez, A.; Ruiz-Sternberg, Á.M.; Velez-Van-Meerbeke, A. Country character-
istics and acute diarrhea in children from developing nations: A multilevel study. BMC Public Health 2015, 15, 811. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
7.
Njau, J.D.; Stephenson, R.; Menon, M.; Kachur, S.P.; A McFarland, D. Exploring the impact of targeted distribution of free bed
nets on households bed net ownership, socio-economic disparities and childhood malaria infection rates: Analysis of national
malaria survey data from three sub-Saharan Africa countries. Malar. J. 2013, 12, 245. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Hajat, A.; Hsia, C.; O’Neill, M.S. Socioeconomic Disparities and Air Pollution Exposure: A Global Review. Curr. Environ. Health
Rep. 2015, 2, 440–450. [CrossRef]
9.
Pollard, C.M.; Booth, S. Food Insecurity and Hunger in Rich Countries—It Is Time for Action against Inequality. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 1804. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Harker, L. Chance of a Lifetime: Impact of Bad Housing on Children’s Lives; Shelter: London, UK, 2006.
11.
Masson-Delmotte, V.; Zhai, P.; Pirani, A.; Connors, S.L.; Péan, C.; Berger, S.; Caud, N.; Chen, Y.; Goldfarb, L.; Gomis, M.I.;
et al. (Eds.) Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2021.
12.
McMichael, A.J.; Campbell-Lendrum, D.H.; Corvalan, C.F.; Ebi, K.L.; Githeko, A.; Scheraga, J.D.; Woodward, A. Climate Change
and Human Health: Risks and Responses; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2003.
13.
Costello, A.; Abbas, M.; Allen, A.; Ball, S.; Bell, S.; Bellamy, R.; Friel, S.; Groce, N.; Johnson, A.; Kett, M.; et al. Managing the
health effects of climate change: Lancet and University College London Institute for Global Health Commission. Lancet 2009, 373,
1693–1733. [CrossRef]
14.
Helldén, D.; Andersson, C.; Nilsson, M.; Ebi, K.L.; Friberg, P.; Alfvén, T. Climate change and child health: A scoping review and
an expanded conceptual framework. Lancet Planet. Health 2021, 5, e164–e175. [CrossRef]
15.
Arksey, H.; O’Malley, L. Scoping studies: Towards a methodological framework. Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 2005, 8, 19–32.
[CrossRef]
16.
Levac, D.; Colquhoun, H.; O’Brien, K.K. Scoping studies: Advancing the methodology. Implement. Sci. 2010, 5, 69. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
17.
Munn, Z.; Peters, M.D.J.; Stern, C.; Tufanaru, C.; McArthur, A.; Aromataris, E. Systematic review or scoping review? Guidance
for authors when choosing between a systematic or scoping review approach. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 2018, 18, 143. [CrossRef]
18.
Fakoya, O.A.; McCorry, N.K.; Donnelly, M. Loneliness and social isolation interventions for older adults: A scoping review of
reviews. BMC Public Health 2020, 20, 129. [CrossRef]
19.
Enns, J.E.; Holmqvist, M.; Wener, P.; Halas, G.; Rothney, J.; Schultz, A.; Goertzen, L.; Katz, A. Mapping interventions that promote
mental health in the general population: A scoping review of reviews. Prev. Med. 2016, 87, 70–80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
OHCHR. Convention on the Rights of the Child 1990. Available online: https://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/
crc.aspx (accessed on 16 June 2021).
21.
Benevolenza, M.A.; DeRigne, L. The impact of climate change and natural disasters on vulnerable populations: A systematic
review of literature. J. Hum. Behav. Soc. Environ. 2019, 29, 266–281. [CrossRef]
22.
Phalkey, R.K.; Aranda-Jan, C.; Marx, S.; Höﬂe, B.; Sauerborn, R. Systematic review of current efforts to quantify the impacts of
climate change on undernutrition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112, E4522–E4529. [CrossRef]
23.
Chersich, M.F.; Pham, M.D.; Areal, A.; Haghighi, M.M.; Manyuchi, A.; Swift, C.P.; Wernecke, B.; Robinson, M.; Hetem, R.;
Boeckmann, M.; et al. Associations between high temperatures in pregnancy and risk of preterm birth, low birth weight, and
stillbirths: Systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2020, 371, m3811. [CrossRef]
24.
Lieber, M.; Chin-Hong, P.; Kelly, K.; Dandu, M.; Weiser, S.D. A systematic review and meta-analysis assessing the impact of
droughts, ﬂooding, and climate variability on malnutrition. Glob. Public Health 2020, 1, 1–15. [CrossRef]
25.
Ahdoot, S.; Pacheco, S.E.; The Council on Environmental Health Global. Climate Change and Children’s Health. Pediatrics 2015,
136, e1468–e1484. [CrossRef]
26.
Assembly of First Nations. The Health of First Nations Children n.d.:28. Available online: https://www.afn.ca/uploads/ﬁles/
rp-discussion_paper_re_childrens_health_and_the_environment.pdf (accessed on 25 November 2019).
27.
Clemens, V.; Von Hirschhausen, E.; Fegert, J.M. Report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change: Implications for the
mental health policy of children and adolescents in Europe—A scoping review. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 2020, 1, 1–13.
[CrossRef]
28.
Ebi, K.L.; Paulson, J.A. Climate Change and Children. Pediatr. Clin. North Am. 2007, 54, 213–226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Goldhagen, J.L.; Shenoda, S.; Oberg, C.; Mercer, R.; Kadir, A.; Raman, S.; Waterston, T.; Spencer, N.J. Rights, justice, and equity:
A global agenda for child health and wellbeing. Lancet Child Adolesc. Health 2020, 4, 80–90. [CrossRef]
30.
Kistin, E.J.; Fogarty, J.; Pokrasso, R.S.; McCally, M.; McCornick, P.G. Climate change, water resources and child health. Arch. Dis.
Child. 2010, 95, 545–549. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 10896
17 of 17
31.
Levy, B.S.; Patz, J.A. Climate Change, Human Rights, and Social Justice. Ann. Glob. Health 2015, 81, 310–322. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
McMichael, A.J. Climate Change and Children: Health Risks of Abatement Inaction, Health Gains from Action. Children 2014, 1,
99–106. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Parkes, M.; de Leeuw, S.; Greenwood, M. Warming Up to the Embodied Context of First Nations Health: A Critical Intervention
into and Analysis of Health and Climate Change Research. Int. Public Health J. 2010, 2, 477–485.
34.
Patz, J.A.; Gibbs, H.K.; Foley, J.A.; Rogers, J.V.; Smith, K.R. Climate Change and Global Health: Quantifying a Growing Ethical
Crisis. EcoHealth 2007, 4, 397–405. [CrossRef]
35.
Philipsborn, R.P.; Chan, K. Climate Change and Global Child Health. Pediatrics 2018, 141, 10–14. [CrossRef]
36.
Rylander, C.; Odland, J.; Øyvind; Sandanger, T.M. Climate change and the potential effects on maternal and pregnancy outcomes:
An assessment of the most vulnerable–The mother, fetus, and newborn child. Glob. Health Action 2013, 6, 19538. [CrossRef]
37.
Shefﬁeld, P.E.; Landrigan, P.J. Global Climate Change and Children’s Health: Threats and Strategies for Prevention. Environ.
Health Perspect. 2011, 119, 291–298. [CrossRef]
38.
Anderko, L.; Chalupka, S.; Du, M.; Hauptman, M. Climate changes reproductive and children’s health: A review of risks,
exposures, and impacts. Pediatr. Res. 2019, 87, 414–419. [CrossRef]
39.
Wooldridge, G.; Murthy, S. Pediatric Critical Care and the Climate Emergency: Our Responsibilities and a Call for Change. Front.
Pediatr. 2020, 8, 472. [CrossRef]
40.
Olson, D.M.; Metz, G.A. Climate change is a major stressor causing poor pregnancy outcomes and child development.
F1000Research 2020, 9, 1222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Davies, G.I.; McIver, L.; Kim, Y.; Hashizume, M.; Iddings, S.; Chan, V. Water-Borne Diseases and Extreme Weather Events in
Cambodia: Review of Impacts and Implications of Climate Change. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2015, 12, 191–213. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
42.
Bennett, C.M.; Friel, S. Impacts of Climate Change on Inequities in Child Health. Children 2014, 1, 461–473. [CrossRef]
43.
Atwoli, L.; Baqui, A.H.; Benﬁeld, T.; Bosurgi, R.; Godlee, F.; Hancocks, S.; Horton, R.; Laybourn-Langton, L.; Monteiro, C.A.;
Norman, I.; et al. Call for emergency action to limit global temperature increases, restore biodiversity, and protect health. J. Health
Popul. Nutr. 2021, 40, 39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Ragavan, M.I.; Marcil, L.; Garg, A. Climate Change as a Social Determinant of Health. Pediatrics 2020, 145, 1–5. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
