International  Journal  of
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Review
The Climate Change, Food Security and Human
Health Nexus in Canada: A Framework to Protect
Population Health
Rebekka Schnitter 1,* and Peter Berry 1,2
1
Climate Change and Innovation Bureau, Health Canada, 269 Laurier Ave. W, Ottawa, ON K1A 0P8, Canada
2
Department of Geography and Environmental Management, University of Waterloo, 200 University,
Avenue W, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
*
Correspondence: rebekka.schnitter@canada.ca; Tel.: +1-613-960-4505
Received: 29 May 2019; Accepted: 13 July 2019; Published: 16 July 2019


Abstract: Climate change impacts on the Canadian food system pose risks to human health.
Little attention has been paid to the climate change, food security, and human health nexus, resulting
in a number of knowledge gaps regarding food system components that are most vulnerable to
climate change. The lack of understanding of key dynamics and possible future impacts challenges
the ability of public health oﬃcials and partners in other sectors to prepare Canadians for future
health risks. A series of literature reviews were conducted to establish the relationship between
climate change, food security, and human health, and to identify vulnerabilities within the Canadian
food system. Evidence suggests that key activities within the food system are vulnerable to climate
change. The pathways in which climate change impacts travel through the food system and aﬀect the
critical dimensions of food security to inﬂuence human health outcomes are complex. Climate-related
disruptions in the food system can indirectly impact human health by diminishing food security,
which is a key determinant of health. Human health may also be directly aﬀected by the physical
eﬀects of climate change on the food system, primarily related to the impacts on nutrition and
foodborne illnesses. In this study, we propose a novel analytical framework to study and respond to
the climate change, food security, and human health nexus. This work is intended to help public
health oﬃcials, researchers, and relevant stakeholders investigate and understand current and future
risks, and inform adaptation eﬀorts to protect the health of Canadians.
Keywords: food security; food systems; food insecurity; health; climate change; framework
1. Introduction
It is well established that slow- and rapid-onset climate change eﬀects will cause adverse impacts
on natural and human systems. Health risks associated with extreme weather and climate events have
already been observed, and are increasing globally and in Canada. For example, in 2003, a heat wave in
Europe resulted in over 70,000 deaths [1]; ﬂooding in High River, Alberta, in 2013 resulted in a number
of adverse mental health outcomes [2]; and Lyme disease cases increased by over 1300% from 2009 to
2017 in Canada [3]. The impacts of climate change will vary across the country, as will demographic,
socio-economic, infrastructural, institutional capacity, and health system resiliency. Thus, there will
be regional variation in terms of the strength and severity of associated health impacts. Indirect and
direct eﬀects of climate change such as temperature extremes, extreme weather events, air pollution,
infectious diseases transmitted by vectors, stratospheric ozone depletion, and contamination of food
and water [4,5] are associated with health risks that are of signiﬁcant concern in Canada.
The impacts of a changing climate will have direct and indirect eﬀects on global and domestic
food systems [6,7]. Recent scientiﬁc evidence has led to increased concern about the possible impacts
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531; doi:10.3390/ijerph16142531
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
2 of 16
of climate change on food security. In its ﬁfth assessment report, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) indicated that climate change would have signiﬁcant eﬀects on food in the
near-to-medium term [8]. On a global level, it has been suggested that climate change impacts on
undernutrition constitute this century’s greatest threat to health [9]. An examination of 30 of the
most vulnerable countries to climate change impacts on undernutrition found that the number of
undernourished people increased by approximately 6%, from 398 million people in 1990 to 422 million
people in 2016 [9].
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that without adaptation,
climate change will result in 7.5 million more cases of stunted children by 2030 and 10.1 million by
2050 [10]. Furthermore, an additional 4.8 million cases of undernutrition in children under 5 years
of age is projected by 2050 due to climate change [11]. Currently, world hunger is on the rise and
climate-related shocks have exacerbated this trend [12]. Extreme weather events were a major driver
of the drastic increase in the number of people facing crisis level food insecurity in 2015 (~80 million
people) and 2016 (~108 million people) [13].
Evidence suggests that climate change is impacting food security in Canada, particularly in
northern and Indigenous communities [4,14]. Observed climate impacts related to reduced duration
and thickness of sea and lake ice, thawing permafrost, more unpredictable weather, freezing rain and
wildﬁres, shorter winter seasons, and hotter summers can threaten food safety and security, for example,
by challenging hunting and gathering activities and traditional food storage practices [14,15].
Climate change impacts are also contributing to a change in the abundance and geographic distribution
of populations of traditionally harvested species, such as caribou [4,14]. In Manitoba, many of the
province’s 25 northern communities have experienced supply shortages of healthy food products due
to warming conditions resulting in deteriorating ice roads [16].
The pathways in which climate change impacts travel through the food system and aﬀect the
critical dimensions of food security to inﬂuence human health outcomes are complex. Some pathways
are understood well, while others have many knowledge gaps. Climate-related disruptions in the food
system can indirectly impact human health by diminishing food security, which is a key determinant
of health. Human health may also be directly aﬀected by the physical eﬀects of climate change on the
food system, primarily through pathways of food safety and nutrition.
In Canada, little attention has been paid to this relationship in climate change research, resulting
in a number of knowledge gaps regarding components of the food system most vulnerable to climate
change, current and future impacts in Canada from warming of the climate [4], and the most eﬀective
strategies for adapting. This lack of understanding of the key dynamics and possible future impacts
challenges the ability of public health oﬃcials and partners in other sectors to prepare Canadians for
future risks to health.
The relationship between climate change, the food system, food security, and human health is
dynamic and multi-sectoral. This creates conceptualization diﬃculties in recognizing vulnerabilities.
The factors leading to health outcomes interact in complex systems that need to be understood.
Challenges therefore exist in describing, measuring, and projecting future health risks associated with
climate change impacts on food security [17].
To address these challenges, this paper presents a novel analytical framework to study and
respond to the climate change, food security, and human health nexus. Current levels of food insecurity
in Canada are presented, along with evidence of impacts on health and wellbeing. The framework is
then presented, highlighting the complex and multi-sectoral relationships between climate change,
food security, and human health. Examples of the Canadian food system’s components that may be
vulnerable to disruption by climate change impacts are identiﬁed, followed by analysis of how key
pathways of vulnerability can inﬂuence food security and human health.
A number of frameworks exist that demonstrate the relationships between climate change and
food security or food systems [6,15,18,19], and to some extent, health or nutrition [20–22]. However,
to the best of our knowledge, there is no existing framework that conceptualizes the nexus of climate
change, food security, and human health in Canada. The proposed framework is intended to help
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
3 of 16
public health oﬃcials, researchers, and relevant stakeholders investigate and understand current and
future risks to food security from climate change, to inform eﬀorts to prepare Canadians and their
communities for possible health impacts.
2. Background: Food Security in Canada
In 1996, Canada adopted the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food
Summit Plan of Action. The declaration indicates that food security exists when “. . . all people, at all
times, have physical, social and economic access to suﬃcient, safe and nutritious food which meets
their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life” [23]. Three primary dimensions
must be met in order for food security to exist: availability, accessibility, and utilization of food [24].
Food availability concerns the “physical presence of food” [25] and includes the quantity, quality,
and type of food available to individuals. Food production, food distribution, and the exchange
of food are key elements of food availability [18,19,24,26]. The ability of individuals to acquire
the quantity, quality, and type of food necessary for an active and healthy life is captured in the
dimension of food accessibility. Key elements of food accessibility include aﬀordability, allocation,
and preference [19,24,25]. Food utilization refers to the ability to eﬀectively use, consume, and beneﬁt
from food. Food safety as well as the nutritional and social value of food, are considered to be key
elements of food utilization [18,19,24].
The temporal stability of the three dimensions described above is also required to achieve food
security [18]. Indeed, food insecurity refers to “both the inability to secure an adequate diet today
and the risk of being unable to do so in the future” [14], indicating the importance of the long-term
stability of food availability, accessibility, and utilization. Food insecurity exists when any of the primary
dimensions are unmet.
In Canada, approximately 12.6% of households were considered to be food insecure in 2011–2012,
representing 2.8 million adults and 1.5 million children under the age of 18 [27]. These rates are an
underestimation given that people living on First Nations reserves, full time members of the Canadian
Forces, individuals in prisons or care facilities, and the homeless population are not included in
this data [27,28]. As illustrated in Figure 1, rates of food insecurity are signiﬁcantly higher in the
Canadian North.
There is much evidence that suggests linkages and associations between food security and health
conditions. For example, issues related to birth outcomes and maternal health, child development,
chronic diseases, mental health, and emotional wellbeing, and increases in health care costs may
emerge in food insecure households (Table 1) [29].
A nutritious diet, a key aspect of food security [30], plays a signiﬁcant role in an individual’s health
and wellbeing. In Canada, an unhealthy diet is considered a leading risk for death and disability [31]
and is associated with an economic burden of approximately 13.8 billion dollars a year in Canada [32].
Increased consumption of processed foods and beverages that contribute to excess intake of sodium,
sugars, and saturated fats and insuﬃcient intakes of whole grains, nuts and seeds, fruits, and vegetables
are key drivers of unhealthy diets [31]. The Global Burden of Disease Study reported that in 2016,
dietary risk factors resulted in more than 800,000 years of disability and the death of approximately
48,000 Canadians [33,34].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
4 of 16
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
35.0%
40.0%
45.0%
50.0%
Severe food insecurity
Moderate food insecurity
Marginal food insecurity
Figure 1. Percentage of households with food insecurity, by province or territory, Canada 2011–2012 [27].
Table 1.
Health and social challenges associated with food insecure households, adapted from
Li et al. [29].
Health Outcome Category
Health and Social Challenges Related to Food Insecurity
Birth Outcomes and
Maternal Health
Negative health impacts on both the mother and baby due to inadequate
nutrition during pregnancy
Increased risk of birth defects
Impacts on infant feeding behaviors and sustainability of breastfeeding
Child Development
Poorer general health among food insecure children
Impacts on growth and development in early life
Poorer academic outcomes and social skills compared to children who do not
experience food insecurity
Iron deﬁciency anemia linked to the subsequent development of a variety of
chronic conditions, including asthma and depression
Health Status and
Chronic Disease
Impacts on the quality and quantity of women’s food intake due to lower incomes
Higher levels of poor or fair self-rated health, diabetes, heart disease, high blood
pressure, food allergies and mental health outcomes
Barriers to chronic disease management, increasing the likelihood of adverse
outcomes
Mental Health and Emotional
Well-being
Impacts on social and mental well-being that can increase the likelihood of
depression, distress and social isolation
Child hunger leading to depression and suicidal symptoms in adolescence and
early adulthood
Economic costs
Increased health care costs associated with food insecurity
In Ontario, the annual healthcare costs were 23% higher for adults in marginally
food insecure households, 49% higher for those in moderately food insecure
households and 121% higher for those in severely food insecure households 1 [34]
Increased probability that adults will become high-cost users of health care
1 The study used data collected from 67,033 individuals aged 18–64 years in Ontario who participated in the
Canadian Community Health Survey in 2005, 2007/08, and 2009/10 to assess their household food insecurity status in
the 12 months before the survey interview. The authors linked this with administrative health care data to determine
direct health care costs for individuals during the same 12-month period [34].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
5 of 16
3. Methods
An analytical framework was developed to illustrate the complex relationship between climate
change impacts and the food system, and how this relationship inﬂuences food security and human
health in Canada. In order to appropriately capture the breadth of the climate change, food security,
human health nexus, and the nuances of the relationship, multiple literature searches were conducted.
The databases Medline and Embase were searched via Ovid between 2007 and September 2017.
To understand the possible impacts of climate change on the Canadian food system and the subsequent
implications for human health, four search strategies were developed in consultation with a research
librarian at Health Canada’s Health Library: (1) climate change + food security + Canada, (2) climate
change + food security + health, (3) food security + health + Canada, and (4) food systems + climate
change + food security.
An additional literature search was conducted between 2000 and April 2019 to identify frameworks
that conceptualize the relationship between climate change, food security, and human health. Embase
and Medline were searched via Ovid. Another simpliﬁed keyword search was conducted in AGRICOLA,
BIOSIS Previews, Food Science and Technology Abstracts, Global Health, PsycINFO, and Social Policy
and Practice.
4. Results
4.1. The Climate Change, Food Security, and Human Health Nexus Framework
Few studies and frameworks exist to increase our understanding of the possible impacts of climate
change on food security and human health. Commonly, researchers examine the impacts of climate
change on food systems or food security, but rarely are implications for human health included in
the analysis. Thus, there is no comprehensive or common approach to studying the climate change,
food security, and human health nexus, resulting in important knowledge gaps that hinder eﬀective
adaptation eﬀorts.
The linkages and drivers between climate change, food security, and human health are presented
in a new framework (Figure 2). The framework illustrates the nexus from a food system perspective,
highlighting the direct and indirect pathways in which the physical impacts of climate change may work
through the food system to inﬂuence food security and, subsequently, human health. By identifying
the diﬀerent sectors of the food system, the framework demonstrates that a multi-sectoral approach is
necessary for eﬀective adaptation and resiliency building in response to climate change.
The following text provides an explanation of the main components of the framework. Table 2
summarizes potential vulnerabilities to key food system components from climate change impacts.
Given the limited literature available in a Canadian context, examples from international studies
are used where relevant. Evidence indicates that every component of the food system—production,
processing, distribution, preparation and consumption—is climate sensitive and can experience impacts
from climate change eﬀects. These impacts can cause disruption and challenges to critical activities of
the food system.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
6 of 16
 
Figure 2. Food security, climate change, and human health nexus framework.
4.2. Food Production
Food production is an essential component of the food system, it encompasses commercial
and non-commercial agriculture, livestock, ﬁsheries and aquaculture sectors, as well as the hunting,
ﬁshing and harvesting of traditional Indigenous foods. The food production sector is the starting
point of the food system, providing the raw ingredients for processing and consumption. Ultimately,
if the productivity of the food production sector declines, the availability and supply of food may be
challenged. This would have impacts on food security status and, subsequently, human health.
Climate conditions such as rainfall and temperature have a primary inﬂuence on food production
through impacts on water yields and ﬂows, which are often modulated by irrigation and other water
management techniques [17]. Other climate-related factors that can aﬀect food production, and hence
food security, include impacts on freshwater, biodiversity, soil degradation, ﬁsheries, and carbon
dioxide fertilization, with attendant impacts on nutritional food quality [35]. Some research suggests
that climate change may create opportunities for Canadian food production [8,36]. For example, some
regions in Canada may experience an increased growing season and lengthened outdoor feeding season
for livestock, which could positively aﬀect food production [36,37]. However, climate projections
suggest an increased risk of drought in some regions of Canada, including the Prairies and British
Columbia. In addition, future impacts from invasive pests and diseases, and transportation disruptions
could put pressures on Canadian food production [38]. On the global level, any positive eﬀects
resulting from a warming climate are expected to be signiﬁcantly outweighed by their adverse eﬀects
on the food system [39].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
7 of 16
4.3. Food Processing
Food processing involves the transformation of raw food inputs into food products that are used
in the preparation of meals or directly consumed by individuals. The food processing sector has a
direct link to human health as its operations include washing, sanitizing, and preparing food that is
safe for human consumption. Limited research has been conducted on climate change impacts to the
food processing sector, both globally and in the Canadian context. Existing evidence suggests that
climate change impacts may cause disruption to the stable supply of necessary resources, and inputs
for processing operations and extreme weather events can cause physical damage to processing
facilities [7,38,40,41]. This sector is an essential component of food security, supporting the key
dimensions of availability, accessibility, and utilization.
4.4. Food Distribution
The distribution of food is a critical component of food security as it links food products
to consumers, directly supporting the availability and accessibility dimensions of food security.
Climate change can disrupt food distribution networks through acute shocks such as extreme weather
events, as well as through creeping climatic changes [42]. A national climate change assessment
conducted on Canada’s transportation sector in 2016 concluded that climate change will aﬀect all
modes of transportation, across the country [42]. Challenges to transportation infrastructure can
undermine food security, and regions that are rural or remote—with a low capacity to produce and/or
store food products locally—may be particularly vulnerable. Urban transportation infrastructure and
public transportation systems, which are relied upon by many Canadians to access food distribution
sites, such as grocery stores and markets, are also vulnerable to climate change [42]. Individuals
that reside in food deserts—neighborhoods that are characterized by low income households and
are underserved in terms of food distribution sites and public transportation infrastructure [43]—are
particularly impacted by such disruptions.
4.5. Food Preparation and Consumption
The food preparation and consumption component of the food system directly supports the
utilization dimension of food security. Food utilization refers to the need for “available and accessible
food to fulﬁll the cultural, religious, health and nutrition needs of the population” [43]. This suggests
that food needs to be safe to consume, be prepared in a culturally appropriate manner, while also
providing adequate nutritional value in order for food security to exist.
Food safety and nutrition may be the pathways through which climate change impacts have
the most direct eﬀect on human health [20]. Nutrition may be challenged as climate change can
contribute to shifts in diet composition and diversity [14,44]. For example, country and traditional foods
provide important nutritional value and contribute to healthy diets for Indigenous populations [14,45].
In northern Indigenous communities in Canada, there has been an observed diet shift from country and
traditional foods, to market foods. Climate change impacts on the availability and quality of traditional
foods may contribute to this shift [14]. Market foods are often prepared, processed, and/or frozen,
while fresh foods such as fruits and vegetables are not always available [14,46]. Foods purchased
and consumed are often less nutritious and high in sodium, sugars, and fat, which may contribute to
various forms of malnutrition.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
8 of 16
Table 2. Potential vulnerabilities to key food system components from climate change impacts.
Food System Component
Climate Vulnerability
Production
Increasing temperature extremes and variability, and changes in
precipitation patterns and extreme weather events can cause damage to
agricultural crops, reduce productivity, and decrease yield [37–39,47,48]
In the Prairies, groundwater quality and quantity may be reduced as
summer rainfall decreases, which can increase irrigation needs for
agricultural crops [49]
Water resources will face increasing demand and competition from other
users (i.e., oil and gas industry) [49] as well as domestic demand [50],
causing further impacts on water availability
Sea level rise could cause inundation of agricultural lands in coastal regions,
damaging crops, and creating unsuitable conditions for agricultural
production and result in salt water intrusion of aquifers, reducing the
quality of irrigation water [38]
Increasing temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns may create
more favorable conditions for pests, invasive species and plant
diseases [36,37,48]
Rising temperatures and increased concentrations of atmospheric CO2 may
decrease the eﬀectiveness of some herbicides used for pest control [8]
Increasing ozone pollution, a by-product of fossil fuel combustion, can
inhibit photosynthesis in plants, reducing the quality and productivity of
the crop [37,48]
Temperature extremes can adversely impact livestock health and decrease
productivity [48]
Extreme weather events may reduce land available for livestock pasture and
foraging [36]
The distribution and productivity of natural and farmed ﬁsh will change as
ocean and freshwater temperatures and ocean acidiﬁcation increase [8,38]
Rising temperatures may create favorable conditions for aquatic disease and
invasive species [51]
Increasing temperatures and changing precipitation patterns are changing
the quality and distribution of populations of traditionally harvested
species in Canada (i.e., Caribou) [14]
Processing
Increasing temperatures and extreme temperature events may increase the
risk of food spoilage or contamination while in storage at processing
facilities [40]
Traditional food storage and preparation practices may be at risk, for
example, permafrost melt may have implications for the stability and safety
of traditional in-ground freezers used by Indigenous communities in the
Canadian North [14]
Reduced or variable water availability may challenge food processing
operations, which require signiﬁcant amounts of potable water [38]
The physical infrastructure of processing facilities may be damaged by
extreme weather events (i.e., ﬂooding) which can disrupt operations [40]
Extreme weather events may cause disruption to energy supplies, labor
availability and technological infrastructure critical to processing
operations [40]
Availability, quality, and the cost of raw materials and inputs may be
variable as a result of climate change impacts in the food production sector,
from both international and domestic sources [7,41]
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
9 of 16
Table 2. Cont.
Food System Component
Climate Vulnerability
Distribution
Extreme weather events can cause damage and disruption to transportation
infrastructure including road, rail, marine, and air transport infrastructure
as well as urban and public transportation systems [42]
Temperature extremes, permafrost melt, changes in precipitation patterns,
and freeze-thaw cycles can compromise the integrity of road, rail, marine,
and air transport infrastructure [42]
Extreme weather events can cause physical damage to distribution facilities
(i.e., grocery stores and food banks) and also disrupt energy supplies, labor
availability, and technological infrastructure critical for distribution site
operations [40,41]
Preparation and Consumption
Increasing temperatures, changes in precipitation patterns, and extreme
weather events can create favorable conditions for the transmission,
survival, and growth of many common foodborne pathogens [40,52,53]
Increasing temperatures may result in a rise of activities where food
preparation and consumption occurs outdoors (i.e., barbeques, picnics),
potentially increasing the risk of exposure to foodborne illness [40,54]
Extreme weather events may facilitate chemical contamination at food
production sites (i.e., contaminated ﬂood waters inundating agricultural
crops) [40]
An increase in ocean temperature and changes in salinity may increase the
risk of pathogens that are known to contaminate seafood (i.e.,
Vibrio) [40,52,55]
In the Canadian North, climate change may allow for the emergence of new
pathogens, viruses, and parasites that aﬀect wildlife harvested as part of
traditional and country food systems [14]
A changing climate may increase the need for the use of pesticides which
can lead to increased pesticide residues in the food supply [6]
Increasing concentrations of atmospheric CO2 can alter the nutritional
content of some agricultural crops, with studies indicating decreased
concentration of protein, iron, zinc, and key minerals [8,40,56,57]
As the framework suggests (Figure 2), proper functioning of the food system is integral for
food security by supporting the critical dimensions of availability, accessibility, and utilization of
food [24,26,58]. Given this relationship, food security may become compromised should any component
of the food system experience disruption or stress in such a way that limits the accessibility, availability,
and or proper utilization of food [26,46,58]. Ericksen [19] identiﬁes three primary elements for each of
the dimensions of food security, demonstrating the relationship with the food system. The primary
elements also have relevance for human health outcomes (Table 3).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
10 of 16
Table 3. Primary elements of food security and their critical dimensions [19].
Primary Elements of
Food Security
Critical Dimensions
Food availability
Production: how much and which types of food are available
Distribution: how food is made available (physically moved), in what form,
when, and to whom
Exchange: how much of the available food is obtained through exchange
mechanisms such as barter, trade, purchases, or loans
Food accessibility
Aﬀordability: the purchasing power of households or communities relative to
the price of food
Allocation: the economic, social, and political mechanisms governing when,
where, and how food can be accessed by consumers
Preference: social, religious, or cultural norms and values that inﬂuence
consumer demand for certain types of food
Food utilization
Nutritional value: how much of the daily requirements of calories, vitamins,
protein, and micronutrients are provided by the food people consume
Social value: the social, religious, and cultural functions and beneﬁts food
provides
Food safety: toxic contamination introduced during producing, processing,
and packaging, distribution or marketing food; and foodborne diseases
Canada is part of a global food system, exporting and importing raw and prepared food products
from other regions of the world [59]. Although the severity or magnitude of some risks caused by
climate change to Canada’s food system may be lower compared to other countries, the nature of
the global food system suggests that climate change impacts and risks in other regions can have
implications for Canadian food security, including food supply and food safety [6].
The framework highlights that the presence and strength of food security is inﬂuenced by a
number of diﬀerent factors, including social, political, environmental, and economic determinants [19].
Evidence suggests, however, that climate change is increasingly becoming a signiﬁcant stressor and
inﬂuence on food security, through its impact on the food system [58]. Furthermore, climate change is
a threat multiplier and can have impacts on the other factors that contribute to and inﬂuence food
security status.
The framework also acknowledges that the food system is a major source of greenhouse gas
emissions, and thus, an important driver of climate change [30,39]. It is estimated that a quarter of
global emissions are from food system operations and activities [60]. Furthermore, food systems are
resource intensive, requiring signiﬁcant water and energy inputs to sustain operations and activities.
Industrial food systems can also contribute to unsustainable land use and deforestation [30].
Traditional and country foods have long been established as an important “enabler of food
security and health” [14] for Indigenous communities and provide both spiritual and nutritional
value [14,61]. There are unique food security considerations that have not traditionally been included
in conceptualizations of western food systems and food security concepts [62]. While this framework
does include traditional and country foods and related activities in the diﬀerent components of the food
system, it is recognized that it may be limited in the extent to which it can appropriately capture the
exceptional elements and characteristics of Indigenous food security and food systems. The Council of
Canadian Academies developed a food security and sovereignty conceptual framework that reﬂects
the situation of Indigenous communities in Canada’s North, in the context of climate change [14].
5. Discussion
Greater understanding of the current impacts climate change is having on food security and
on health is needed along with projections of future risks to populations [4]. Much of the current
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
11 of 16
climate change and food security literature focuses on low-income countries [6,35]. Indeed, low-income
countries will be disproportionately impacted by climate change eﬀects, and will likely experience
more severe impacts to their domestic food systems, resulting in the exacerbation of existing challenges
of food insecurity and undernutrition. While high income countries like Canada generally have robust
food systems, with threats such as insuﬃcient food supply of minor concern, challenges, and stressors
related to climate change impacts still exist, particularly for certain populations and regions [4,6].
Despite the consensus that climate change will have signiﬁcant implications for global food
security, research to date has primarily concentrated on one aspect of food security: availability,
with a heavy focus on agricultural food production [58]. As a result, there is limited understanding
of the measurable impacts climate change will have on non-production components of the food
system [8]. Thus, many important aspects of food security are being overlooked both in domestic
and international climate change and health research, demonstrating the need for a comprehensive
conceptual framework.
While much of the existing Canadian research on climate change impacts on food security and
health is focused on communities north of 60 degrees latitude, knowledge gaps about impacts in
this region continue to exist. Furthermore, very little is known about the impacts and implications
for regions south of 60 degrees latitude, for Indigenous, rural, and remote communities, as well as
urban centers. Given these knowledge gaps, information about health outcomes that might result from
climate change impacts, and eﬀective adaptations in the food system, is limited.
The framework demonstrates that the climate change, food security, and health nexus represent
an interdisciplinary problem that requires cross-sectoral collaboration for development of eﬀective
adaptations—for example, stakeholders from transportation, agriculture, water, health, environmental
conservation, natural resources, urban planning, trade, social programs, and policy and regulations
all play a role in the food system. Food systems have many interdependent subsystems that operate
over diﬀerent time and spatial scales [22]. The disruption of one activity can impact other activities
in the system. The majority of existing research ignores the interdependency of the food system [58],
typically exploring subsectors of the food system in isolation from each other. The framework
supports interdisciplinary and systems research, and collaboration by conceptualizing key aspects of
interdependencies in the food system.
Increasingly, the public health sector is using climate change and health vulnerability and
adaptation assessments (V&As) to collect information on health risks associated with climate change
and develop adaptation and response strategies [63]. The possible impacts of climate change on food
security have not been widely explored in V&As within or outside of Canada. One study in 2018
that examined 34 assessments, supported by the WHO since 2013, found that all countries included
an examination of climate change impacts on vector-borne diseases, while 22 countries examined
water-borne diseases and only 15 investigated impacts on malnutrition [64].
In Canada, the 1998 assessment of health impacts of climate change did not explore the eﬀects of
climate change on food security, nor did an assessment in 2004 [65], but the 1998 study did recognize
this as a high priority knowledge gap [66]. Subsequent national climate change and health assessments
included examination of climate change impacts on food safety with some discussion of food insecurity
threats in northern Canadian communities [4,5].
On the local and regional levels, risks to food security have been identiﬁed in few V&As [54,67].
In 2018, a high-level vulnerability assessment of Toronto’s food system was conducted which explored
the impacts of three hypothetical extreme weather events. The assessment highlighted that extreme
weather events could impact food accessibility, distribution, and food safety [68].
The report
recommended developing neighborhood-level food system resiliency plans for urban centers to
address the unique needs of neighborhoods that may experience increased vulnerability during
extreme weather events. The ﬁndings of the assessment support the argument for a coordinated eﬀort
across the food system to address vulnerabilities.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
12 of 16
A food system resiliency assessment for the city of Baltimore also identiﬁed food system
vulnerabilities to climate change-related hazards, and the results of the report will inform the
development of a Food System Resilience Plan for the city [43]. There has yet to be a comprehensive
examination of climate change impacts on Canada’s food system at the national or local levels.
The proposed framework is scalable and could guide such studies, ensuring unique characteristics of
Canada are considered and key vulnerabilities are not overlooked.
Adaptation can be eﬀective in mitigating the impacts of climate change on health [69], and proven
interventions exist that can enhance food security, for example, by improving food safety and by
preventing or treating malnutrition [35]. However, actions taken by public health oﬃcials to prepare
for climate change impacts through for example, food access or food safety programs, will have
limited eﬀectiveness in reducing poor health outcomes if other major drivers of food insecurity are
not addressed. This could include appropriate measures by oﬃcials in other sectors, for example,
increasing the resilience of food production facilities and transportation systems.
At the global level an adaptation gap exists in eﬀorts to address impacts of climate change on food
insecurity and nutrition. Further eﬀorts to build the evidence base and to develop models that can
assist in quantifying the burden of disease related to malnutrition associated with weather extremes are
needed to ramp up eﬀorts to protect health [35]. Watts et al. [9] suggest that human interventions play
the predominant role in shaping the relationship between climate change, food insecurity, and health
impacts. The relationship of people to infrastructures and markets, for example, is a greater driver
of vulnerability to food insecurity than is exposure to climate-related hazards such as droughts and
ﬂoods [9]. Adaptation is therefore essential to prepare for the impacts of climate change.
The proposed framework highlights a number of important avenues of investigation related
to key climate drivers, factors mediated by human behavior that inﬂuence accessibility, utilization,
and availability of food and other determinants of poor health outcomes. This can aid researchers in
future studies of climate change impacts on food security and health, including the development of
health models and of early monitoring and warning systems of climate impacts on the food system.
Investigation of unique characteristics and diﬀerences in social, political, economic, and environmental
factors among urban, rural, coastal, northern, and Indigenous communities can elucidate important
vulnerabilities in food systems that can inform the development of eﬀective adaptations by health
sector decision makers and those in related sectors.
Consideration of social equity is also important when developing and implementing adaptation
actions. For example, Inuit participants of a workshop that focused on developing a strategic plan
for food security for the Inuvialuit Settlement Region, Northwest Territories, using the results of the
2007–2008 Inuit Health Survey, identiﬁed housing as a major concern and barrier to achieving food
security [70]. In order to store and prepare healthy foods, access to aﬀordable, adequate, and safe
housing was considered critical by the participants. Housing was not initially identiﬁed by the
researchers as an area of concern as it was not recognized in the health survey results [70]. Thus,
signaling the importance of studying food security and human health using an interdisciplinary,
comprehensive framework. Furthermore, engaging people most aﬀected empowers them to contribute
to robust responses and adaptation strategies. Future research on the climate change, food security,
and human health nexus, should therefore include considerations of social equity as well as Indigenous
knowledge, which contribute to the development of eﬀective responses and adaptation action.
6. Conclusions
The impacts of climate change on the Canadian food system work through complex pathways to
inﬂuence human health. There is a signiﬁcant need for a conceptual framework that fully captures
these relationships so that Canadians and their communities can prepare for future impacts.
The framework presented in this paper provides a comprehensive conceptualization of the climate
change, food security, and human health nexus, illustrating pathways of vulnerabilities and identifying
opportunities for intervention. Analyzing this nexus from a food system lens allows for a broad
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
13 of 16
understanding of food security, capturing the critical dimensions and highlighting vulnerabilities that
may be overlooked in the existing literature. The framework will be useful in guiding future research,
and can aid in the completion of climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments.
It can also inform the development and implementation of adaptation and resiliency building actions.
As highlighted in the framework, the food system is an interdependent system that requires
activities from numerous sectors in order to operate eﬀectively. Thus, a collaborative, multi-sectoral
response is critical in order to increase climate change resilience in the food system.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.S.; methodology, R.S.; writing—original draft preparation, R.S. and
P.B.; writing—review and editing, R.S. and P.B.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: We thank Robyn Hocking, MLIS (Health Library, Health Canada) for conducting the
literature searches.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Robine, J.M.; Cheung, S.L.; Le Roy, S.; Van Oyen, H.; Griﬃths, C.; Michel, J.P.; Herrmann, F.R. Death toll
exceeded 70,000 in Europe during the summer of 2003. C. R. Biol. 2008, 331, 171–178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Sahni, V.; Scott, A.N.; Beliveau, M.; Varughese, M.; Dover, D.C.; Talbot, J. Public health surveillance response
following the southern Alberta ﬂoods, 2013. Can. J. Public Health 2016, 107, 142–148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Government of Canada. Surveillance of Lyme Disease. Available online: https://www.canada.ca/en/public-
health/services/diseases/lyme-disease/surveillance-lyme-disease.html (accessed on 15 March 2019).
4.
Berry, P.; Clarke, K.; Fleury, M.; Parker, S. Human health. In Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives
on Impacts and Adaptation; Lemmen, D., Warren, F., Eds.; Government of Canada: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2014;
pp. 101–130, ISBN 978-1-100-24143-2.
5.
Health Canada. Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive
Capacity; Health Canada: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2008; ISBN 978-0-662-48365-6.
6.
Lake, I.R.; Hooper, L.; Abdelhamid, A.; Bentham, G.; Boxall, A.B.A.; Draper, A.; Fairweather-Tait, S.;
Hulme, M.; Hunter, P.R.; Nichols, G.; et al. Climate change and food security: Health impacts in developed
countries. Environ. Health Perspect. 2012, 120, 1520–1526. [CrossRef]
7.
Edwards, F.; Dixon, J.; Friel, S.; Hall, G.; Larsen, K.; Lockie, S.; Wood, B.; Lawrence, M.; Hanigan, I.;
Hogan, A.; et al. Climate change adaptation at the intersection of food and health. Asia Pac. J. Public Health
2011, 23, 91S–104S. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Porter, J.R.; Xie, L.; Challinor, A.J.; Cochrane, K.; Howden, S.M.; Iqbal, M.M.; Lobell, D.B.; Travasso, M.I. Food
security and food production systems. In Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A:
Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change; Field, B.C., Barros, V.R., Dokken, D.J., Mach, K.J., Mastrandrea, M.D., Bilir, T.E.,
Chatterjee, M., Ebi, K.L., Estrada, Y.O., Genova, R.C., et al., Eds.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,
UK, 2014; pp. 485–533, ISBN 978-1-107-64165-5.
9.
Watts, N.; Amann, M.; Ayeb-Karlsson, S.; Belesova, K.; Bouley, T.; Boykoﬀ, M.; Byass, P.; Cai, W.;
Campbell-Lendrum, D.; Chambers, J.; et al. The lancet countdown on health and climate change: From 25
years of inaction to a global transformation for public health. Lancet 2018, 391, 581–630. [CrossRef]
10.
WHO. Quantitative Risk Assessment of the Eﬀects of Climate Change on Selected Causes of Death, 2030s and 2050s;
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2014; ISBN 9789241507691.
11.
Sanchez Martinez, G.; Berry, P. The Adaptation Health Gap: A Global Overview. In The Adaptation Gap
Report; United Nations Environment Programme: Nairobi, Kenya, 2018; ISBN 978-92-807-3728-8.
12.
FAO; IFAD; UNICEF; WFP; WH. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World: Building Resilience
for Peace and Food Security; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations: Rome, Italy, 2017;
ISBN 978-92-5-109888-2.
13.
FSIN. Global Report on Food Crises 2017.
Food Security Information Network:
2017.
Available
online: https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp291271.pdf?_ga=2.252302985.
1615901461.1563215260-866744782.1563215260 (accessed on 25 June 2017).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
14 of 16
14.
CCA. Aboriginal Food Security in Northern Canada: An Assessment of the State of Knowledge; Council of Canadian
Academies: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2014; ISBN 978-1-926558-74-5.
15.
Ford, J.D. Vulnerability of Inuit food systems to food insecurity as a consequence of climate change: A case
study from Igloolik, Nunavut. Reg. Environ. Chang. 2009, 9, 83–100. [CrossRef]
16.
Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources. (2006): Climate Change Impacts on Ice, Winter Roads,
Access Trails, and Manitoba First Nations Study. Available online: http://www.yourcier.org/climate-change-
impacts-on-ice-winter-roads-access-trails-and-manitoba-ﬁrst-nations-2006.html (accessed on 10 April 2018).
17.
McMichael, A.; Woodward, A.; Muir, C. Climate Change and the Health of Nations: Famines, Fevers and the Fate
of Populations; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2017; ISBN 9780190262952.
18.
FAO. An Introduction to the Basic Concepts of Food Security. EC-FAO Food Security Programme: 2008.
Available online: http://www.fao.org/3/al936e/al936e00.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2017).
19.
Ericksen, P.J. Conceptualizing food systems for global environmental change research. Glob. Environ. Chang.
2008, 18, 234–245. [CrossRef]
20.
Aberman, N.; Tirado, C. Impacts of climate change on food utilization. In Global Environmental Change:
Handbook of Global Environmental Pollution; Freedman, B., Ed.; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2014;
Volume 1, pp. 717–724, ISBN 978-94-007-5784-4.
21.
Tuomisto, H.L.; Scheelbeek, P.; Chalabi, Z.; Green, R.; Smith, R.D.; Haines, A.; Dangour, A.D. Eﬀects of
environmental change on population nutrition and health: A comprehensive framework with a focus on
fruits and vegetables. Wellcome Open Res. 2017, 2, 21–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
James, S.W.; Friel, S. An integrated approach to identifying and characterising resilient urban food systems
to promote population health in a changing climate. Public Health Nutr. 2015, 18, 2498–2508. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
23.
FAO. Rome Declaration on World Food Security and World Food Summit Plan of Action. In Proceedings of
the World Food Summit, Rome, Italy, 13–17 November 1996.
24.
Ingram, J. A food systems approach to researching food security and its interactions with global environmental
change. Food Secur. 2011, 3, 417–431. [CrossRef]
25.
Burke, M.; Lobell, D. Climate eﬀects on food security: An overview. In Climate Change and Food Security:
Adapting Agriculture to a Warming World; Lobell, D., Burke, M., Eds.; Springer Science & Business Media:
Berlin, Germany, 2010; Volume 37, pp. 13–30, ISBN 978-90-481-2953-9.
26.
Gregory, P.J.; Ingram, J.S.I.; Brklacich, M. Climate change and food security. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.
2005, 360, 2139–2148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Tarasuk, V.; Mitchell, A.; Dachner, N. Household Food Insecurity in Canada, 2012; Research to Identify Policy
Options to Reduce Food Insecurity (PROOF): Toronto, ON, Canada, 2014.
28.
Jessiman-Perreault, G.; McIntyre, L. The household food insecurity gradient and potential reductions in
adverse population mental health outcomes in Canadian adults. SSM Popul. Health 2017, 3, 464–472.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Li, N.; Dachner, N.; Tarasuk, V.; Zhang, R.; Kurrein, M.; Harris, T.; Gustin, S.; Rasal, D. Priority Health Equity
Indicators for British Columbia: Household Food Insecurity Indicator Report; Provincial Health Services Authority
and PROOF: Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2016. Available online: https://proof.utoronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/
2016/08/1186-PHS-Priority-health-equity-indicators-WEB.pdf (accessed on 5 December 2018).
30.
Friel, S. Climate Change and the People’s Health; Krieger, N., Ed.; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA,
2019; ISBN 9780190492731.
31.
Bacon, S.L.; Campbell, N.R.C.; Raine, K.D.; Tsuyuki, R.T.; Khan, N.A.; Arango, M.; Kaczorowski, J. Canada’s
new Healthy Eating Startegy: Implications for health care professionals and call to action. J. Coll. Fam.
Physicians Can. 2019, 65, 393–398.
32.
Lieﬀers, J.R.L.; Ekwaru, J.P.; Ohinmaa, A.; Veugelers, P.J. The economic burden of not meeting food
recommendations in Canada: The cost of doing nothing. PLoS ONE 2018, 13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Burden of Disease Arrow Diagram; Institute for Health
Metrics and Evaluation: Seattle, WA, USA, 2016.
34.
Tarasuk, V.; Cheng, J.; de Oliveira, C.; Dachner, N.; Gundersen, C.; Kurdyak, P. Association between
household food insecurity and annual health care costs. CMAJ 2015, 187, E429–E436. [CrossRef]
35.
UNEP. The Adaptation Gap Report 2018; United Nations Environment Programme: Nairobi, Kenya, 2018.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
15 of 16
36.
AAFC. Impact of Climate Change on Canadian Agriculture. Available online: http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/science-
and-innovation/agricultural-practices/agriculture-and-climate/future-outlook/impact-of-climate-change-on-
canadian-agriculture/?id=1329321987305 (accessed on 25 August 2017).
37.
Gornall, J.; Betts, R.; Burke, E.; Clark, R.; Camp, J.; Willett, K.; Wiltshire, A. Implications of climate change
for agricultural productivity in the early twenty-ﬁrst century. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2010, 365,
2973–2989. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Campbell, I.D.; Durant, D.G.; Hunter, K.L.; Hyatt, K.D. Food production. In Canada in a Changing Climate:
Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation; Warren, F.J., Lemmen, D.S., Eds.; Government of Canada:
Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2014; pp. 99–134, ISBN 978-1-100-24143-2.
39.
Fanzo, J.; Davis, C.; McLaren, R.; Choufani, J. The eﬀect of climate change across food systems: Implications
for nutrition outcomes. Glob. Food Secur. 2018, 18, 12–19. [CrossRef]
40.
Ziska, L.; Crimmins, A.; Auclair, A.; DeGrasse, S.; Garofalo, J.F.; Khan, A.S.; Loladze, I.; Perez de Leon, A.A.;
Showler, A.; Thurston, J.; et al. Food safety, nutrition, and distribution. In The Impacts of Climate Change on
Human Health in the United States: A Scientiﬁc Assessment; U.S. Global Change Research Program: Washington,
DC, USA, 2016; p. 189, ISBN 978-0-16-093241-0.
41.
Wong, J.; Schuchard, R. Adapting to Climate Change: A Guide for the Food, Beverage and Agriculture
Industry. Business for Social Responsibility: 2011. Available online: https://www.bsr.org/reports/BSR_
Climate_Adaptation_Issue_Brief_Food_Bev_Ag2.pdf (accessed on 5 July 2018).
42.
Palko, K.; Lemmen, D. Climate Risks and Adaptation Practices for the Canadian Transportation Sector; Government
of Canada: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2017; ISBN 978-0-660-07680-5.
43.
Biehl, E.; Buzogany, S.; Huang, A.; Chodur, G.; Neﬀ, R. Baltimore Food System Resilience Advisory Report; Johns
Hopkins Centre for A Livable Future and Baltimore Oﬃce of Sustainability: Baltimore, MD, USA, 2017.
44.
Springmann, M.; Mason-D’Croz, D.; Robinson, S.; Garnett, T.; Godfray, H.C.J.; Gollin, D.; Rayner, M.;
Ballon, P.; Scarborough, P. Global and regional health eﬀects of future food production under climate change:
A modelling study. Lancet 2016, 387, 1937–1946. [CrossRef]
45.
Kuhnlein, H.V.; Receveur, O. Local cultural animal food contributes high levels of nutrients for arctic
Canadian indigenous adults and children. J. Nutr. 2007, 137, 1110–1114. [CrossRef]
46.
Beaumier, M.C.; Ford, J.D. Food insecurity among Inuit women exacerbated by socioeconomic stresses and
climate change. Can J. Public Health 2010, 101, 196–201.
47.
Easterling, W.E.; Aggarwal, P.K.; Batima, P.; Brander, K.M.; Erda, L.; Howden, S.M.; Morton, J.; Pingali, P.;
Soussana, J.F.; Tubiell, F.; et al. Food, ﬁbre and forest products. In Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change; Parry, M.L., Canziani, O.F., Palutikof, J.P., van der Linden, P.J., Hanson, C.E., Eds.;
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2007; ISBN 978 0521 70597-4.
48.
Butler, C.D. Food and water and climate change. In Global Environmental Change; Freedman, B., Ed.; Springer
Science & Business Media: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2014. [CrossRef]
49.
Sauchyn, D.; Kulshreshtha, S. Prairies. In From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007;
Lemmen, D., Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J., Bush, E., Eds.; Government of Canada: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2008;
ISBN 987-0-662-05176-3.
50.
Strzepek, K.; Boehlert, B. Competition for water for the food system. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2010, 365,
2927–2940. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Rahel, F.J.; Olden, J.D. Assessing the Eﬀects of Climate Change on Aquatic Invasive Species. Conserv. Biol.
2008, 22, 521–533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Jaykus, L.; Woolridge, M.; Michael Frank, J.; Miraglia, M.; McQuatters-Gollop, A.; Tirado, C.; Clarke, R.;
Friel, M. Climate Change: Implications for Food Safety; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations:
Rome, Italy, 2008.
53.
Kim, Y.S.; Park, K.H.; Chun, H.S.; Choi, C.; Bahk, G.J. Correlations between climatic conditions and foodborne
disease. Food Res. Int. 2015, 68, 24–30. [CrossRef]
54.
Levison, M.; Whelan, M.; Butler, A. A Changing Climate: Addressing Health Impacts and Vulnerabilities
due to Climate Change within Simcoe Muskoka. Simcoe-Muskoka District Health Unit: 2017. Available
online: http://www.simcoemuskokahealth.org/docs/default-source/topic-environment/smdhu-vulnerability-
assessment-2017-ﬁnale1e3e25f97be6bc38c2dﬀ0000a8dfd8.pdf?sfvrsn=0 (accessed on 13 May 2019).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2531
16 of 16
55.
Tirado, M.C.; Clarke, R.; Jaykus, L.A.; McQuatters-Gollop, A.; Frank, J.M. Climate change and food safety: A
review. Food Res. Int. 2010, 43, 1745–1765. [CrossRef]
56.
Myers, S.S.; Smith, M.R.; Guth, S.; Golden, C.D.; Vaitla, B.; Mueller, N.D.; Dangour, A.D.; Huybers, P.
Climate change and global food systems: Potential impacts on food security and undernutrition. Annu. Rev.
Public Health 2017, 38, 259–277. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Myers, S.S.; Zanobetti, A.; Kloog, I.; Huybers, P.; Leakey, A.D.B.; Bloom, A.J.; Carlisle, E.; Dietterich, L.H.;
Fitzgerald, G.; Hasegawa, T.; et al. Increasing CO2 threatens human nutrition. Nature 2014, 510, 139–142.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Nelson, M.; Zak, K.; Davine, T.; Pau, S. Climate Change and Food Systems Research: Current Trends and
Future Directions. Geogr. Compass 2016, 10, 414–428. [CrossRef]
59.
O’Riordan, J.; Karlsen, E.; Sandford, B.; Newman, L. Summary Report: Climate Change Adaptation and Canada’s
Crops and Food Supply; Simon Fraser University (ACT): Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2013.
60.
Pachauri, R.K.; Allen, M.R.; Barros, V.R.; Broome, J.; Cramer, W.; Christ, R.; Church, J.A.; Clarke, L.; Dahe, Q.;
Dasgupta, P. IPCC 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. In Contribution of Working Groups I, II and
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; IPCC: Geneva, Switzerland,
2014. Available online: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/SYR_AR5_FINAL_full.pdf (accessed
on 13 May 2019).
61.
Ford, J.D.; Smit, B.; Wandel, J.; Allurut, M.; Shappa, K.; Ittusarjuat, H.; Qrunnut, K. Climate change in the
arctic: Current and future vulnerability in two Inuit communities in Canada. Geogr. J. 2008, 174, 45–62.
[CrossRef]
62.
Power, E.M. Conceptualizing food security for aboriginal people in Canada. Can. J. Public Health 2008, 99,
95–97. [PubMed]
63.
Berry, P.; Enright, P.M.; Shumake-Guillemot, J.; Prats, E.V.; Campbell-Lendrum, D. Assessing Health
Vulnerabilities and Adaptation to Climate Change: A Review of International Progress. Int. J. Environ. Res.
Public Health 2018, 15, 2626. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
World Health Organization. Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment in Practice: An Evaluation; World Health
Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2018.
65.
Riedel, D. Human health and well-being. In Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation: A Canadian Perspective;
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., Eds.; Natural Resources Canada: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2004; ISBN 0-662-68019-7.
66.
Duncan, K.; Guidotti, T.; Cheng, W.; Naidoo, K.; Gibson, G.; Kalkstein, L.; Sheridan, S.; Waltner-Toews, D.;
MacEachern, S.; Last, J. Chapter 11: Health Sector. In Canada Country Study: Climate Impacts and Adaptation:
National Sectoral Volume; Koshida, G., Avis, W., Eds.; Environment Canada: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 1998.
67.
Berry, P.; Paterson, J.; Buse, C. Assessment of Vulnerability to the Health Impacts of Climate Change in
Middlesex-London. 2014. Available online: https://www.healthunit.com/climate-change (accessed on 13
May 2019).
68.
Zeuli, K.; Nijhuis, A.; Macfarlane, R.; Ridsdale, T. The impact of climate change on the food system in Toronto.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Smith, B.A.; Ruthman, T.; Sparling, E.; Auld, H.; Comer, N.; Young, I.; Lammerding, A.M.; Fazil, A. A risk
modeling framework to evaluate the impacts of climate change and adaptation on food and water safety.
Food Res. Int. 2014, 68, 78–85. [CrossRef]
70.
Fillion, M.; Laird, B.; Douglas, V.; Van Pelt, L.; Archie, D.; Chan, H.M. Development of a strategic plan for
food security and safety in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region, Canada. Int. J. Circumpolar Health 2014, 73,
25091. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
