International  Journal  of
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Review
Assessing Health Vulnerabilities and Adaptation to
Climate Change: A Review of International Progress
Peter Berry 1, Paddy M. Enright 1,*, Joy Shumake-Guillemot 2, Elena Villalobos Prats 3
and
Diarmid Campbell-Lendrum 3
1
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada; pberry@uwaterloo.ca
2
WMO/WHO Climate and Health Ofﬁce, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland; jshumake-guillemot@wmo.int
3
Climate Change and Health Unit, WHO, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland; villalobose@who.int (E.V.P.);
campbelllendrumd@who.int (D.C.-L.)
*
Correspondence: pmenright@uwaterloo.ca; Tel.: +1-613-954-6794
Received: 12 October 2018; Accepted: 14 November 2018; Published: 23 November 2018


Abstract: Climate change is increasing risks to human health and to the health systems that seek to
protect the safety and well-being of populations. Health authorities require information about current
associations between health outcomes and weather or climate, vulnerable populations, projections
of future risks and adaptation opportunities in order to reduce exposures, empower individuals to
take needed protective actions and build climate-resilient health systems. An increasing number of
health authorities from local to national levels seek this information by conducting climate change
and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments. While assessments can provide valuable
information to plan for climate change impacts, the results of many studies are not helping to build
the global evidence-base of knowledge in this area. They are also often not integrated into adaptation
decision making, sometimes because the health sector is not involved in climate change policy
making processes at the national level. Signiﬁcant barriers related to data accessibility, a limited
number of climate and health models, uncertainty in climate projections, and a lack of funding
and expertise, particularly in developing countries, challenge health authority efforts to conduct
rigorous assessments and apply the ﬁndings. This paper examines the evolution of climate change
and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments, including guidance developed for such projects,
the number of assessments that have been conducted globally and implementation of the ﬁndings to
support health adaptation action. Greater capacity building that facilitates assessments from local to
national scales will support collaborative efforts to protect health from current climate hazards and
future climate change. Health sector ofﬁcials will beneﬁt from additional resources and partnership
opportunities to ensure that evidence about climate change impacts on health is effectively translated
into needed actions to build health resilience.
Keywords: climate change and health; vulnerability assessment; adaptive capacity; adaptation;
climate resilient health systems
1. Introduction
Growing scientiﬁc evidence suggests that climate variability and change pose serious risks to
people living in developing and developed countries across the globe [1–4]. Extraordinary gains to
global population health achieved in recent decades are at risk of reversal due to the expected impacts
of climate change [2,5]. Countries that lack adaptive capacity, vulnerable populations (e.g., indigenous
peoples, people relying on agricultural livelihoods) and certain regions facing severe challenges, such
as small island developing states and the Arctic, are more vulnerable to its impacts [4,6]. The efforts of
countries to achieve key sustainable development goals (SDGs) under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626; doi:10.3390/ijerph15122626
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
2 of 25
Development are threatened by climate change (e.g., SDG 1—No poverty; SDG 2—End hunger; SDG
3—Good health and well-being; and SDG 6—Clean water and sanitation) [7]. For example, climate
change could result in 100 million more people living in extreme poverty [4].
Health authorities and researchers, from international to local levels, recognize the serious threats
to health that climate change poses and are taking protective measures to reduce current impacts
and future risks [8]. Evidence-based information about current and possible future risks to health,
vulnerable populations, and effective adaptation options is needed so as to prepare individuals and
communities for the health impacts of climate change [9,10]. This includes identiﬁcation of innovative
adaptations for use by public health ofﬁcials to understand and respond to more severe and possibly
compounding effects of future climate change, such as threats from tipping points and shock events
that are outside of the range of current experience [11].
Climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments (V&As) are an important
instrument and process to establish partnerships and obtain information for understanding and
addressing climate change-related risks [8]. They can also provide the knowledge needed to realize
potentially large health co-beneﬁts from well-designed adaptation and greenhouse gas mitigation
measures, thereby taking advantage of what the Lancet Commission on Climate and Health suggests
is the “ . . . greatest global health opportunity of the 21st century” [5] (p. 1).
This paper reviews the evolution of V&As as part of efforts by governments and experts to better
understand and respond to climate change risks to health. It provides information on the type of
guidance that has been developed for conducting V&As and summarizes national and subnational
assessments that have been conducted. The importance of assessments in helping to build the global
evidence-base of climate change impacts on health is highlighted along with observations on the
implementation of ﬁndings to support health adaptation action. Recommendations are then provided
about supporting future V&As, establishing local to global baselines of climate change health risks,
vulnerabilities and adaptation activities and applying the knowledge generated to protect the health
of populations.
2. Methods
To estimate the number of national V&As that have been conducted expert knowledge and
the records of the World Health Organization (WHO) were used. WHO sourced data consisted
of the results from the 2015 WHO Climate and Health Country Survey reported through the
WHO/United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Climate and Health
Country Proﬁles [12], the unpublished results of a WHO commissioned review of assessments, and
different reports from the WHO Regional Ofﬁces available online. The WHO Climate and Health
Country Survey collects global data on a suite of indicators measuring global progress on climate
change and health every two years. These indicators include the number of countries that have
conducted a V&A.
An additional semi-structured search of the Web of Science database revealed 190 articles with
possible discussion of completed national-level climate change and health V&As. Of these 190 articles,
110 underwent abstract review, and 39 received a full-text review for references to national-level studies.
The review results supported the WHO data. A review of the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) database revealed a further 3 V&As that have been conducted—in Uganda,
Senegal and Mozambique—with the assistance of USAID’s African and Latin American Resilience to
Climate Change (ARCC) Program.
3. Background
3.1. Climate Change and Health
The global evidence base of information about climate change impacts on health has grown
over the last few decades through the publication of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
3 of 25
(IPCC) reports [2,13], analysis of the global burden of disease from climate change [1,14] and related
studies [5,6,15]. Direct and indirect health impacts associated with climate change are caused by
rising temperatures, altered precipitation patterns as well as increasingly severe and frequent extreme
weather events [2,4,5,16]. Direct health impacts arise from hazards such as heat-waves, droughts and
storms, and indirect impacts come from exposures to disease vectors and air and water pollution.
Rising carbon dioxide levels, which contribute to climate change, may also reduce the nutrient value
in staple crops. This could increase food insecurity among some populations, particularly those in
developing countries [17]. A range of social factors can act to either exacerbate the health impacts of
the environmental effects of climate change or to help mitigate them with public health interventions
(Figure 1). Knowledge gaps about the impacts of climate change on public health, food distribution,
poverty, rural communities and indigenous groups and marginalized people exist [4].
Figure 1. Pathways of climate change, sustainable development and health. Source: [18].
Many of the health impacts from climate variability and change can be lessened or avoided
through well-designed adaptation measures [2,8]. Health adaptation refers to “the process of designing,
implementing, monitoring, and evaluating strategies, policies, and measures intended to reduce climate
change-related impacts and to take advantage of opportunities” [19] (p. 501). Public health authorities
have decades of experience with known, effective interventions for reducing many health risks from
climate and weather-related hazards, such as air and water pollution, contaminated food, vector-borne
diseases, ozone depletion, and extreme weather events (e.g., heatwaves, ﬂoods, droughts, wildﬁres,
ice storms, hurricanes) [9,20].
3.2. Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessments
Climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments are conducted at local,
regional, or national scales by health authorities to identify and interpret information needed to
prepare health systems for the impacts of climate change. These studies are participatory in nature,
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
4 of 25
engaging a range of stakeholders to support efforts in preparing for climate change. They possess
a common set of goals and processes, although individual studies may vary signiﬁcantly in design.
Key functions of assessments include [9]:
•
Improving evidence and understanding of the current associations between weather/climate and
health outcomes, including the health of populations most vulnerable to these risks;
•
Providing health and emergency management ofﬁcials, stakeholders, and the public with
information on the magnitude and pattern of current and future health risks associated with
climate variability and change, and identifying vulnerabilities in the health system;
•
Identifying opportunities to incorporate climate change concerns into existing policies and
programs designed to manage health risks associated with weather and climate, and to develop
new programs where necessary to prevent and reduce the severity of future risks;
•
Serving as a baseline analysis against which future changes in risks and in associated policies and
programs can be monitored;
•
Forging collaborations with sectors such as water and infrastructure to promote activities to
improve population health in a changing climate; and
•
Strengthening the case for investment in health protection.
The ultimate goal of an assessment is to support the implementation of adaptation and risk
management measures that are effective in reducing current and future climate-related risks to human
health and well-being, including among populations most vulnerable to the impacts. V&As develop
evidence-based adaptation plans or strategies by health authorities in collaboration with a broad
range of partners within and outside the health sector [9]. For least developed countries and other
developing countries, Health National Adaptation Plans (HNAPs), and the Operational Framework
for Building Climate Resilient Health Systems (2015) are complementary tools designed by WHO to
apply information from a V&A to deﬁne strategic goals and plans for building health resilience to
climate change. HNAPs, as sector speciﬁc adaptation plans, can be included as the health component
of a country’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and highlight national health adaptation goals to be
achieved over a speciﬁc timeframe, and with available resources [21]. The NAP process was created by
the UNFCCC climate change agenda, and facilitates efforts by these countries to undertake medium-
and long-term adaptation planning [22].
4. Results
4.1. Guidance for Conducting V&As
The WHO, World Meteorological Organization (WMO), and the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) established a task team in 1995 to assess risks to health from climate change, setting
the stage for two decades of further climate and health assessments [23]. McMichael et al. [23] laid the
foundation for the evidence-base on climate change and health by describing what is known about the
basic biology and epidemiology of diseases that were ﬁrst characterized as “climate sensitive”, the
direct and indirect pathways through which current climate variability and future climate change can
impact health. They also described key decision-making processes supporting health adaptation [23].
In addition, analysis of health impacts of climate change has been included in all ﬁve IPCC reports
since 1990 and most recently, in the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 ◦C [4]. In 2014,
WHO published quantitative estimates of climate change effects on global health [1].
Effective measures to protect health from climate change impacts require assessments that further
the understanding and integration of information about local and population level vulnerabilities [24].
This includes analysis of exposure and sensitivities to hazards, regional weather and climate drivers;
such studies beneﬁt from participation of a range of stakeholders at the community level [9,25].
To facilitate efforts by public health ofﬁcials to assess current and future impacts of climate change
on health, guidance and methods for conducting assessments have been developed over the last
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
5 of 25
two decades by building on fundamental principles and theoretical models from environmental
health impact assessment [9,14,26–31].
The ﬁrst comprehensive guide for conducting climate
change and health assessments was developed by the WHO European Ofﬁce, in collaboration with
WMO, Health Canada (HC) and UNEP in 2003 [27].
It presented a framework and key steps
for conducting an assessment, and described quantitative and qualitative methods to establish
associations of local climate and weather conditions with health outcomes using speciﬁc health
impact areas as examples [27]. The guidance also included discussion of useful tools and methods
for conducting assessments based upon the principles of environmental health impact assessment,
including environmental epidemiology (e.g., short and long time-series studies, ecological studies),
geographical information systems, climate change, population and socioeconomic scenarios, climate
and health modelling, biological models of infectious disease transmission, development of indicators,
comparative risk assessment, integrated assessment, traditional knowledge, literature reviews, single
event case studies, focus groups, participatory workshops, and cost-beneﬁt analysis [27]. The report
was generally tailored for researchers and provided limited information on health policy and program
development. The assessment guidelines were reported to WHO to be complicated and cumbersome
by a number of health authorities using them.
In 2008, the Member States of WHO requested development of tools for conducting V&As through
a World Health Assembly Resolution [32]. A new WHO workplan on climate change and health in
2009 included a strong emphasis on building evidence through such studies [33]. WHO therefore
developed new guidance which provided stronger direction on the assessment process including how
to engage stakeholders and communicate the assessment ﬁndings. It also provided greater detail on the
adaptation assessment process, such as identifying resources for implementation of options, potential
barriers to action and inaction to protect health, as well as their approximate costs [9]. The guidance
was developed and tested by WHO and its Regional Ofﬁces over 2007–2010. The document included
25 examples of assessment step implementation from a wide range of countries to make the guidance
more accessible to public health ofﬁcials in both developed and developing countries. A survey was
administered in 2010 on the experiences of 12 countries that conducted V&As using the new guidance,
and a workshop was held in Costa Rica which convened health ofﬁcials and experts from 15 countries
to provide input toward development of the new document [34]. The new guide “Protecting health
from climate change: Vulnerability and adaptation assessment” [9] was published by the Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO) and WHO and outlines 5 steps (Table 1) for conducting an assessment
based upon the 2003 guide. It remains the current tool for undertaking such studies promoted today
by the WHO.
Guidance for conducting V&As has evolved over the last two decades to better accommodate the
decision-making needs of public health ofﬁcials in both developing and developed countries. Changes
made reﬂect needs for more thematic and localized information and data to assess risks over multiple
timescales, and to inform adaptation of speciﬁc health programs or infrastructures. For example, the
Ministry of Health and Long-term Care in Ontario developed a Climate Change and Health Toolkit [29]
to assist the 36 local boards of health in that province meet the requirement in the new provincial public
health standards to assess the health impacts of climate change [35]. The Toolkit includes technical
assessment guidelines that provide case studies of health adaptation and multisectoral collaboration in
Ontario, a vulnerabilities assessment checklist, and an assessment workbook with ﬁllable worksheets
that can be used to obtain and analyze needed data and information [29].
To cater to regional needs, the WHO, WMO, HC, and PAHO developed guidance to conduct
assessments in small-island developing states in the Caribbean with more explicit and regionally
relevant direction, including appropriate regional resources, data, and indicators [30]. In response
to the request from countries for more detailed guidance for key priority climate change and
health issues, WHO is developing supplementary tools for the 2013 guide [9] including information
on assessing climate change impacts on zoonotic and vector-borne diseases, diarrheal diseases,
airborne and respiratory diseases, heat stress, undernutrition, natural disasters and extreme weather
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
6 of 25
events, and occupational health. Detailed national and thematic guides have also been developed
in Canada, the United States, the United Kingdom, and by PAHO/WHO for assessing speciﬁc
components of health systems such as climate-related vulnerabilities and adaptation options of health
facilities [36–39]. The World Bank (WB) in 2017 developed tailored V&A guidance to inform their
investment decision-needs in the health sector [31].
Table 1.
Five steps for undertaking a climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation
assessment. Source: [9].
Assessment Step
Activity
1. Frame and scope the assessment
•
Deﬁne the geographical range and health outcomes of interest
•
Identify the questions to be addressed and steps to be used
•
Identify the policy context for the assessment
•
Establish a project team and a management plan
•
Establish a stakeholder process
•
Develop a communications plan
2. Conducting the vulnerability and
adaptation assessment
•
Establish baseline conditions by describing the human health risks of current climate variability and
recent climate change, and the public health policies and programs to address the risks
•
Describe current risks of climate-sensitive health outcomes, including the most vulnerable populations
and regions
•
Identify vulnerable populations and regions
•
Describe risk distribution using spatial mapping
•
Analyze the relationships between current and past weather/climate conditions and health outcomes
•
Identify trends in climate change-related exposures
•
Take account of interactions between environmental and socioeconomic determinants of health
•
Describe the current capacity of health and other sectors to manage the risks of climate-sensitive
health outcomes
3. Understanding future impacts on health
•
Estimate future health risks and impacts under climate change
•
Describe how the risks of climate-sensitive health outcomes, including the most vulnerable populations
and regions, may change over coming decades, irrespective of climate change
•
Estimate the possible additional burden of adverse health outcomes due to climate change
4. Adaptation to climate change:
Prioritizing and implementing health
protection
•
Identify and prioritize policies and programs to address current and projected health risks
•
Identify additional public health and health care policies and programs to prevent likely future
health burdens
•
Prioritize public health and health care policies and programs to reduce likely future health burdens
•
Identify resources for implementation and potential barriers to be addressed
•
Estimate the costs of action and of inaction to protect health
•
Identify possible actions to reduce the potential health risks of adaptation and greenhouse gas mitigation
policies and programs implemented in other sectors
•
Develop and propose health adaptation plans
5. Establish an iterative process for
managing and monitoringthe health risks
of climate change
•
Establish an iterative process for managing and monitoring the health risks of climate change
Climate change and health adaptation and vulnerability assessments are most helpful in planning
for future risks to populations when they take into consideration future demographic, socioeconomic
and health sector trends that may combine with climate drivers to either increase or reduce the
resilience of health systems. The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) which were developed to
help understand challenges to climate change adaptation and greenhouse gas mitigation activities
under different futures are a useful tool for V&As [40].
New and innovative approaches to conducting V&As have also come from individual countries.
The UK Climate Change Risk Assessment developed a new way to conduct risk framing and prioritize
adaptation options to generate more decision-relevant information. This approach was applied to
nearly sixty individual risk areas including human health [41]. It used the concept of urgency to
summarize the ﬁndings of the assessment analysis and to communicate the need for further adaptation
actions based upon the four categories: “more action needed”, “research priority”, “sustain current
action”, or “watching brief” [41].
4.2. Overview of International, National and Subnational Assessments
Climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments have been conducted at
national and subnational scales for over 20 years. The mandate and resources for conducting V&As
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
7 of 25
among countries varies greatly. While many assessments in developing countries have been supported
by WHO as part of its technical support to countries, others have been triggered by the need to provide
sectoral inputs to National Communications to the UNFCCC, and in some instances, are government
mandated. For example, national climate change assessments are mandated in the U.S. by Congress
through the Global Change Research Act (GCRA) of 1990 and assessments in the UK through the
2008 Climate Change Act. The most recent US assessment report was produced by a team of more
than 300 experts guided by a 60-member Federal Advisory Committee [42]. The UK Climate Change
Risk Assessment (comprehensive of all sectors) took 3 years to complete and included commissioning
of original research [43]. In contrast, V&As completed by many developing countries may involve
only 12–30 national experts engaged for shorter time frames (e.g., three to nine months) and those
supported by WHO in the past had much smaller budgets, on average between 50,000–100,000 USD.
A majority of national climate change and health assessments in developing countries have
been supported by the WHO (approximately 48) as part of its role in providing technical support
to countries for the implementation of climate change and health adaptation projects [34,44–48].
Other agencies such as United States Agency for International Development (USAID) (e.g., Senegal,
Mozambique) [49,50], the Asian Development Bank (e.g., Cambodia), the German Corporation for
International Development (GIZ) (e.g., Grenada) have also invested to support V&As to inform
health adaptation programming. The WB conducted climate change and health assessments in
Madagascar and Fiji to ensure that their health investments in those countries were resilient to climate
change [31,51].
The number of V&As has risen steadily in recent years in both developed and developing
countries, in response to growing investment in climate change adaptation and the need for relevant
information.
Kovats et al. [52] identiﬁed 16 countries as having completed at least 1 national
level assessment prior to mid-2002 with half (8/16) having been completed by UNFCCC Annex
1 (e.g., developed) countries. The only countries that undertook multiple assessments prior to
mid-2002 were both Annex 1 counties (Australia and Japan) [52]. Only recently have mechanisms been
established to systematically and regularly monitor and track such studies. In total, 92 countries have
completed national V&As (Figure 2) (Appendix A). Some countries have also conducted subnational
assessments (e.g., Ghana, Bangladesh and Nepal) and further inquiry would be needed to obtain a
comprehensive estimate of the total number of these studies.
Analysis was conducted on a sample of the WHO supported V&As completed since 2013,
including 34 at the country level and 5 at the subnational level [53]. The 34 assessments were supported
by WHO and results of the studies were used to develop WHO Climate and Health Country Proﬁles.
The analysis revealed that all but 4 of 34 assessments included some analysis of the climate change and
health vulnerability and/or adaptation capacity [53]. However, for each priority health issue only about
one third of the assessments identiﬁed speciﬁc populations vulnerable to the impacts, leaving decision
makers with limited information to develop needed targeted public health interventions. In addition,
approximately half of the assessments included either qualitative or quantitative projections of future
health impacts of climate change.
Regarding health concerns of focus, all of the 34 assessments identiﬁed vector-borne diseases
as a priority, while only 16 identiﬁed heat and cold-related health risks.
The most commonly
prioritized individual diseases among vector-borne diseases were malaria (n = 28), dengue (n = 18), and
leishmaniasis (n = 8) [53]. Just over half of the assessments (n = 20) included projections of future health
impacts from climate change, either through quantitative or qualitative analysis, suggesting that many
reports included little information about future risks from climate change. Of the 34 studies reviewed,
26 assessments indicated plans or intent to use the study results to inform national climate change
adaptation strategies or to enhance the resilience health programming [53]. It is not known whether
these ﬁndings apply to the rest of V&As conducted to date with or without support from WHO.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
8 of 25
 
Figure 2. Countries that have completed a national climate change and health vulnerability and
adaptation assessment. Not visible on the above map: Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Brunei,
Cook Islands, Dominica, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Grenada, Kiribati, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, St. Lucia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu,
and Vanuatu.
Subnational assessments allow for more localized analysis of the health impacts of climate change
including a more accurate estimation of current and future vulnerabilities to inform effective adaptation
planning. They may also allow researchers to focus limited resources on priority areas (e.g., large
urban centers, areas with high proportions of vulnerable people, areas believed to be at increased risk,
such as coastal areas). In geographically large countries, such as Canada and the United States that
span multiple ecozones/biomes, the anticipated health impacts of climate change may vary widely
from one area to another [15,54]. Subnational assessments provide the opportunity to identify and
address locally speciﬁc health risks that may otherwise be overlooked in a national context (e.g., an
invasive vector-borne disease only likely to impact a particular region of a country) and develop locally
appropriate response options.
Since 2009, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) has supported
state, tribal, local, and territorial public health agencies to use evidence-based information to better
understand and predict the health risks of climate change and prepare programs to respond and protect
health. Through the Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative (CRSCI) and the supporting Building
Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) Framework [55] it has provided new assessment tools and
opportunities for information exchange (e.g., communities of practice) to support 16 states and 2 cities
to conduct V&As and develop adaptation plans or measures. A review of CRSCI activities found
that the program had increased the capacity of local health authorities to prepare for and respond
to climate change by providing information about climate change impacts on health and vulnerable
populations [56]. Speciﬁcally, the program supported development of practice-informed guidance on
quantitative risk assessment methods, greater integration of health considerations within the climate
change agenda in the respective jurisdictions and the creation of new networks for sharing information.
Experiences of grantees revealed the need for greater efforts to enhance knowledge of climate modeling
tools and their use in disease burden projections among public health professionals [56]. Examples of
US states and cities that have developed climate change adaptation plans or frameworks or taken other
actions based on the research results are presented in Table 2.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
9 of 25
Table 2. Climate Change and Health Adaptation Plans or Actions Taken by the United States Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (U.S. CDC) Building Resilience against Climate Effects (BRACE)
Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative Participants.
US CDC BRACE Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative
Examples of Climate Change Adaptation Plan/Framework Developed
Arizona
New York State
California
North Carolina
Michigan
Oregon
Minnesota
Rhode Island
Wisconsin
San Francisco
Examples of Other Adaptation Actions or Next Steps Taken
Florida (priority hazard proﬁles and cases;
county adaptation plans)
Maryland (outreach)
Illinois (public health training, heat toolkit)
Massachusetts (climate change preparedness
assessment—local boards of public health)
Maine (Syndromic surveillance system for heat,
enhanced vector-borne disease monitoring)
New York City (local hazard mitigation plans—extreme
heat, resiliency guideline for infrastructure)
Vermont (public health training)
Subnational assessments have been completed in a number of other countries as well, including,
for example by the Simcoe Muskoka District Health Unit in Canada [57], and the Government of
Western Australia [58].
5. Discussion
Irrespective of greenhouse gas emissions reductions, climate change will continue for decades
resulting in gradual warming punctuated by stresses and shocks that have the potential to severely
impact individuals, communities and health systems. Learnings from engagement with researchers
and decision makers in V&As suggest that climate change is transforming the milieu in which public
health ofﬁcials and partners understand health risks and make decisions to reduce them due to:
•
Dynamic and complex disease and health impact risks which occur over multiple timescales and
geographies (e.g., vector-borne diseases, mental health);
•
Multiple uncertainties—particularly around management of cascading and indirect health effects
(e.g., food insecurity and nutrition);
•
An increased probability of extreme and “surprise” events that can severely impact health
outcomes and health system functioning; and
•
Risks of “involuntary” adaptation (e.g., rushed and poorly planned interventions in response to
an emergency or disaster).
Climate change and health adaptation and vulnerability assessments can provide the
evidence-based information to help public health ofﬁcials and partners in other sectors navigate
these challenges and respond effectively to increasing risks.
5.1. Assessment Opportunities
Climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments have assisted some
health authorities and researchers in efforts to raise awareness of possible impacts on vulnerable
populations, build capacity to prepare for impacts, understand data and evidentiary requirements
for decision-making, and establish the required knowledge base for climate change adaptation in
the health sector [9,23]. Assessments have also helped health authorities to integrate the needs of
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
10 of 25
the health sector into national climate assessment and policy efforts. Ministries of Health, which
have undertaken V&As, are better prepared to join national and international policy fora and related
processes on climate change (e.g., national adaptation planning and strategy development, UNFCCC
negotiations, World Health Assembly), and to advocate for action which beneﬁts health and builds the
climate resiliency of the health sector.
The horizontal and participatory nature of V&As also facilitates climate change cooperation
across sectors. Involvement of professionals from water, energy, conservation, transportation, urban
planning, agriculture, coastal management and related sectors provides information about health risks
associated with key drivers from impacts or adaptation actions in these sectors [26]. This collaboration
opens door to identifying adaptation and risk management responses across sectors that are often
preventative in nature, more effective, cost less to society and maximize health co-beneﬁts.
As V&As by health authorities generate more robust evidence, this information can be integrated
into international scientiﬁc reports including regular studies by the IPCC, the Lancet Commission
on Health and Climate, and WHO, thereby providing a more comprehensive global evidence-base
of the vulnerability of people to climate change impacts and progress being made to reduce risks.
International reports facilitate a common understanding of the risks posed by climate change, improve
access to climate and health data, support calls for action to address climate change and inform the
development of new tools and methods for assessment. The WHO V&A assessment guide [9] was
informed by leading edge concepts, methods and frameworks related to climate impact assessment
developed by bodies, such as the IPCC. In turn, evidence regarding risks and vulnerabilities to health
from current climate variability and future climate change presented in these international reports
contributes to the development of local to national V&As.
5.2. Assessment Barriers
In the face of increasing calls for more information about climate change impacts on health and
interest from health authorities in undertaking assessments, a number of important barriers exist
in completing these studies. A key challenge for health authorities conducting V&As is to provide
information in timescales relevant for decision making. To be most useful V&As should provide
rigorous ﬁndings that help policy makers identify both short-term and longer-term adaptation options.
However, as highlighted above, WHO analysis of a sample of completed assessments indicated that
only half included either qualitative or quantitative projections of future health impacts of climate
change. Limited data, a paucity of climate and health models, uncertainty related to climate projections,
and a lack of resources, expertise or time often make estimating future health impacts of climate change
in a region or community difﬁcult. Robust indicators that can be used to track: (1) vulnerability, risk,
and exposure of populations and health systems to climate change hazards; (2) actual impacts from
such hazards; and (3) progress in adapting and building resilience are lacking from local to national
scales [59]. To ensure consistency in approaches and comparability of ﬁndings V&As often consider
and apply ﬁndings from existing national climate assessments conducted by the government or other
sectors, including the same climate projections (e.g., global and regional SRES, RCP projections).
This is useful to raise awareness that current health vulnerabilities, if not addressed now, may increase
signiﬁcantly in the future. However, in resource poor contexts this information alone is rarely sufﬁcient
to justify and motivate investments in health adaptation.
In the short-term, policy and program managers often require information from V&As to
inform near-term decisions related to stafﬁng, procurement, and programming, for example for
efforts to address a particular intervention (e.g., heat-health warning systems, health promotion
campaign, disaster management plan, food safety program) found to be ineffective. This can present a
fundamental challenge in applying the results of V&A assessments to decision-making. Adaptation
options identiﬁed in assessments may include important recommendations to strengthen health
system management, such as strengthened surveillance, training and capacity building, but lack
recommendations for immediate actions. In such cases, gaining buy-in of decision makers that action
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
11 of 25
is required is difﬁcult because results pertaining to near-term adaptations are not included in the
study. This type of information requires analysis of how current climate and extreme weather events
are driving and inﬂuencing health outcomes and health system performance in a country or region.
This analysis is often not possible with existing resources (e.g., data, ﬁnancial, expertise, time) for
the assessment. However, improved understanding and analysis of current seasonality, inter-annual
climate patterns, conditions and projections of extreme rainfall, temperature, and drought in the
country can provide decision-relevant information that is easily applied to current planning cycles,
and is also likely representative of future climate conditions.
Many V&As also focus narrowly on building the evidence-base of climate-sensitivity related
to speciﬁc health outcomes of concern for a speciﬁc jurisdiction, frequently measured as disease
burdens. They often do not investigate in great enough detail the climate-sensitivity of broader
components of the health system (e.g., health facilities, health workforce, new adaptation technologies,
adaptation networks and partnerships) as identiﬁed in the WHO Operational Framework for Building
Climate Resilient Health Systems [10]. This focus on disease outcomes can result in insufﬁcient
attention to potentially critical vulnerabilities and impacts from climate change on health-related
sectors such as a projected collapse of food stocks, large-scale landscape changes due to sea-level rise
or hydrological changes, or population migration from climate impacts. It also results in inadequate
attention to measuring impacts on the health sector itself, such as those on health systems and facilities
and on levels of adaptive capacity; information on such impacts could generate speciﬁc actionable
recommendations. Future studies would beneﬁt from greater focus on the potential impacts of climate
change, including stresses and shocks, on health systems [11].
Particular obstacles may face developing countries in conducting V&As. National analyses of
health risks and future impacts are often challenged by the availability of national and local data, which
are often insufﬁcient to establish robust linear and non-linear relationships among health outcomes
and climate variables. In addition, those conducting assessments often lack both high quality and
long-term climate and epidemiological data and have few pre-existing local studies to consider within
a V&A. They may also have few climate and health models for application, low capacity within
country teams to conduct the analysis, and limited ﬁnancial resources and time to contract appropriate
academic teams to conduct more sophisticated studies. Schnitter et al. [60] reported that challenges
encountered in completing a V&A in Dominica in 2015 included insufﬁcient resources and expertise to
undertake modeling of future health impacts for more than one issue (vector-borne diseases), limited
health data for analysis, and challenges prioritizing adaptation options.
Robust V&As build upon existing locally relevant evidence, which has already established
associations between climate variables, tested data sets, and can describe local vulnerabilities and
disease dynamics. However, many developing countries do not have this evidence base, or sufﬁcient
data and capacity to conduct this research, and are thus dependent upon proxy studies which may be
relevant, but conducted in other locations. This is reﬂected in WHO’s 2018 ﬁnding [54] that only half of
the reviewed assessments were able to include future risk projections. V&As in developing countries
often focus their resources on establishing associations between weather and health outcomes and not
future climate change due to this lack of existing evidence. They often conclude with recommendations
for additional studies; closer collaboration between the international research community and local
policy communities would help address these gaps.
Challenges associated with mobilizing communities and health authorities to take action on
climate-related health risks based upon V&A studies often relate to limited funding for climate
change and health activities, particularly in developing countries. The World Health Organization
estimated that in 2017, less than 1.5% of available funds dedicated to climate change adaptation
globally are used for health protection projects [61]. Limited support for climate change and health
and related assessment activities inevitably reduces the number and quality of V&As, making it
harder for health authorities to engage in broader climate change activities and build needed capacity.
Greater funding would signiﬁcantly strengthen capacity at all levels of government and among
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
12 of 25
civil society organizations to increase understanding of the health impacts of climate variability and
change [25]. Building such capacity would also be supported by expanded training of health ofﬁcials
from local to national levels on conducting V&As with stakeholders and research partners.
Health authorities often have difﬁculty effectively translating the ﬁndings from a V&A into
adaptation practice to protect populations from current climate hazards and future climate change [50].
This includes little application of the knowledge produced into relevant policy processes at the
national level such as the NAPs, the UNFCCC National Communications and Nationally Determined
Contributions. Challenges can be faced by the health sector in efforts to engage in national climate
change processes, which are most often led by the environmental sector. This may also occur because
some assessments are not producing information and data most needed by decision makers to protect
health and because of a lack of evidence informed activities and tools to support knowledge translation
(e.g., spatial tools such as GIS, training kits, education and outreach materials, communities of practice)
and facilitate efforts to reduce population health risks. As noted above, while two thirds of the V&As
reviewed by WHO indicated intent to use the ﬁndings to inform health adaptation planning, only one
third identiﬁed speciﬁc populations vulnerable to climate change health impacts. In addition, Hayes
and Poland [62] suggest that many V&As have not included investigation of mental health impacts
of climate change, a growing concern among health authorities. Decision makers are therefore often
not receiving needed evidence-based information to develop targeted public health interventions to
prepare for climate change.
National V&As have been conducted relatively recently and time is needed to gauge accurately
the degree to which ﬁndings and recommendations will inform concrete efforts to prepare for climate
change impacts on health. It is possible that information from national level assessments is being used
by health decision makers at other levels of government (e.g., local, regional) or by non-governmental
partners to adapt. This could include efforts to raise awareness of impacts, build networks for
cooperation, or pursue targeted actions such as the development of heat-health warning systems that
warn the public of impending dangerous temperatures to support protective behaviors.
V&As by both developed and developing countries have had limited inﬂuence on the evolution of
the body of climate change and health knowledge reﬂected by the scientiﬁc literature. Such assessments
are rarely published, peer reviewed, or communicated outside government-led projects; they draw
upon existing literature, and inﬂuence local knowledge but are not directly contributing to the global
knowledge base.
5.3. The Way Forward in Conducting V&As
Climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments are an important instrument
for taking stock of current conditions and vulnerabilities, and should be considered as part of
an iterative process to be reviewed and returned to over time [9,63]. Establishing health impact,
vulnerability and adaptation baselines through a V&A allows health authorities to monitor progress
made, or adaptation failures, in efforts to protect the health of populations from climate change impacts.
Most countries have not yet repeated their V&A assessment to assess whether the baseline constructed
in the ﬁrst study is sufﬁcient to monitor the success of adaptation efforts and the health outcomes
related to climate change. In the future, WHO support for countries to undertake Climate and Health
Country Proﬁles biennially [12] will help provide this information.
Climate change and health action by health authorities and partners can be strengthened by the
development of indictors from local to national scales that capture trends among populations and
health systems related to: (1) vulnerabilities, risks and exposures to climate hazards; (2) impacts from
such hazards and (3) adaptation and resilience building. Regular tracking of climate change impacts
with such indicators supports iterative risk management where evidence is synthesized through V&As
and then disseminated and applied through health adaptation [59]. As part of this approach, V&As
should be regularly updated to ensure health authorities are using the latest information about key
vulnerabilities and are monitoring progress in addressing climate change impacts on health [63].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
13 of 25
Participatory approaches to V&As should include involvement of all relevant stakeholders
(e.g., meteorological services, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Health, community social services),
experts (e.g., climate change, epidemiology, statistics), and representatives of populations with
unique perspectives, or that are at higher risk (e.g., indigenous populations, children, women, elderly
people, mentally or physically disabled people, ethnic minorities, impoverished people) [9,29]. Broad
engagement with a range of partners improves the quality of assessments while development of a
detailed plan to communicate the ﬁndings to key decision makers, stakeholders and the research
community through a range of opportunities (e.g., UNFCCC National Communications; publication
of ﬁndings) ensures that the results are relevant and useful for efforts to protect health [9].
Opportunities also exist to inform decision making with V&A ﬁndings by integrating results into
relevant initiatives within existing mechanisms and processes (e.g., HNAPs, Health and Environment
Strategies Alliance (HESA), Situation Analysis and Needs Assessment (SANA), disaster risk reduction)
that support efforts to protect health from climate change impacts. Although an important challenge,
V&As will beneﬁt from efforts to increase knowledge of local level climate change risks to health and
the needs of vulnerable populations. This can be achieved through the conduct of local and regional
V&As, as the US BRACE example discussion above illustrates, or by integrating such information into
national studies (e.g., investigation of perceptions, adaptive capacity; use of case studies).
6. Conclusions
Greater knowledge of risks to health and well-being posed by climate change and guidance
available to health authorities for assessing vulnerabilities has resulted in more local, regional
and national studies being undertaken. Climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation
assessments provide invaluable information to health authorities to increase the resilience of
individuals, communities and health systems to climate change impacts. They also contribute to
development of the global evidence-base on climate change and health needed to inform adaptation
and greenhouse gas mitigation measures in the future, ensuring that they beneﬁt the well-being
of populations.
Expanded efforts through V&As to continue to build this global evidence base and inform
the development of adaptations to protect against growing risks from climate hazards require
further development of both quantitative and qualitative assessment methods, tools and guidance
documents [25]. This would include, for example, prioritizing adaptation options, using qualitative
methods to assess future impacts from climate change and developing indicators of health system
resilience. Greater skill development in environmental health and epidemiology that includes tools
and competencies for understanding health risks in the context of environmental and climate change
will support health authorities in undertaking V&As. The rigor of assessments would improve
with more robust metrics and approaches for estimating adaptive capacity and the effectiveness of
current adaptations, as well as with more climate scenario and modelling information applicable to
regional and local scales. Enhanced understanding of systemic, synergistic, cascading or compounding
health effects from climate change needs to be included in V&As to prepare for potentially severe,
or catastrophic events. The use of V&As as a key tool to support effective adaptation to the health
impacts of climate change will beneﬁt from increased collaboration, exchange and learning among
health authorities as they continue to undertake these studies in the future.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, P.B., J.S.-G., P.M.E., E.V.P., D.C.-L.; Methodology, P.B., P.M.E.; Formal
Analysis, P.B., P.M.E.; Investigation, J.S.-G., P.M.E., E.V.P.; Writing—Original Draft, P.B.; Writing—Review and
Editing, P.B., J.S.-G., P.M.E., E.V.P., D.C.-L.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
14 of 25
Appendix A. Completed National-Level Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and
Adaptation Assessments (V&As)
Table A1. Completed National-Level Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation
Assessments (V&As).
Country i
Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment or Assessment
Overview Reference
Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle ii
ALBANIA
Ministry of Health. Protecting Health from Climate Change in
Albania: A Vulnerability Assessment; Ministry of Health: Tirana,
Albania, n.d. [64].
ALGERIA
Algeria’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [65].
ANTIGUA AND
BARBUDA
AUSTRALIA
AUSTRIA
BANGLADESH
Mani, M.; Wang, L. Climate Change and Health Impacts: How
Vulnerable is Bangladesh and What Needs to be Done?
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, The World
Bank Group: Washington, USA, 2014 [66].
Bangladesh’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [67].
BARBADOS
BENIN
BHUTAN
Environmental Health Programme. Assessment of Health
Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate Change: Final Report.
Thimphu, Bhutan: Department of Public Health, Ministry of Health:
2012.
Bhutan’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [68].
BOLIVIA
Effen, M. A.; Pardo, I. A.; J. A. E.; Mollinedo, R.; Cuellar, C.; Santa
Cruz, W.. Bolivia Pilot Assessment. Ministry of Health: La Paz,
Bolivia, 2010 [69].
BRAZIL
Confalonieri, U.E.C.; Marinho, D.P.; Rodriguez, R.E. Public health
vulnerability to climate change in Brazil. Climate Research, 2009, 40,
175–186 [70].
Brazil’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [71].
BRUNEI
BURKINA FASO
CAMBODIA
Department of Preventative Medicine, Ministry of Health. Climate
Change and Health in Cambodia: A Vulnerability and Adaptation
Assessment. Ministry of Health: Phnom Penh, Cambodia, 2010 [72].
Cambodia’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [73].
CAMEROON
CANADA
Berry, P.; Clarke, K.; Fleury, M.D.; Parker, S. Human Health; in
Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and
Adaptation, (ed.) Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S.; Government of
Canada, Ottawa, Canada, 2014 [54].
COOK ISLANDS
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
COSTA RICA
Navarro, L.L. Evaluación de Vulnerabilidad y Adaptación de la
Salud al Cambio Climático en Costa Rica. Ministerio de Salud: San
José, Costa Rica, 2010 [75].
DOMINICA
Verret, M.; Berry, P.; Fook, T.C.T.; Lal, L. Assessment of Climate
Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation in Dominica.
Dominica Ministry of Health and the Environment: Roseau,
Dominica, 2016.
ETHIOPIA
Deressa, W.; Simane, B.; Kumie, A.; Woyessa, A.; Kaba, M.; Taye, G.;
Berhane, G. Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment of Health to
Climate Change in Ethiopia. Ministry of Health:
Addis Ababa, 2015 [76].
Ethiopia’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [77].
FEDERATED STATES OF
MICRONESIA
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
FIJI
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
Fiji’s Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle
[78].
FINLAND
FRANCE
Pascal, M. Health Impacts of Climate Change in France—What are
the Challenges for the French Institute for Public Health
Surveillance
(InVS)? French Institute for Public Health Surveillance:
Saint-Maurice, France, 2010 [79].
GERMANY
Eis, D.; Helm, D.; Laußmann, D.; Stark, K. Klimawandel und
Gesundheit Ein Sachstandsbericht. Robert Koch-Institut: Berlin,
Deutschland, 2010 [80].
Germany’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [81].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
15 of 25
Table A1. Cont.
Country i
Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment or Assessment
Overview Reference
Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle ii
GHANA
Asante, F.; Bawakyillenuo, S. Assessment of Existing Relevant
Climate, Health, Poverty and Vulnerability Information. Report
prepared for the Republic of Ghana Ministry of Health. United
Nations Development Programme; and the Global Environmental
Facility: Accra, Ghana [82].
GREECE
Climate Change Impacts Study Committee. The Environmental,
Economic and Social Impacts of Climate Change in Greece. Bank of
Greece: Athens, Greece, 2011 [83].
GRENADA
Pochanke-Alff, A.; Meincke, M.; Scheske, L.; Wuttge, E. (ed).
Grenada Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation
Assessment. Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit: Bonn, Germany, 2015 [84].
GUINEA
HUNGARY
Faragó, T.; Láng, I.; Csete, L. Climate Change and Hungary:
Mitigating the Hazard and Preparing for the Impacts - the “Vahava”
Report. Hungarian Academy of Sciences: Budapest,
Hungary, 2010 [85].
INDIA
INDONESIA
Indonesia’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [86].
IRAN
Iran’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [87].
ISRAEL
Green, M.S.; Pri-or, N.G.; Capeluto, G.; Epstein, Y.; Paz, S. Climate
change and health in Israel: adaptation policies for extreme weather
events. Israeli Journal of Health Policy Research 2013, 2(23), 11 [88].
ITALY
Wolf, T.; Menne, B. Environment and Health Risks from Climate
Change and Variability in Italy. World Health Organization
Regional Ofﬁce for Europe: Copenhagen, Denmark, 2007 [89].
Italy’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [90].
JAPAN
JORDAN
Ministry of Health. National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
and Action Plan of Jordan. Ministry of Health: Amman, Jordan,
2012 [91].
Jordan’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [92].
KAZAKHSTAN
KENYA
Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation and Ministry of
Environment and Mineral Resources. Report on Kenya Country
Situation Analysis and Needs Assessment for the Preparation of
National Plans of Joint Action for Implementation of the Libreville
Declaration on Health and Environment in Africa. Government of
Kenya: Nairobi, Kenya, 2009 [93].
Kenya’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [94].
KIRIBATI
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
Kiribati’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [95].
KYRGYZSTAN
Sharshenova, A.A.; Kasymov, O.T.; Belov, G.V.; Menne, B.; Nurse, J.;
Buyuklyanov, A.I. Assessment of Climate Change Health Impact in
the Population of the Kyrgyz Republic. Ministry of Health,
Scientiﬁc and Production Centre for Preventative Medicine:
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, 2012.
LAOS PDR
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Climate Change and Health in the Western Paciﬁc Region. World
Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [96].
LITHUANIA
Meˇcislovas, Ž.; Remigijus, O.; Ar¯unas, B.; Juozas, R.; Egidijus, R.;
Gintaras, V.; Gintautas, S.; Vidas, S. Klimato kaitos poveikio šalies
ekosistemoms,
bioı˛vairovei, vandens ištekliams, žem˙es ir mišku˛ ¯ukiui
ir žmoniu˛ sveikatai ı˛vertinimo studija ir pasekmiu˛
švelninimo strateginis planas; Respublikos aplinkos ministerijos:
Vilnius. Lietuva, 2007.
MACEDONIA
Kendrovski, V. Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation Strategy
Development in Health Sector due to Climate Change in the
Republic of Macedonia. Institute for Public Health of the Republic
of Macedonia: Skopje, Macedonia, 2010 [97].
MADAGASCAR
Bouley, T.; Midgley, A.; Shumake-Guillemot, J.; De Weir Golden, C.;
Ebi, K.L. Madagascar—Climate Change and Health Diagnostic:
Risks and Opportunities for Climate-Smart Health and Nutrition
Investment (English). Investing in climate change and health series.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group, 2018 [31].
Madagascar’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [98].
MALAWI
MALAYSIA
Malaysia’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [99].
MALDIVES
Maldives’ Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [100].
MALI
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
16 of 25
Table A1. Cont.
Country i
Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment or Assessment
Overview Reference
Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle ii
MALTA
MARSHALL ISLANDS
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
MEXICO
Mexico’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [101].
MONGOLIA
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Climate Change and Health in the Western Paciﬁc Region. World
Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [96].
MOROCCO
Morocco’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [102].
MOZAMBIQUE
Zermoglio, F.; Steynor, A.; Jack, C.; Pinto, I.; Ebi, K.; Allen, L.; Quinn,
C.; Colborn, J. Climate Change and Health in Mozambique: Impacts
on Diarrheal Disease and Malaria. United States Agency for
International Development: Washington, USA, 2018 [50].
NAURU
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
NEPAL
Nepal’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [103].
NETHERLANDS
NEW ZEALAND
Royal Society Te Ap¯arangi. Human Health Impacts of Climate
Change for New Zealand. Royal Society Te Ap¯arangi: Wellington,
New Zealand, 2017 [104].
NIGERIA
Nigeria’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [105].
NIUE
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
NORWAY
OMAN
Oman’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [106].
PALAU
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
PANAMA
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Climate Change and Health in the Western Paciﬁc Region. World
Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [96].
PHILIPPINES
Cruz, R. V. O.; Aliño, P.M.; Cabrera, O.C.; David, C.P.; David, L.T.;
Lansigan, F.P.; Lasco, R.D.; Licuanan, W.R. Y.; Lorenzo, F.M.;
Mamauag, S.S.; Peñaﬂor, E.L.; Perez, R.T.; Pulhin, J.M.; Rollon, R.N.;
Samson, M.S.; Siringan, F.P.; Tibig, L.V.; Uy, N.M.; Villanoy, C.L.
Philippine Climate Change Assessment: Impacts, Vulnerabilities
and Adaptation. The Oscar M. Lopez Center for Climate Change
Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management Foundation, Inc. and
Climate Change Commission: Pasig, Philippines, 2017 [107].
Philippines’ Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [108].
PORTUGAL
RUSSIA
REPUBLIC OF KOREA
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Climate Change and Health in the Western Paciﬁc Region. World
Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [96].
SAMOA
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
SENEGAL
Zermoglio, F.; Steynor, A.; Jack, C.; Climate Change and Health
Risks in Senegal. United States Agency for International
Development: Washington, USA, 2015 [49].
SOLOMON ISLANDS
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries;
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
SPAIN
Diaz, J.; Ballester, F.; López-Vélez, R.; Chapter 16 - Impacts on
Human Health; in A Preliminary Assessment of the Impacts in
Spain due to the Effects of Climate Change. Rodriguez, J.M.M. (ed.);
Ministry of Environment: Madrid, Spain, 2005 [109].
SRI LANKA
Sri Lanka’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [110].
ST. LUCIA
SWEDEN
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
17 of 25
Table A1. Cont.
Country i
Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment or Assessment
Overview Reference
Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle ii
SWITZERLAND
Vöhringer, F.; Vielle, M.; Thurm, B.; Knoke, W.; Stocker, D.; Frehner,
A.; Maire, S.; and Thalmann, P. Assessing the Impacts of Climate
Change for Switzerland. Report Prepared for the Federal Ofﬁce for
the Environment: Bern, Switzerland, 2017 [111].
TAJIKISTAN
THAILAND
Thailand’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [112].
TIMOR-LESTE
Timor-Leste’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [113].
TONGA
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
TUNISIA
Raja, M. Health Impact Assessment Tunisia. Ministry of Public
Health, Department of Hygiene and Environmental Protection:
Tunis, Tunisia, 2010 [114].
Tunisia’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [115].
TUVALU
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
UGANDA
Zinser, K. An Overview of Climate Change and Health in Uganda.
United States Agency for International Development: Washington,
USA, 2014 [116].
Uganda’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [117].
UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND
Kovats, R.; Osborn, D.; Humphrey, K.; Thompson, D.; Johns, D.;
Ayres, J.; Bates, P.; Baylis, M.; Bell, S.; Church, A.; Curtis, S.; Davies,
M.; Depledge, M.; Houston, D.; Vardoulakis, S.; Reynard, N.;
Watson, J.; Mavrogianni, A.; Shrubsole, C.; Taylor, J.; Whitman, G.
UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 5,
People and the Built Environment. Adaptation Sub-Committee of
the Committee on Climate Change: London, United Kingdom,
2016 [118].
The United Kingdom’s Climate Change and Health
Country Proﬁle [119].
UNITED REPUBLIC OF
TANZANIA
The United Republic of Tanzania’s Climate Change
and Health Country Proﬁle [120].
UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA
Crimmins, A.; Balbus, J.; Gamble, J.L.; Beard, C.B.; Bell, J.E.; Dodgen,
D.; Eisen, R.J.; Fann, N.; Hawkins, M.D.; Herring, S.C.; Jantarasami,
L.; Mills, D.M.; Saha, S.; Saroﬁm, M.C.; Trtanj, J.; Ziska, L. (eds). The
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States:
A Scientiﬁc Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program:
Washington, USA, 2016 [15].
The United States’ Climate Change and Health
Country Proﬁle [121].
UZBEKISTAN
VIET NAM
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Climate Change and Health in the Western Paciﬁc Region. World
Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [96].
VANUATU
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc.
Human Health and Climate Change in Paciﬁc Island Countries.
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015 [74].
Vanuatu’s Climate Change and Health Country
Proﬁle [122].
ZAMBIA
i Some countries have completed multiple V&As and this list presents the most recent national level V&A known
to the author team. ii In some cases the Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle was completed prior to the
respective country’s V&A which may result in conﬂicting reporting on V&A completion status.
References
1.
World Health Organization (WHO). Quantitative Risk Assessment of the Effects of Climate Change on Selected
Causes of Death, 2030s and 2050s; World Health Organization (WHO): Geneva, Switzerland, 2014.
2.
Smith, R.K.; Woodward, A.; Campbell-Lendrum, D.; Chadee, D.D.; Honda, Y.; Liu, Q.; Olwoch, J.M.; Revich, B.;
Sauerborn, R. Human health: Impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits. In Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; Field, C.B., Barros, V.R., Dokken, D.J., Mach, K.J.,
Mastrandrea, M.D., Bilir, T.E., Chatterjee, M., Ebi, K.L., Estrada, Y.O., Genova, R.C., et al., Eds.; Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2014; pp. 709–754. Available online: http://www.ipcc.
ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg2/WGIIAR5-Chap11_FINAL.pdf (accessed on 30 July 2018).
3.
Horton, R.; Beaglhole, R.; Bonita, R.; Raeburn, J.; McKee, M.; Wall, S. From public to planetary health: A
manifesto. Lancet 2014, 282, 9920. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
18 of 25
4.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O.; Jacob, D.; Taylor, M.; Bindi, M.; Brown, S.; Camilloni, I.; Diedhiou, A.; Djalante, R.;
Ebi, K.; Engelbrecht, F.; et al. Chapter 3: Impacts of 1.5 ◦C global warming on natural and human systems. In
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5 ◦C above
Pre-industrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in the Context of Strengthening the
Global Response to the Threat of Climate Change, Sustainable Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty; World
Meteorological Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2018.
5.
Watts, N.; Adger, W.N.; Agnolucci, P.; Blackstock, J.; Byass, P.; Cai, W.; Chaytor, S.; Colbourn, T.; Collins, M.;
Cooper, A.; et al. Health and climate change: Policy responses to protect public health. Lancet 2015, 386,
1861–1914. [CrossRef]
6.
Watts, N.; Amann, M.; Ayeb-Karlsson, S.; Belesova, K.; Bouley, T.; Boykoff, M.; Byass, P.; Cai, W.;
Campbell-Lendrum, D.; Chambers, J.; et al. The Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: From 25
years of inaction to a global transformation for public health. Lancet 2018, 391, 581–630. [CrossRef]
7.
United Nations Development Program (UNDP). Sustainable Development Goals.
2018.
Available
online: http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-development-goals.html (accessed on
15 July 2018).
8.
Luber, G.; Lemery, J. (Eds.) Climate change and health vulnerability assessments. In Global Climate Change
and Human Health: From Science to Practice; Jossey-Bass: San Francisco, CA, USA, 2015.
9.
World Health Organization and Pan American Health Organization. Protecting Health from Climate
Change: Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment. World Health Organization, 2013. Available online:
http://www.who.int/iris/handle/10665/104200 (accessed on 15 July 2018).
10.
World Health Organization (WHO). Operational Framework for Building Climate Resilient Health Systems.
World Health Organization, 2015. Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/189951/1/
9789241565073_eng.pdf?ua=1 (accessed on 15 July 2018).
11.
Ebi, K.L.; Berry, P.; Boyer, C.; Hayes, K.; Enright, P.M.; Sellers, S.; Hess, J.J. Stress testing the capacity of
health systems to manage climate change-related shocks and stresses. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018,
15, 2370. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
World Health Organization (WHO). WHO UNFCCC Climate Health Country Proﬁle Project—Monitoring
Health Impacts of Climate Change and Progress in Building Climate Resilient Health Systems. 2018.
Available online: http://www.who.int/globalchange/resources/countries/en/ (accessed on 15 July 2018).
13.
Confalonieri, U.; Menne, B.; Akhtar, R.; Ebi, K.L.; Hauengue, M.; Kovats, R.S.; Revich, B.; Woodward, A.;
Abeku, T.; Alam, M.; et al. Human health. In Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change;
Parry, M.L., Canziani, O.F., Palutikof, J.P., van der Linden, P.J., Hanson, C.E., Eds.; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK, 2007; Available online: www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/ar4-wg2.htm (accessed on 3 July 2018).
14.
Campbell-Lendrum, D.; Woodruff, R. Climate Change: Quantifying the Health Impact of Climate Change at
National and Local Levels; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2007.
15.
United States Global Change Research Program (USGCRP). The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health
in the United States: A Scientific Assessment; Crimmins, A., Balbus, J., Gamble, J.L., Beard, C.B., Bell, J.E.,
Dodgen, D., Eisen, R.J., Fann, N., Hawkins, M.D., Herring, S.C., et al., Eds.; U.S. Global Change Research
Program: Washington, DC, USA, 2016; p. 312. Available online: http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0R49NQX
(accessed on 3 July 2018).
16.
IPCC. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report
of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; Field, C.B., Barros, V., Stocker, T.F.,
Qin, D., Dokken, D.J., Ebi, K.L., Mastrandrea, M.D., Mach, K.J., Plattner, G.-K., Allen, S.K., et al., Eds.;
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2012; p. 582.
17.
Myers, S.S.; Smith, M.R.; Guth, S.; Golden, C.D.; Vaitla, B.; Mueller, N.D.; Dangour, A.D.; Huybers, P. Climate
change and global food systems: Potential impacts on food security and undernutrition. Annu. Rev. Public
Health 2017, 38, 259–277. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
World Health Organization (WHO); Regional Ofﬁce for Europe. Protecting Health from Climate Change in
Europe: 2017 Update. Copenhagen, 2017. Available online: http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_
ﬁle/0004/355792/ProtectingHealthEuropeFromClimateChange.pdf (accessed on 15 July 2018).
19.
Ebi, K.L.; Semenza, J.C. Community-based adaptation to the health impacts of climate change. Am. J. Prev.
Med. 2008, 35, 501–507. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
19 of 25
20.
Frumkin, H.; Hess, J.; Luber, G.; Malilay, J.; McGeehin, M. Climate change: The public health response. Am. J.
Public Health 2008, 98, 435–445. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
World Health Organization. WHO Guidance to Protect Health from Climate Change through Health
Adaptation Planning. Geneva, 2014. Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/
137383/9789241508001_eng.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y (accessed on 20 July 2018).
22.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)/Least-developed Countries Expert
Group (LEG). The National Adaptation Plan Process. A Brief Overview. Geneva, 2012. Available online:
http://unfccc.int/ﬁles/adaptation/application/pdf/19688_unfccc_nap_summary_low_v8.pdf (accessed
on 20 July 2018).
23.
McMichael, A.J.; Haines, J.A.; Slooff, R.; Sari Kovats, R.; World Health Organization. Climate Change and
Human Health: An Assessment. 1996. Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/
62989/WHO?sequence=1 (accessed on 3 July 2018).
24.
Haines, A. Climate change and health: Strengthening the evidence base for policy. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2008, 35,
411–413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Ebi, K.L.; Otmani del Barrio, M. Lessons learned on health adaptation to climate variability and change:
Experiences across low- and middle-income countries. Environ. Health Perspect. 2017, 125, 065001. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
26.
Balbus, J.M.; Brody, M.; Burton, I.; Campos, M.; Carson, I.; Carter, T.R.; Cohen, S.; Oude Essink, G.H.P.;
Feenstra, J.F.; Hlohowskyj, I.; et al. Human health. In Handbook on Methods of Climate Change Impact Assessment
and Adaptation Strategies, version 2.0.; Feenstra, J.F., Burton, I., Smith, J.B., Tol, R.S.J., Eds.; UNEP: Nairobi,
Kenya; Institute for Environmental Studies: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1998.
27.
World Health Organization (WHO); World Meteorological Organization (WMO); Health Canada (HC);
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). Methods of Assessing Human Health Vulnerability and Public
Health Adaptation to Climate Change; World Health Organization: Copenhagen, Denmark, 2003.
28.
Manangan, A.P.; Uejio, C.K.; Shubhayu, S.; Schramm, P.J.; Marinucci, G.D.; Hess, J.J.; Luber, G. Assessing
Health Vulnerability to Climate Change: A Guide for Health Departments; US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention: Atlanta, GA, USA, 2015. Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/pubs/
assessinghealthvulnerabilitytoclimatechange.pdf (accessed on 30 July 2018).
29.
Ebi, K.; Paterson, J.; Yusa, A.; Anderson, V.; Berry, P. Climate Change and Health Vulnerability Assessment
Guidelines for the Province of Ontario; Report Developed for the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care;
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care: Toronto, ON, Canada, 2016.
30.
Scheske, L.; Berry, P.; Shumake-Guillemot, J.; Montoya, L.F.; Verret, M. Climate Change and Health Vulnerability
and Adaptation Assessment Workbook for Caribbean Small Island Developing States; Pan American Health
Organization, World Health Organization, World Meteorological Organization, Health Canada: Geneva,
Switzerland, 2018; In press.
31.
World Bank; World Meteorological Organization (WMO); World Health Organization (WHO). Madagascar:
Climate Change and Health Diagnostic—Risks and Opportunities for Climate-Smart Health and Nutrition
Investment. 2018. Available online: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/936661516004441146/
pdf/121945-12-1-2018-11-21-5-WorldBankMadagascarClimateChangeandHealthDiagnosticJan.pdf
(accessed on 1 September 2018).
32.
World Health Organization. Sixty-First World Health Assembly: Resolutions and Decisions Annexes.
Geneva (19–24 May 2008). 2008. Available online: http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_ﬁles/wha61-rec1/
a61_rec1-en.pdf (accessed on 5 October 2018).
33.
World Health Organization. Climate Change and Health: Report by the Secretariat. Sixty-Second World
Health Assembly—Provisional Agenda Item 12.7. Geneva (6 March 2009). 2009. Available online: http:
//www.who.int/globalchange/A62_11_en.pdf?ua=1 (accessed on 5 October 2018).
34.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health—Health Vulnerability and Adaptation
Assessments: Costa Rica Consultation (20–23 July 2010). 2018. Available online: http://www.who.int/
globalchange/mediacentre/events/2010/costa_rica_consultation_200710/en/ (accessed on 15 July 2018).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
20 of 25
35.
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care (MOHLTC). Protecting and Promoting the Health of
Ontarians—Ontario Public Health Standards: Requirements for Programs, Services and Accountability. Toronto,
2018. Available online: http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/pro/programs/publichealth/oph_standards/docs/
protocols_guidelines/Ontario_Public_Health_Standards_2018_en.pdf (accessed on 30 July 2018).
36.
Balbus, J.; Berry, P.; Brettle, M.; Jagnarine-Azan, S.; Soares, A.; Ugarte, C.; Varangu, L.; Prats, E.V. Enhancing
the sustainability and climate resiliency of health care facilities: A comparison of initiatives and toolkits.
Revista Panamericana de Salud Pública 2016, 40, 174–180. [PubMed]
37.
Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care. Climate Change Resiliency for Health Care. Available online:
www.greenhealthcare.ca/resiliency/ (accessed on 30 July 2018).
38.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit. 2016. Available online:
https://toolkit.climate.gov/topics/human-health/building-climate-resilience-health-sector (accessed on
15 July 2018).
39.
Pan American Health Organization; World Health Organization.
SMART Hospitals Toolkit.
2016.
Available online:
www.paho.org/disasters/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=1742%
3Asmart-hospitals-toolkit&Itemid=911&lang=en (accessed on 2 October 2018).
40.
Sellers, S.; Ebi, K.L. Climate change and health under the shared socioeconomic pathway framework. Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public Health. 2017, 15, 3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Warren, R.; Watkiss, P.; Wilby, R.L.; Humphrey, K.; Ranger, N.; Betts, R.; Lowe, J.; Watts, G. UK Climate
Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 2, Approach and Context; Report prepared for the Adaptation
Sub-Committee of the Committee on Climate Change; HM Government: London, UK, 2016.
42.
United States Global Change Research Program. (USGCRP). Available online: https://www.globalchange.
gov/nca4 (accessed on 30 August 2018).
43.
United
Kingdom
(UK).
UK
Climate
Change
Risk
Assessment.
2017.
Available
online:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
ﬁle/584281/uk-climate-change-risk-assess-2017.pdf (accessed on 2 October 2018).
44.
World Health Organization (WHO). National Health, Vulnerability, Impact and Adaptation Assessments.
Available
online:
http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/environment-and-health/Climate-
change/country-work/national-health-vulnerability,-impact-and-adaptation-assessments (accessed on
30 October 2018).
45.
World Health Organization (WHO); Regional Ofﬁce for South-East Asia. Review of Climate Change and
Health Activities in SEARO Member States: Synthesis Report. Available online: http://www.searo.who.int/
entity/water_sanitation/review-of-cc.pdf?ua=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
46.
World Health Organization (WHO); Regional Ofﬁce for the Eastern Mediterranean. Climate Change and
Health: Framework for Action 2017–2021. EM/RC64/4. 2017. Available online: http://applications.emro.
who.int/docs/RC_technical_papers_2017_4_20040_en.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
47.
Buss, D. Climate Change and Health in the Americans.
2017.
Available online:
http:
//napexpo.org/workshops/lac/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/DBuss-PAHO-WHO-UNFCCC-NAP-
training-CRI-sept17.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
48.
Tapko, N. Protecting Health from Climate Change: Assessment of Vulnerability and Adaptation to Change in the
African Region; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2017.
49.
Zermoglio, F.; Steynor, A.; Jack, C. Climate Change and Health Risks in Senegal; United States Agency for
International Development: Washington, DC, USA, 2015.
50.
Zermoglio, F.; Steynor, A.; Jack, C.; Pinto, I.; Ebi, K.; Allen, L.; Quinn, C.; Colborn, J. Climate Change and Health
in Mozambique: Impacts on Diarrheal Disease and Malaria; United States Agency for International Development:
Washington, DC, USA, 2018.
51.
Government of Fiji; World Bank; Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery. Fiji 2017: Climate
Vulnerability Assessment—Making Fiji Climate Resilient; World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2017.
52.
Kovats, R.S.; Menne, B.; Ahern, M.J.; Patz, J.A. Chapter 9: National assessments of health impacts of climate
change: A review. In Climate Change and Human Health: Risks and Responses; World Health Organization:
Geneva, Switzerland, 2003.
53.
World Health Organization (WHO). Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment in Practice: An Evaluation; World
Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2018.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
21 of 25
54.
Berry, P.; Clarke, K.; Fleury, M.D.; Parker, S. Human health. In Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector
Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation; Warren, F.J., Lemmen, D.S., Eds.; Government of Canada: Ottawa, ON,
Canada, 2014.
55.
United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC). CDC’s Building Resilience against
Climate Effects (BRACE) Framework. 2018. Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/
BRACE.htm (accessed on 30 July 2018).
56.
Sheehan, M.D.; Fox, M.A.; Kaye, C.; Resnick, B. Integrating health into local climate response: Lessons from
the U.S. CDC Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative. Environ. Health Perspect. 2017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Levison, M.M.; Butler, A.J.; Rebellato, S.; Armstrong, B.; Whelan, M.; Gardner, C. Development of a climate
change vulnerability assessment using a public health lens to determine local health vulnerabilities: An
Ontario health unit experience. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Spickett, J.; Brown, H.; Katscherian, D. Health Impacts of Climate Change: Adaptation Strategies for Western
Australia. 2018. Available online: https://ww2.health.wa.gov.au/~{}/media/Files/Corporate/general%
20documents/Environmental%20health/Climate%20change/Health-impacts-of-climate-change.pdf
(accessed on 30 October 2018).
59.
Ebi, K.L.; Boyer, C.; Bowen, K.J.; Frumkin, H.; Hess, J. Monitoring and evaluation indicators for climate
change-related health impacts, risks, adaptation, and resilience. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15,
1943. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Schnitter, R.; Verret, M.; Berry, P.; Fook, T.C.T.; Lal, A.; Hales, S.; Edwards, S. An assessment of climate change
and health vulnerability and adaptation in Dominica. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018. submitted.
61.
WHO. Launch of Special Initiative to Address Climate Change Impact on Health in Small Island Developing
States.
2017.
Available online:
http://www.who.int/en/news-room/detail/12-11-2017-launch-of-
special-initiative-to-address-climate-change-impact-on-health-in-small-island-developing-states (accessed
on 30 July 2018).
62.
Hayes, K.; Poland, B. Addressing mental health in a changing climate: Incorporating mental health indicators
into climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
2018, 15, 1806. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.
Hess, J.J.; McDowell, J.Z.; Luber, G. Integrating climate change adaptation into public health practice: Using
adaptive management to increase adaptive capacity and build resilience. Environ. Health Perspect. 2012, 120,
171–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Albania Ministry of Health. Protecting Health from Climate Change in Albania: A Vulnerability Assessment;
Ministry of Health: Tirana, Albania, n.d. Available online: http://www.seeclimateforum.org/upload/
document/protecting_from_change.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
65.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Algeria. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246137/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.32-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
66.
Mani, M.; Wang, L. Climate Change and Health Impacts: How Vulnerable is Bangladesh and What Needs to be Done?
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development; The World Bank Group: Washington, DC, USA, 2014;
Available online: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21820 (accessed on 30 October
2018).
67.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Bangladesh.
Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208856/WHO_FWC_PHE_EPE_15.
02_eng.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
68.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Bhutan. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246124/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.17-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
69.
Effen, M.A.; Pardo, I.A.; Aparicio, J.; Mollinedo, R.; Cuellar, C.; Santa Cruz, W. Bolivia Pilot Assessment;
Ministry of Health:
La Paz, Bolivia, 2010.
Available online:
http://www.who.int/globalchange/
mediacentre/events/2010/costa_rica_consultation_200710/bolivia_va_Presentation.pdf
(accessed
on
30 October 2018).
70.
Confalonieri, U.E.C.; Marinho, D.P.; Rodriguez, R.E. Public health vulnerability to climate change in Brazil.
Climate Res. 2009, 40, 175–186. Available online: https://www.int-res.com/articles/cr_oa/c040p175.pdf
(accessed on 30 October 2018).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
22 of 25
71.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Brazil. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208857/WHO_FWC_PHE_EPE_15.03_eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
72.
Department of Preventative Medicine, Ministry of Health. Climate Change and Health in Cambodia: A
Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment; Ministry of Health: Phnom Penh, Cambodia, 2010. Available
online: http://www.who.int/globalchange/mediacentre/events/2010/costa_rica_consultation_200710/
CAMBODIA_va.pdf?ua=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
73.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Cambodia. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/250824/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.47-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
74.
World Health Organization Regional Office for the Western Pacific. Human Health and Climate Change in Pacific
Island Countries; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015; Available online: http://iris.wpro.
who.int/bitstream/handle/10665.1/12399/9789290617303_eng.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
75.
Navarro, L.L. Evaluación de Vulnerabilidad y Adaptación de la Salud al Cambio Climático en Costa Rica; Ministerio de
Salud: San José, Costa Rica, 2010; Available online: http://www.who.int/globalchange/mediacentre/events/
2010/costa_rica_consultation_200710/costa_rica_va_Presentation.pdf?ua=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
76.
Deressa, W.; Simane, B.; Kumie, A.; Woyessa, A.; Kaba, M.; Taye, G.; Berhane, G. Vulnerability and
Adaptation Assessment of Health to Climate Change in Ethiopia; Ministry of Health: Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
2015. Available online: http://www.who.int/globalchange/resources/wash-toolkit/vulnerability-and-
adaptation-assessment-of-health-to-climate-change-in-ethiopia.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
77.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Ethiopia. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208861/WHO_FWC_PHE_EPE_15.07_eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
78.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Fiji. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246138/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.35-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
79.
Pascal, M. Health Impacts of Climate Change in France—What are the Challenges for the French Institute for Public
Health Surveillance (InVS)? French Institute for Public Health Surveillance: Saint-Maurice, France, 2010;
Available online: http://invs.santepubliquefrance.fr/publications/2010/impact_sanitaire_changement_
climatique/impact_sanitaire_changement_climatique_rapport_uk.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
80.
Eis, D.; Helm, D.; Laußmann, D.; Stark, K. Klimawandel und Gesundheit Ein Sachstandsbericht; Robert
Koch-Institut:
Berlin,
Deutschland,
2010;
Available online:
https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/
Gesund/Umwelteinﬂuesse/Klimawandel/Klimawandel-Gesundheit-Sachstandsbericht.pdf?__blob=
publicationFile (accessed on 30 October 2018).
81.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Germany. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246122/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.19-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
82.
Asante, F.; Bawakyillenuo, S. Assessment of Existing Relevant Climate, Health, Poverty and Vulnerability
Information;
Report prepared for the Republic of Ghana Ministry of Health;
United Nations
Development Programme;
The Global Environmental Facility:
Accra, Ghana;
Available online:
http://www.gh.undp.org/content/dam/ghana/docs/Doc/Susdev/UNDP_GH_SUSDEV_CCH_
Assessment%20of%20Existing%20Climate%20Chnage_Health_Poverty_Vulnerability%20Infor....pdf
(accessed on 30 October 2018).
83.
Climate Change Impacts Study Committee. The Environmental, Economic and Social Impacts of Climate Change in
Greece; Bank of Greece: Athens, Greece, 2011; Available online: https://www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/
ClimateChange_FullReport_bm.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
84.
Pochanke-Alff, A.; Meincke, M.; Scheske, L.; Wuttge, E. (Eds.) Grenada Climate Change and Health Vulnerability
and Adaptation Assessment; Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit: Bonn, Germany, 2015;
Available online: http://www.iccas.gd/sites/default/ﬁles/resources/VA%20Grenada_Formatted_GIZ_
FinalApril.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
85.
Faragó, T.; Láng, I.; Csete, L. Climate Change and Hungary: Mitigating the Hazard and Preparing for the
Impacts—The “Vahava” Report; Hungarian Academy of Sciences: Budapest, Hungary, 2010; Available online:
https://www.unisdr.org/ﬁles/18582_thevahavareport08dec2010.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
23 of 25
86.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Indonesia. Available
online: http://www.who.int/globalchange/resources/country-proﬁles/PHE-country-proﬁle-Indonesia.
pdf?ua=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
87.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Iran. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246125/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.21-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
88.
Green, M.S.; Pri-or, N.G.; Capeluto, G.; Epstein, Y.; Paz, S. Climate change and health in Israel: Adaptation
policies for extreme weather events. Isr. J. Health Policy Res. 2013, 2, 11. Available online: https://ijhpr.
biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/2045-4015-2-23 (accessed on 30 October 2018). [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Wolf, T.; Menne, B. Environment and Health Risks from Climate Change and Variability in Italy; World Health
Organization Regional Ofﬁce for Europe: Copenhagen, Denmark, 2007; Available online: http://www.euro.
who.int/__data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/0007/95920/E90707.pdf?ua=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
90.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Italy. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/260380/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.52-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
91.
Ministry of Health. National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan of Jordan; Ministry of Health:
Amman, Jordan, 2012. Available online: http://www.moh.gov.jo/EchoBusV3.0/SystemAssets/PDFs/
PDFs%20AR/Strategies_AR/%D8%A7%D8%B3%D8%AA%D8%B1%D8%A7%D8%AA%D9%8A%D8%
AC%D9%8A%D8%A9%20%D9%88%D8%AE%D8%B7%D8%A9%20%D8%B9%D9%85%D9%84%20%D8%
AA%D9%83%D9%8A%D9%81%20%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%82%D8%B7%D8%A7%D8%B9%20%D8%A7%
D9%84%D8%B5%D8%AD%D9%8A.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
92.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Jordan. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246132/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.22-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
93.
Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation and Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources. Report on
Kenya Country Situation Analysis and Needs Assessment for the Preparation of National Plans of Joint Action
for Implementation of the Libreville Declaration on Health and Environment in Africa; Government of Kenya:
Nairobi, Kenya, 2009. Available online: http://www.healthyfutures.eu/images/healthy/deliverables/
D5.1/Kenya/kenya%20assessment%20for%20the%20preparation%20of%20national%20plans%20of%
20joint%20action%20for%20implementation%20of%20libreville%20declaration%202009.pdf (accessed on
30 October 2018).
94.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Kenya. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246133/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.23-eng.pdf;
jsessionid=721161A16C2B7AF584FFB37E86241184?sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
95.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Kiribati. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/260411/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.51-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
96.
World Health Organization Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc. Climate Change and Health in the
Western Paciﬁc Region; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015; Available online: http:
//www.google.ca/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=2ahUKEwjnm8328uXeAhVNm-
AKHe1jBqwQFjABegQIDBAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Firis.wpro.who.int%2Fbitstream%2Fhandle%
2F10665.1%2F12401%2F9789290617372_eng.pdf&usg=AOvVaw212Ge6py4KpDCAhDr0DfeF (accessed on
30 October 2018).
97.
Kendrovski, V. Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation Strategy Development in Health Sector due to Climate
Change in the Republic of Macedonia; Institute for Public Health of the Republic of Macedonia: Skopje,
Macedonia, 2010; Available online: http://www.who.int/globalchange/mediacentre/events/2010/costa_
rica_consultation_200710/macedonia_va_Presentation.pdf?ua=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
98.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Madagascar.
Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246140/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.
40-eng.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
99.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Malaysia. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208863/WHO_FWC_PHE_EPE_15.09_eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
24 of 25
100. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Maldives. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246134/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.25-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
101. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Mexico. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246116/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.26-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
102. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Morocco. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208864/WHO_FWC_PHE_EPE_15.10_eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
103. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Nepal. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246135/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.27-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
104. Royal Society Te Ap¯arangi.
Human Health Impacts of Climate Change for New Zealand; Royal Society
Te Ap¯arangi: Wellington, New Zealand, 2017; Available online: https://royalsociety.org.nz/assets/
documents/Report-Human-Health-Impacts-of-Climate-Change-for-New-Zealand-Oct-2017.pdf (accessed
on 30 October 2018).
105. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Nigeria. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208865/WHO_FWC_PHE_EPE_15.11_eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
106. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Oman. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208866/WHO_FWC_PHE_EPE_15.12_eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
107. Cruz, R.V.O.; Aliño, P.M.; Cabrera, O.C.; David, C.P.; David, L.T.; Lansigan, F.P.; Lasco, R.D.; Licuanan, W.R.Y.;
Lorenzo, F.M.; Mamauag, S.S.; et al. Philippine Climate Change Assessment: Impacts, Vulnerabilities and
Adaptation; The Oscar M. Lopez Center for Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management
Foundation, Inc. and Climate Change Commission: Pasig, Philippines, 2017. Available online: http:
//climate.gov.ph/images/knowledge/PhilCCA-WG2.pdf (accessed on 30 October 2018).
108. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Philippines.
Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208868/WHO_FWC_PHE_EPE_15.
14_eng.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
109. Diaz, J.; Ballester, F.; López-Vélez, R. Chapter 16—Impacts on Human Health. In A Preliminary Assessment
of the Impacts in Spain due to the Effects of Climate Change; Rodriguez, J.M.M., Ed.; Ministry of Environment:
Madrid, Spain, 2005; Available online: https://www.miteco.gob.es/es/cambio-climatico/temas/impactos-
vulnerabilidad-y-adaptacion/16_Impacts%20on%20human%20health_ing_tcm30-178530.pdf (accessed on
30 October 2018).
110. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Sri Lanka. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246141/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.45-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
111. Vöhringer, F.; Vielle, M.; Thurm, B.; Knoke, W.; Stocker, D.; Frehner, A.; Maire, S.; Thalmann, P. Assessing the
Impacts of Climate Change for Switzerland; Report Prepared for the Federal Ofﬁce for the Environment; The
Federal Ofﬁce for the Environment: Bern, Switzerland, 2017; Available online: https://infoscience.epﬂ.ch/
record/252804/ﬁles/EPFL_-_Assessing_the_impacts_of_climate_change_for_Switzerland.pdf (accessed
on 30 October 2018).
112. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Thailand. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208870/WHO_FWC_PHE_EPE_15.16_eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
113. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Timor-Leste.
Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246119/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.
29-eng.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
114. Raja, M. Health Impact Assessment Tunisia; Ministry of Public Health, Department of Hygiene and
Environmental Protection: Tunis, Tunisia, 2010. Available online: http://www.who.int/globalchange/
mediacentre/events/2010/costa_rica_consultation_200710/tunisia_va_Presentation.pdf?ua=1 (accessed
on 30 October 2018).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 2626
25 of 25
115. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Tunisia. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246121/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.46-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
116. Zinser, K. An Overview of Climate Change and Health in Uganda; United States Agency for International
Development: Washington, DC, USA, 2014. Available online: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/
ﬁles/asset/document/Uganda%2520CC%2520and%2520Health%2520Overview_CLEARED.pdf (accessed
on 30 October 2018).
117. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Uganda. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246136/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.30-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
118. Kovats, R.; Osborn, D.; Humphrey, K.; Thompson, D.; Johns, D.; Ayres, J.; Bates, P.; Baylis, M.; Bell, S.;
Church, A.; et al. UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report:
Chapter 5, People and the Built
Environment; Adaptation Sub-Committee of the Committee on Climate Change: London, UK, 2016; Available
online: https://www.theccc.org.uk/tackling-climate-change/preparing-for-climate-change/uk-climate-change-
risk-assessment-2017/ccra-chapters/people-and-the-built-environment/ (accessed on 30 October 2018).
119. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 United Kingdom.
Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246120/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.
31-eng.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
120. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 United Republic
of Tanzania. Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208869/WHO_FWC_
PHE_EPE_15.15_eng.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
121. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 United States of
America. Available online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/254647/WHO-FWC-PHE-
EPE-15.49-eng.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
122. World Health Organization (WHO). Climate Change and Health Country Proﬁle—2015 Vanuatu. Available
online: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/260416/WHO-FWC-PHE-EPE-15.53-eng.pdf?
sequence=1 (accessed on 30 October 2018).
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
