ORGANIZATIONS
Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources
An Indigenous-directed non-profit working in 
partnership with Indigenous communities to build 
capacity and support Indigenous-led responses 
to environmental challenges. 
Indigenous Climate Change Adaptation 
Planning Toolkit
A series of six guidebooks to support Indigenous 
communities interested in climate adaptation 
planning. Intended for communities to be used 
at all stages of adaptation. Also includes an 
Indigenous Languages Glossary Workbook.
The Firelight Group 
An Indigenous-owned consulting group providing 
research and advisory services for traditional 
knowledge and use studies, mapping, capacity 
building, planning, negotiation, and more. 
First Nations Technical Advisory Group (TSAG) 
Technical services and training for First Nations 
in Alberta in the areas of asset management, 
environmental management, fire safety, and 
more. “The Asset Management Toolkit and 
Resources: A First Nations Perspective” is 
available to download.
Future Ancestors Services 
Indigenous and Black-led and owned social 
enterprise advancing climate justice through 
an Indigenous and anti-racist lens. Offering 
training services, speaking services, research, and 
capacity building.
Indigenous Climate Action
An Indigenous-led organization committed to 
Indigenous sovereignty and Indigenous-led 
climate solutions. Publications, resources and 
training, webinar library, a podcast, and more. 
Indigenous Clean Energy Social Enterprise 
Publications, mentorship, a podcast, and events 
aimed at supporting an Indigenous-led clean 
energy future.
20/20 Catalysts Program
A mentorship and capacity building program 
providing applied and peer-to-peer learning 
opportunities for Indigenous clean energy 
champions.
ImaGENation
An Indigenous youth mentorship program 
facilitated by SevenGen, Indigenous Clean Energy, 
and Student Energy supporting Indigenous 
youth-led clean energy projects.
Generation Power 
Indigenous youth clean energy career training.
Decolonizing Power Podcast 
Hosted by hosted by Mihskakwan James Harper 
and Freddie Huppé Campbell.
Indigenous-led Clean Energy Projects Playlist 
Comprehensive video library featuring Indigenous 
clean energy projects from across Canada.
Indigenous Climate Hub
An Indigenous-led online platform of resources 
and information created by Okwaho Equal 
Source together with the Centre for Indigenous 
Environmental Resources.
Resource Library 
A global catalogue of organizations, articles, and 
multimedia.
Indigenous Climate Hub Members Network 
An online network for Indigenous peoples, 
communities, and organizations to connect and 
share climate-related news and resources.
Iron & Earth 
Nonprofit dedicated to the transition of the fossil 
fuel workforce.
Naheyawin
An Indigenous-led and owned agency building 
bridges between Indigenous and non-Indigenous 
peoples. Offering online courses and services 
on cultural awareness, Indigenous histories and 
diversity and inclusion. 
The Pembina Institute 
National think tank generating science-based 
research and reporting on energy challenges. 
The case for investing in clean energy in remote 
communities: recommendations on how to 
improve access to capital.
The Resilience Institute 
A registered charity supporting community-
driven adaptation and resilience initiatives that 
integrate local and scientific knowledges.
SevenGen 
Indigenous youth council committed to a 
sustainable and equitable energy future. Hosts an 
Indigenous Youth Energy Summit.
INDIGENOUS 
CLIMATE 
RESILIENCE
RESOURCE HUB
Edmonton
Grande Prairie
Fort McMurray
Calgary
Jasper
Banﬀ
Red Deer
Lethbridge
TREATY 8
TREATY 6
TREATY 7
Browse this resource to discover climate action 
initiatives, resources and funding sources.
Learn about climate adaptation and resilience while 
starting conversations and building relationships 
within and among communities, including
municipalities and Indigenous communities.
All listed resources and initiatives are 
either available nationally or within Alberta, 
homelands to: 
•	 First Nations outlined in Treaty 6, Treaty 7 
and Treaty 8 
•	 Aseniwuche Winewak Nation
•	 Non-Status Indigenous Nations/
Communities
•	 Métis Settlements established by the 
Métis Settlements Act
•	 Métis Nation of Alberta
•	 Self-governing Métis Nations/Communities
A SHARED Future
Community-based projects through 
Achieving Strength, Health, and Autonomy 
through Renewable Energy Development 
for the Future (A SHARED Future), a research 
program based at Queen’s University focused on 
renewable energy as a platform for reconciliation 
and relationship building.
Canadian Climate Institute 
Unnatural Disasters: Colonialism, climate 
displacement, and Indigenous sovereignty in 
Siksika Nation’s disaster recovery efforts.
Part of the Indigenous Perspectives series of case 
studies on Indigenous-led responses to climate 
change from across Canada.
First Nation Adapt Program
Projects in Alberta funded through the First 
Nation Adapt Program.
Green Energy Futures 
Video and audio case studies of green energy 
projects in Indigenous communities and 
municipalities across Alberta.
Indigenous Climate Hub
Indigenous Community Adaptation Projects 
Final reports and community vulnerability 
assessments for seven Indigenous communities.
Indigenous Community-based Climate 
Monitoring Program, funded projects
Projects in Alberta funded through the Indigenous 
Community-based Climate Monitoring Program.
Indigenous Climate Monitoring Toolkit 
A toolkit to support Indigenous communities in all 
phases of community-based climate monitoring 
projects. Includes case studies, an interactive map 
of Indigenous-led community-based monitoring 
projects from across Canada, a step-by-step 
guide, and an in-depth resource list.
Just Powers
A University of Alberta research initiative with 
a catalogue of resources and research projects 
focused on climate justice and a just energy 
transition. Including a documentary film and the 
Deep Energy Literacy podcast.
Municipal Climate Change Action Centre 
Town of Smoky Lake: Métis Crossing Solar Project
Case study and webinar recording on the Métis 
Crossing Solar Project, a partnership of the Métis 
Nation of Alberta, Town of Smoky Lake, and 
Smoky Lake County.
Prairies Regional Adaptation Collaborative 
Partners in Climate Action: How Beardy’s and 
Okemasis’ Cree Nation is addressing flood-related 
risks through knowledge sharing and collaboration
Outcomes of climate adaptation planning in 
Beardy’s and Okemasis’ Cree Nation (BOCN).
Rural Routes to Climate Solutions
Siksikaitsitapi Agriculture Project
On-farm and on-ranch climate solutions including 
regenerative agriculture and clean energy led by 
Kainai, Piikani, and Siksika First Nations. Podcast 
episodes available.
The Resilience Institute 
Piikani Nation Stories of Resilience - Our Stories of 
Resilience, Our Future
Bison & Climate Change - Willow Lake Métis Nation 
Stories of Resilience
Interactive webpages as part of the Stories 
of Resilience program, sharing Indigenous 
perspectives on climate change and resilience.
Fire with Fire Project Overview 
Partnership with Samson Cree, Piikani, Kainai, 
and Dene Tha’ First Nations aimed at building 
capacity for climate adaptation by braiding 
Indigenous and scientific knowledges. Includes 
the Keeping the Fire Burning webinar series; and 
three participatory videos created by the Kainai 
First Nation highlighting climate impacts in their 
community.
Partnering to Explore the Potential of Sweetgrass 
to Sequester Carbon
A partnership of The Resilience Institute, the 
Piikani Nation, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 
the University of Lethbridge, and Environment 
and Climate Change Canada. 
Natural Resources Canada 
Clean Energy for Rural and Remote Communities, 
funded projects
Renewable energy and capacity building projects 
funded by the Clean Energy for Rural and Remote 
Communities program.
KNOWLEDGE
CASE STUDIES
Assembly of First Nations (AFN)
Joint Committee on Climate Action Annual Report 
2020 & 2021
Action plans for First Nations climate leadership 
and regional case studies. The Joint Committee 
is made up First Nations representatives, AFN 
representatives, and Government of Canada 
officials.
National Climate Gathering Report - Driving 
Change, Leading Solutions 
Outcomes from AFN’s National Climate 
Gathering, March 2020.
Climate Change Adaptation Planning and 
Creation of a Local Early Action Plan: A Guide 
for Facilitating a Co-Created Adaptation 
Planning Process in Indigenous Communities
A guide to support community-led adaptation. 
Prepared by the Resilience Institute and All One 
Sky, with support from the Calgary Foundation.
Métis Nation of Alberta
Health and Climate Change Toolkit
Developed to communicate the intersections of 
climate change and health through the lens of 
Métis culture. 
Métis National Council
Métis Nation Climate Change and Health 
Vulnerability Assessment 
Prepared for the Métis National Council, this 
report identifies key climate risks and actions for 
the resiliency of Métis Nations across Canada.
Canada in a Changing Climate: Regional 
Perspectives Report
Chapter 4: Prairie Provinces
A report on climate adaptation and resiliency in 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba. Featuring 
a video of the late Anishinaabe Elder Dave 
Courchene.
REPORTS
To recommend an additional resource, 
please email contact@mccac.ca or 
visit mccac.ca/learning-centre.
INDIGENOUS CLIMATE RESILIENCE RESOURCE HUB
MCCAC.CA
Alberta Municipalities 
Resources to Support Relationship Building with 
Indigenous Leaders
Resources on Indigenous histories and 
relationship building as a starting place for 
municipal-Indigenous relations.
Municipal-Indigenous Relations
Including best practices for engaging with 
Indigenous leaders; ‘Engaging with Elders; A 
Co-created Story” guide developed by The Native 
Counselling Services of Alberta; Resources; and 
Municipal examples.
Webinar Recording - Reconciliation and 
Relationship Building with Indigenous Peoples 
An online session on municipal-Indigenous 
relations, featuring Elliott Young (pipikwan 
pêhtâkwan), Jaimy Miller (City of Edmonton), and 
Rachelle Venne (Institute for the Advancement of 
Aboriginal Women).
A Municipal Guide to the Truth And Reconciliation 
Commission’s Calls to Action 
A guide to assist municipal leaders in 
understanding the Calls to Action that are most 
applicable to municipal governments. 
Calgary Foundation
Treaty 7 Indigenous Ally Toolkit 
A toolkit for settler allies in Treaty 7 including 
background on Indigenous nations, histories, and 
languages.
Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources
Collaborative Leadership Initiative (CLI) 
A collaboration between Indigenous and municipal 
elected leaders on solutions to shared water 
challenges. View the CLI Manitoba Reconciliation 
in Action Documentary.
Centre for Race and Culture 
âpahkowâyânaw: Indigenous Education Sessions 
on Indigenous Issues and Advocacy
Recordings of online public education sessions on 
the historical legacies and current realities of anti-
Indigenous discrimination and racism. Explore 
other trainings offered through the Centre for 
Race and Culture.
City of Calgary
White Goose Flying Report 
A framework for advancing reconciliation in the 
City of Calgary.
City of Edmonton Indigenous Framework 
A framework meant to guide City of Edmonton 
staff in reconciliation and relationship building 
with Indigenous peoples.
City of Lethbridge and Lethbridge Indigenous 
Sharing Network
Reconciliation Implementation Plan 2017 - 2027 
A plan outlining a vision for reconciliation in the 
City of Lethbridge, including recommendations 
for municipal action on several of the TRC’s Calls 
to Action. 
First Nations Information Governance Centre 
The First Nations Principles of OCAP® 
Background on the principles of OCAP (ownership, 
control, access, and possession) establishing how 
First Nations’ information and data is collected, 
protected, used, and shared.
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM)
First Nation-Municipal Community Economic 
Development Initiative 
Implemented in partnership with Council for the 
Advancement of Native Development Officers 
(CANDO), an initiative to support capacity 
building and long term planning for community 
economic development between First Nations 
and municipalities.
Stronger Together: A Toolkit for First Nation-
Municipal Community Economic Development 
Partnerships 
An outcome from the Community Economic 
Development Initiative Phase 1. A starting point 
for municipalities and First Nations to establish 
long-term respectful working relationships. 
Joint Working Group Tool for partners 
A tool to guide the creation of a Joint Working Group.
First Nations-Municipal Newsletter 
Stay up to date on news about First Nation-
municipal collaboration from FCM.
First Nation-Municipal Land Use Planning Tool 
A tool to support joint land use planning.
Service Agreement Toolkit 
A toolkit for elected officials and staff from 
municipalities and First Nations seeking to 
develop working relationships with their 
neighbouring communities on local services and 
infrastructure.
Pathways to Reconciliation Report
Responses to the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission Calls to Action as part of FCM’s Big 
City Mayors’ Caucus.
Climate Atlas of Canada 
Indigenous Knowledges 
Videos, resources, and case studies on First 
Nations, Inuit, and Métis perspectives on climate 
change, Including the Indigenous Climate Atlas.
Indigenous Climate Atlas Launch 
Video launch and walkthrough of the Indigenous 
Climate Atlas, an interactive map with climate 
data for 634 First Nations, 53 Inuit communities, 
as well as projects across the Métis homeland
Climate Data 
A hub of climate data, including an interactive map.
Climate Telling Project Map
Interactive map of projects funded through 
Climate Change and Health Adaptation Program. 
See projects in Alberta in the areas of Food 
Security, Vulnerability Assessment, Traditional 
Medicine, and Knowledge Sharing & Education.
Indigenous Renewable Energy Map 
An interactive map of clean energy initiatives in 
Indigenous communities across Canada 
Natural Resources Canada
Climate Action Map
Interactive map of climate action projects across 
Canada, including in Indigenous and remote 
communities 
The Atlas of Canada – Remote Communities Energy 
Database 
An interactive map and database of remote 
communities by main power source 
Map of Adaptation Actions 
An interactive map as part of Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action, 
a national strategy lead by Natural Resources 
Canada
INDIGENOUS–MUNICIPAL RELATIONS
INTERACTIVE MAPS
Building Regional Adaptation Capacity and 
Expertise (BRACE) Program Webinar Series 
Webinars for climate adaptation practitioners 
offered through NRCAN’s BRACE program. 
See “Building Adaptation Skills for Indigenous 
Communities.”
Business Renewables Centre 
The “Social” IN ESG
Discussing social justice considerations and 
Indigenous participation in the renewable energy 
sector, featuring Indigenous Clean Energy 
Advisory Council Member Calvan Waquan.
Solar Alberta
Solar Series Webinars 
Recordings from Solar Alberta’s webinar series. 
Includes: “Supporting and Investing in Indigenous 
Clean Energy Projects: Indigenizing Economics, 
Environmental Protections and Governance” & 
“Supporting Indigenous-Led Solar on the Prairies: 
A Case Study on Strong Partnerships.”
WEBINARS
INDIGENOUS CLIMATE RESILIENCE RESOURCE HUB
MCCAC.CA
Alberta Indigenous Opportunities Corporation
AIOC offers loan guarantees (minimum $20 million 
to a maximum $250 million) to support investment 
into the Energy (oil & gas, renewables, power, and 
coal), Mining, Forestry, Agriculture, Transportation, 
Telecommunications sectors. Eligible for an 
Alberta-based Indigenous group or consortium 
with a minimum 25% Indigenous investment. 
Applications accepted on an ongoing basis. 
Canada Infrastructure Bank
Indigenous Community Infrastructure Initiative
Loan requests of a minimum $5 million and up to 
$100 million for community-infrastructure, clean 
power, public transit, or trade and transportation. 
Projects must provide a direct benefit to an 
Indigenous community. 
Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern 
Affairs Canada
First Nation Adapt Program
Funding for First Nations to assess and respond 
to climate change impacts on infrastructure and 
emergency management. No deadline to apply, 
applications reviewed on an ongoing basis. Open 
to First Nation communities, governments, 
and Indigenous organizations south of the 60th 
parallel
Indigenous Community-Based Climate 
Monitoring Program 
Funding for long-term Indigenous-led climate 
monitoring projects. 
Environment and Climate Change Canada 
Funding Directory
Indigenous climate and environmental funding.
Indigenous Services Canada 
Climate Change and Health Adaptation Program
Funding for First Nations and Inuit communities 
to identify, assess, and respond to the health 
impacts of climate change.
First Nation Infrastructure Fund & Indigenous 
Community Infrastructure Fund 
Funding for infrastructure projects in 9 eligible 
categories, including energy systems, fire 
protection, and cultural and recreational activities. 
Open to Indigenous communities, governments, 
and organizations. 
Indigenous Community Infrastructure Fund, Urban 
Component 
Infrastructure support targeted at improving the 
physical capacity, safety, security, and accessibility 
of facilities for urban Indigenous peoples. Open to 
urban and rural not-for-profit Indigenous service 
delivery organizations located off-reserve.
Strategic Partnerships Initiative 
An initiative for federal partners to reduce 
administrative burden, pool resources, and 
fill funding gaps in support of Indigenous 
involvement in economic opportunities. 
Natural Resources Canada 
Sistering Indigenous and Western Science 
(SINEWS) program
A paid mentorship program with the goal of 
increasing participation of Indigenous and non-
Indigenous women in science related disciplines. 
Accepting applications from pairs of female-
identifying students, at least one of which must 
identify as Indigenous. Find past projects here. 
Clean Energy for Rural and Remote Communities 
Program
Funding for renewable energy, energy efficiency 
measures, and capacity building in Indigenous, 
rural, and remote communities across Canada. 
No deadline to apply, applications reviewed on an 
ongoing basis. 
Indigenous Forestry Initiative
Financial support to Indigenous-led economic 
development projects in Canada’s forest sector. 
Applications accepted throughout the year
2 Billion Trees Program 
Funding to support action on climate change and 
biodiversity loss by planting two billion trees over 
10 years.
Alberta Ecotrust 
Grant programs, pilot projects, and advocacy 
for climate action, emissions reduction, and 
resiliency.
Alberta Emerald Foundation 
The Annual Emerald Awards recognizes 
organizations, projects, and individuals that 
address and mitigate environmental challenges 
in the areas of water, energy, infrastructure, and 
more. 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM)
Funding Opportunity Finder 
A tool to find funding through the Green Municipal 
Fund that is compatible with your community 
type, sector, and project type. Eligible for 
Indigenous communities working in partnership 
with a municipality, or with a shared service 
agreement with a municipality. 
FireSmart Canada 
Wildfire Community Preparedness Day
FireSmart Canada is a national program working 
to increase resilience to wildfire. Apply for a $500 
award to put towards a Wildfire Community 
Preparedness Day event to raise awareness of 
wildfire risk and increase community resilience.
Municipal Climate Change Action Centre
Climate Resilience Capacity Building Program
Funding for municipalities and Indigenous 
communities to assess adaptation measures and 
to create climate resilience plans.
Electric Vehicles Charging Programs 
Funding for the installation of electric vehicle 
charging infrastructure.
Natural Resource Canada 
Canada Greener Homes Initiative 
Grants and interest-free loans to support 
homeowners undertaking eligible home retrofits. 
Open to Indigenous governments, organizations, 
and homeowners.
FUNDING
INDIGENOUS ELIGIBILITY   Open to Indigenous students, communities, organizations and governments.
BROAD ELIGIBILITY   Open to Indigenous communities and municipalities.
INDIGENOUS CLIMATE RESILIENCE RESOURCE HUB
MCCAC.CA
The Municipal Climate Change 
Action Centre provides funding, 
technical expertise, and education to 
municipalities, schools, non-profits 
and community organizations.
A partnership of:
