 
 
Led by: 
Lead Technical Partner: 
With Fund Provided by: 
 
 
Community Solutions Network 
Innovations in data collection, 
monitoring and analysis to  
advance local climate 
resilience in public spaces  
 
 
 
April 2024 
2 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF INDIGENOUS LANDS AND 
TREATIES ACROSS CANADA 
The sacred lands and waterways upon which Evergreen operates and the built communities and cities across the 
country are the traditional territories, homelands and nunangat of the respective First Nations, Métis Nations and 
Inuit who are the long-time stewards of these land. These lands are occupied lands and subject to inherent rights, 
covenants, treaties and self-government agreements to peaceably share and care for the lands and resources 
across Turtle Island. These regions are still home to diverse Indigenous peoples who are still fighting for their 
sovereign rights and tirelessly protecting their traditional territories. As uninvited guests who live and work on 
these lands, we have a responsibility to know the treaties that tie us together, advocate for Indigenous rights and 
commit to learning our responsibilities to each other.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This resource was created for the Community Solutions Network led by Juan Rueda and written by Angela Parillo, 
Dipika Giritharan and Marielle Nicol with support from Alison Herr, Joshua Welch, Ismail Alimovski, Adriana Montes, 
Lorraine Hopkins, Toby Davine and Cheryl Gudz. It is supported by interviews with Mary Kruk (Data Specialist at 
DataStream) and Emily Sharma (Communications & Outreach Advisor at Natural Assets Initiative) and secondary 
research of relevant initiatives across Canada. We are grateful for the knowledge and experience of many experts 
in these fields who have inspired and informed this research brief and all community members who have 
participated in our events through the Community Solutions Network program.  
The Community Solutions Network is a program led by Evergreen in partnership with Open North. Our team 
works with communities to build capacity and improve the lives of residents using data and connected technology 
approaches. We deliver advisory services, workshops and online resources that focus on key areas such as climate 
resilience, data governance, inclusive public space, technology procurement and public engagement. The 
Community Solutions Network is supported by funding from the Government of Canada. The views expressed in 
this publication do not necessarily reflect those of the Government of Canada. 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
This introductory research brief is intended for leaders in communities in Canada who are interested in how data 
collection and monitoring of public spaces can support more climate-resilient communities. Drawing from 
international and national research and initiatives, this brief presents an overview of the role of public space in 
climate resilience and principles for data and technological innovations in climate resilience efforts. The brief 
contains information on smart tools and innovations that can be leveraged by municipalities to build local climate 
resilience and highlights examples in Canada that emphasize the role of data and technology. 
 
3 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Data collection, monitoring and analysis of public spaces can help communities identify and understand local 
climate risks to better guide strategic climate resilience planning. Public spaces such as parks, beaches, 
community centres, plazas, boardwalks and other spaces in a community have a unique role in local-level climate 
resilience. Public spaces can immediately experience the impacts of climate change (such as a flooded shoreline 
or a forest fire) and be part of the resilience efforts to climate change (such as bioswales or tree canopy 
coverage).  From green spaces that support ecological services (such as flood management, water storage and 
carbon sequestration) and reduce the urban heat island effect to cooling and warming centres for community 
member use, public spaces can contribute to a community’s climate resilience. 
 
Identifying and understanding the value of existing public spaces in building climate resilience can better inform 
decision-making in a community. Municipal and community leaders who understand local public assets (natural 
and built) are better able to identify and prepare for climate-related risks by building, protecting and restoring 
assets to be more climate-resilient.1 For example, a community that understands and values the flood 
management capabilities of an existing wetland is more likely to ensure the wetland is protected, maintained, 
enhanced and restored. 
 
Data collection and monitoring tools can support a community’s understanding of the existing natural assets in 
public spaces and how they can be best leveraged for improved climate resilience. Using technological 
innovations, advanced data collection and monitoring tools can analyze and predict the impacts of climate change 
on public infrastructure. An analysis of the data serves to inform decision-making on climate-related policies and 
plans but also serves to help embed climate resilience in all decision-making processes.  
 
PRINCIPLES FOR DATA COLLECTION AND MONITORING 
Decision-makers can use data to evaluate the effectiveness of services from natural assets and green infrastructure 
in a public space. For example, the popular usage of green public parks, the permeability of roads and pathways 
and the impact of green energy installations. While some data and information around public space can be as simple 
as measuring water levels and air temperature, other data points can be more complex or require analysis on their 
interrelated features and connections. Some data about public space may include sensitive information that should 
be proactively safeguarded from cybercriminals and privacy breeches and to ensure respectful authority of control. 
The Internet of Things (IoT) uses digital infrastructure to improve connectivity which can leave vulnerability gaps in 
how information is collected and stored. As such, data collection should include a human rights lens in how it is 
collected, stored and shared.2 Evergreen’s Smart Resilience for Canadian Municipalities research brief further 
explores tips for successful smart solutions. 
Open access data (data that is free and available for use3) empowers communities to access information within 
their region to have a more holistic and collaborative understanding of an area. For example, platforms like 
DataStream host open access water data to encourage knowledge-sharing and collaboration across Canada. Still, 
the ownership of data, or data sovereignty, is another important factor to embed in any data governance model 
and can support First Nations data sovereignty4 and Indigenous data sovereignty.5 The FAIR principles for data to 
be findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable6 and CARE principles of collective benefits, authority to control, 
responsibility and ethics7 provide guidance on how to effectively and respectfully support data management. These 
principles can be integrated into how data is managed and governed to help balance ownership and privacy 
concerns with open and accessible data.  
4 
 
DATA, CLIMATE RESILIENCE AND ASSET MANAGEMENT 
Public spaces, both built and natural, are assets that can be measured and monitored to understand their role and 
usage within a community as well as their contribution to a more climate-resilient community. Climate data 
collection and monitoring can support resilience planning, to help analyze climate variability impacts, as well as 
advance research methods to improve the understanding of climate patterns and modelling of climate systems 
(such as biological, chemical and physical climate properties).8 
Environmental data collection and analysis can also aid communities in identifying climate risks and can guide the 
development of strategic climate action plans that can limit climate stresses.9 Environmental data can include 
information about extreme precipitation levels, habitat and land use changes, the identification and presence of 
wildlife species, solid waste pollution and water characteristics.10  
Asset management is an integrated approach 
to sustainable service delivery. It can increase 
climate resiliency through proactive risk 
management, better maintenance of assets 
and more informed decision-making about 
climate change.13 It is important to consider the 
impact of climate change on public assets, 
infrastructure such as buildings (commercial 
and residential), roads, bridges, storm sewer 
systems, waste management, as well as on 
natural assets such as public parks, lakes or 
rivers, aquifers and groundwater, soil and other 
green infrastructure. Natural asset 
management is the process of creating an 
inventory of existing natural assets, the public 
services they provide and creating a 
maintenance plan for the natural assets14 in 
recognition of the capital value and services 
provided by natural assets.15  
 
Measuring, monitoring and maintaining the existing assets and services in a community through a comprehensive 
asset management system produces more well-informed and well-equipped decision-making. Data collection and 
monitoring efforts can support a local understanding of existing public natural assets and their services (for 
example, wetlands providing flood management and coastal storm protection and forests providing carbon 
storage and erosion control) and green infrastructure and their services (such as raingardens or bioswales) as part 
of both natural and engineered infrastructure systems.16  Effective monitoring programs, maintenance and 
rehabilitation can support the services of natural assets while saving capital and operating costs.17 Natural asset 
management encourages the consideration of the intrinsic and ancillary benefits of natural assets in planning 
processes (for example, choosing to restore a green public park to improve flooding issues in an urban area rather 
than investing in a new impervious stormwater management system).     
Data collection and monitoring innovations can also be used to understand the interconnected social, economic 
and cultural impacts of climate change.18 Climate change disproportionately affects vulnerable or at-risk 
populations based partly on their geographical location, financial or socioeconomic status, access to resources and 
services and other barriers towards decision-making processes.19 Understanding the demographics of community 
 
Biocultural diversity for reconciliation 
Biocultural diversity recognizes and connects 
biological diversity and cultural diversity for more 
resilient ecosystems.11 Biocultural diversity analyses 
data and information about humans and nature to 
integrate their inherent connections for a more 
holistic approach to climate resilience.12 For example, 
the Great Niagara Escarpment Indigenous Cultural Map 
is a multimedia online resource with photos, videos 
and maps exploring the Indigenous historic, cultural 
and natural features of the Niagara Escarpment.  
 
5 
 
members and intersecting environmental factors (such as lower-income housing developments built in a flood 
zone) can help make more informed choices to address the impacts of climate change. For example, developing 
public alert systems based on the unique needs of the community or developing a relocation plan that thoughtfully 
reflects the cultural needs of the impacted community.  
 
 
 
Natural Asset Management in Gibsons, BC 
The Town of Gibsons, BC is a coastal community that has been at the forefront of municipal asset 
management in Canada for decades. Through natural asset management, Gibsons uses data and 
information about its natural assets to value the municipal services they provide for the community. For 
example, natural storm water ponds are used to treat stormwater run-off and reduce the impact of 
flooding; creeks and wetlands help manage stormwater; aquifers serve the wells and springs for drinking 
water; the foreshore protects the waterfront from storm surges and sea level rise, among many other 
ecosystem services from natural assets.20  
In 2014, the Town of Gibsons created a municipal asset management policy that recognized natural assets 
and their value alongside traditional capital assets.21 Since then, dozens of initiatives have been developed 
including the Healthy Harbour Project for eco-asset management that uses data to ensure a vibrant and 
active harbour, the Costal Resilience project to better understand the protective benefits of coastal 
infrastructure from storm surges and coastal erosion, the Urban Forest Plan which includes a Tree 
Preservation Bylaw to protect tree canopy coverage and other innovative projects.  
6 
 
TOOLS FOR DATA COLLECTION AND MONITORING OF 
PUBLIC ASSETS 
Collecting data can be as simple as using pen and paper to record observations (such as the number of people 
visiting a public park daily). Manual observations can be transferred to computer software to create tables and 
graphs to help synthesize and analyze the information.  
Further, smartphone applications can automatically synthesize observations input by the user into a visual display. 
Even more sophisticated is the use of remote data collection tools that gather and transfer information through 
IoT. For example, input data collected around wave and storm size, recurrence periods, flood damage, erosion 
damage and other quantitative factors can be interpreted and evaluated by an analysis tool, such as the Coastal 
Toolbox, to understand the role or coastal natural assets in flood and erosion management.22  
Tools like artificial intelligence (AI) or other machine learning 
technologies can also be leveraged to analyze, forecast and 
interpret collected data and produce maps or scenarios to better 
inform decision-making. For example, pollution susceptibility 
mapping using AI can track pollution levels in public spaces and 
support governments in taking action and improving resilience in 
urban areas.25 Evergreen’s AI for the Resilient City program is a 
data visualization tool focused on Urban Heat Islands and 
extreme heat as well as their impacts on cities throughout 
Canada, empowering municipalities to support policy changes 
for communities.26  
Data collection and monitoring innovations that use AI or other 
innovative technologies for their analysis can support more 
informed choices around climate-related risks. For example, 
flood modelling powered by AI data can analyze the extreme 
effects of sea-level rise on coastal communities by examining 
climate indicators such as infrastructure, topography and land 
use.27  Based on this analysis, AI can determine which areas are 
more vulnerable to flooding and erosion events. This better 
informs decision-making in constructing sea walls with multi-use 
pathways or other resolutions.28  
 
NATURAL ASSET DATA COLLECTION AND MONITORING 
Data management ranges from simple information gathering and storage to more complex data sets and data 
hubs that can coalesce and analyze information at large scales. IoT has improved the efficiency of data collection 
by remotely transmitting gathered information to wherever the data is being stored and used. Areas that may be 
difficult to access (such as large forests with no roads) can be analyzed by innovative technologies that collect and 
interpret observed inputs from a public space. Depending on the intended output, a mix of data collection 
methods can be used by communities to develop a fulsome understanding of a public space. 
 
AI Reporting 
The Accelerating Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Reporting guide from Planet, 
Microsoft, the Natural Capital Project 
and the Gund Institute demonstrates 
how to streamline biodiversity and 
ecosystem reporting using Earth 
observation (EO) and artificial 
intelligence (AI).23 The guide details the 
scalability and interoperability of EO and 
AI measurement techniques for users to 
integrate into workflows to enable more 
meaningful targets for nature-based 
reporting.24 
 
7 
 
• 
Sensors 
Sensor data “is the output of a device that detects and responds to some type of input from the physical 
environment.”29 Sensors can collect information based on the physical signals of where they’re located measuring 
temperature, air quality, water levels, surrounding objects and a myriad of other parameters. Sensors can be fairly 
simple (such as water test strips that rely on more manual recordkeeping) or more complex (such as electronic 
sensors that remotely gather, store and transmit data at higher frequencies). For example, sensors can be used to 
understand the water quality at a public beach.  
• 
Aerial and satellite imagery 
Aerial imagery captures images from aircrafts, drones or other elevated views (including satellites) to provide 
visual pictures of public areas. The images can be used to compare different time periods or provide visual access 
to inaccessible spaces. Aerial imagery is also used during emergency management as a safe means of monitoring 
the emergency event. While technology continues to improve in the quality of images produced, the output’s 
image resolution is an important consideration when using aerial or satellite imagery. High, medium and low-
resolution imagery have different uses depending on the coverage area and the amount of detail required. For 
example, high resolution imagery (such as a 30-metre resolution) can be used for capturing tree canopy 
coverage30 or other vegetation monitoring. In contrast, lower resolution imagery can be used for larger land areas 
and understanding broader trends.31  
• 
Mapping 
Mapping is a powerful visual approach to understanding and analyzing climate resilience. Maps can visually 
demonstrate environmental factors (such as tree canopy coverage), physical infrastructure (such as building 
density), socioeconomic factors (such as demographics or income levels) and other factors of interest. Maps 
display collected data in a visual and accessible format that can also be used for education and storytelling. 
Geographic information systems (GIS) overlays such as wetlands, local demographics, land cover, and zoning can 
be mapped to visually understand how the different characteristics contribute to spatial trends that intersect and 
relate to each other.  Further, tools like ArcGIS StoryMaps use GIS to creatively integrate text, photos, videos and 
maps to narrate data and information visually. The City of Kitchener uses a Natural Areas Story Map for users to 
explore natural areas in the region. 
• 
Surveys 
Surveys are another means of collecting data and information and can include census surveys of populations or 
other more direct sample surveys. Surveys can help to understand the demographics of a region (age, 
socioeconomic background, etc.), the use of a public space (how many people use a space, why a space is being 
used, when the space is most or least used), the perception or public interest in a certain topic (such as climate 
change) and other considerations. Surveys can be administered in-person or through web-based platforms (such 
as SurveyMonkey) that can also be accessed using smart phone applications (such as CollectMobile or 
NoiseCapture) or other creative tools for data collection. For example, a survey can be administered to monitor 
and measure the use of a public cooling centre during an extreme heat event to learn how many individuals are 
using the centre, as well as the accessibility or perceived safety of the space, among other qualitative factors.  
• 
Public engagement 
Engagement with experts, local community groups and individuals provide qualitative information to better 
understand the experiences and opinions of relevant parties. Interviews and public engagements can be 
conducted in-person, through phone calls or using online resources such as Microsoft Teams, Zoom, email or 
other software as well as through smart phone applications or websites. Public engagement can help understand 
how community members use and value a public space along a waterfront for recreation and cultural traditions. 
8 
 
Further, meaningful engagement with local Indigenous communities can facilitate Indigenous knowledge sharing 
to better acknowledge and respect the value of public spaces.  
CONCLUSION 
Data collection and monitoring methods support our understanding of local climate risks and the role of built and 
natural infrastructure in public spaces in addressing climate related impacts. Valuable insights can be gleaned from 
data and information about a public space to inform decision-making on the climate resilient properties of 
infrastructure and, through analysis and future forecasting, the potential climate-related impacts of different 
decisions and developments. Innovative data collection and monitoring technologies supports efficient and 
effective understandings of local climate risks and the role of public spaces is addressing climate change.  
 
GLOSSARY 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is the “simulation of human intelligence in programmed machines.”32 AI can play a major 
role in climate adaptation, mitigation and resilience efforts by collecting and interpreting large datasets in real 
time, which can help detect early warnings for severe weather occurrences and implement prevention efforts 
earlier.33 
Climate resilience describes the capacity to respond to and adapt to or cope with climate change impacts and is 
“the capacity of social, economic and environmental systems to cope with a hazardous event or trend or 
disturbance, responding or reorganizing in ways that maintain their essential function, identity and structure, 
while also maintaining the capacity for adaptation, and learning and transformation.34 
Earth Observation (EO) refers to the usage of remote sensing technologies to monitor land, marine (seas, rivers, 
lakes) and atmosphere.35  
Geographic information systems (GIS) are computer-based systems for capturing, displaying and interpret 
geographic data.36 
Internet of Things (IoT) refers to “the network of physical objects, or things, which are connected to other devices 
and systems over the Internet.”37 
Natural assets are natural resources and ecosystems that provide services and functions to people. Natural assets 
include resources like wetlands, forests and fields.38  
Natural asset management is an approach that recognizes the benefits natural assets in decisions about the 
management of infrastructure assets.39  
Urban heat islands are urbanized areas that experience higher temperatures than outlying areas. Structures such 
as buildings, roads, and other infrastructure absorb and re-emit the sun’s heat more than natural landscapes such 
as forests and water bodies. Urban areas, where these structures are highly concentrated and greenery is limited, 
become “islands” of higher temperatures relative to outlying areas.40 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
1 Tomer, A., George, C., Schuetz, J., & Gill, J. (2023, December 4). How climate risk data can help communities 
become more resilient. Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/how-climate-risk-data-can-help-communities-
become-more-resilient/  
2 A Human Rights-based Approach to Data: Leaving no one behind in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development. (2018). Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 
https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/HRIndicators/GuidanceNoteonApproachtoData.pdf  
3 Government of Canada, Statistics Canada. (2023, April 4). Open data. https://www.statcan.gc.ca/en/our-
data/where/open-data 
4 First Nation Information Governance Centre. 2022. “Exploration of the Impact of Canada’s Information 
Management Regime of First Nations Data Sovereignty.” August 2022. https://fnigc.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/FNIGC_Discussion_Paper_IM_Regime_Data_Sovereignty_EN.pdf. 
5 Indigenous Data Sovereignty: Toward an Agenda. (2016). [Book]. In T. Kukutai & J. Taylor (Eds.), Research 
monograph (Australian National University. Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research). Australia National 
University Press. https://press-files.anu.edu.au/downloads/press/n2140/pdf/book.pdf  
6 Wilkinson, M. D., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, I. J., Appleton, G., Axton, M., Baak, A., Blomberg, N., Boiten, J., Da 
Silva Santos, L. O. B., Bourne, P. E., Bouwman, J., Brookes, A. J., Clark, T. W., Crosas, M., Dillo, I., Dumon, O., 
Edmunds, S., Evelo, C. T., Finkers, R., . . . Mons, B. (2016). The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data 
management and stewardship. Scientific Data, 3(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18 
7 CARE Principles — Global Indigenous Data Alliance. (2023, January 23). Global Indigenous Data Alliance. 
https://www.gida-global.org/care 
8 Data and observations. (n.d.). United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
https://unfccc.int/topics/resilience/resources/data-and-observations  
9 Tomer, A., George, C., Schuetz, J., & Gill, J. (2023, December 4). How climate risk data can help communities 
become more resilient. Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/how-climate-risk-data-can-help-communities-
become-more-resilient/ 
10 What you can use to collect environmental data: Observation and recording through pen and paper. (n.d.). 
OpenLearn Create. https://www.open.edu/openlearncreate/mod/book/view.php?id=181353  
11 Raygorodetsky, G. (2012, November). Biocultural Resilience for Systems Change. Our World - United Nations 
University. https://ourworld.unu.edu/en/biocultural-resilience-for-systems-change  
12 Reuniting Nature and Culture: The North American Declaration on Biocultural Diversity. (2019, November). 
Canadian Commission for UNESCO. https://en.ccunesco.ca/blog/2019/11/north-american-declaration-on-
biocultural-diversity  
13 BC Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing, Union of BC Municipalities, & Asset Management BC. (2019). 
Climate Change and Asset Management [Report]. Asset Management BC. 
https://www.assetmanagementbc.ca/wp-content/uploads/Climate-Change-and-Asset-Management.pdf  
14 Brooke, R., O’Neill, S. J., & Cairns, S. (2017). Defining and scoping municipal natural assets. 
https://mnai.ca/media/2018/02/finaldesignedsept18mnai.pdf  
15 Ibid. 
16 Union of BC Municipalities, Asset Management BC, & BC Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. (2019). 
Integrating Natural Assets into Asset Management. In Asset Management BC. 
https://www.assetmanagementbc.ca/wp-content/uploads/Integrating-Natural-Assets-into-Asset-Management.pdf  
17 Natural Assets Initiative. (2018). Primer on Natural Asset Management for FCM’s 2018 Sustainable Communities 
Conference. In Natural Assets Initiative. https://mnai.ca/media/2018/01/FCMPrimer_Jan1_2018.pdf  
18 Campbell, J. (n.d.). We lack data for 68% of SDG indicators – UN-SPBF. UN Science Policy Business Forum. 
https://un-spbf.org/guest-insights/jillian-campbell/we-lack-data-for-68-of-sdg-indicators-closing-data-gaps-
essential-to-achieving-sdgs/  
19Newell, P., Srivastava, S., Naess, L. O., Gerardo, T. C., & Price, R. (2023). Towards Transformative Climate Justice: 
an Emerging Research agenda. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change (WIREs Climate Change). 
https://wires.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wcc.733  
 
10 
 
 
20 Town of Gibsons. (2014). Towards an Eco-asset Strategy in the Town of Gibsons. In Town of Gibsons. 
https://gibsons.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Eco-Asset-Strategy.pdf  
21 Ibid. 
22 Managing natural assets to increase coastal resilience. (2021). In Natural Assets Initiative (pp. 1–65). 
https://davidsuzuki.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/Coastal-Assets-Guidance-Document-2021.pdf  
23  Lombardo, S. (2024, January 23). Planet, Microsoft, and researchers build new AI-focused reso. . . Planet.com. 
https://www.planet.com/pulse/planet-microsoft-and-researchers-build-new-ai-focused-resource-for-environmental-
reporting  
24 Ibid. 
25 Explainer: How AI helps combat climate change. (2023, November 10). UN News. 
https://news.un.org/en/story/2023/11/1143187  
26 AI for the Resilient City - Evergreen. (2023, November 23). Evergreen. https://www.evergreen.ca/impacts/ai-for-
the-resilient-city/ 
27 Jain, H., Dhupper, R., Shrivastava, A., Kumar, D., & Kumari, M. (2023). AI-enabled strategies for climate change 
adaptation: protecting communities, infrastructure, and businesses from the impacts of climate change. 
Computational Urban Science, 3(25). https://doi.org/10.1007/s43762-023-00100-2  
28 Ibid. 
29 Lutkevich, B. (2023, January 5). Sensor data. TechTarget - IoT Agenda. 
https://www.techtarget.com/iotagenda/definition/sensor-data  
30 For example, the USDA Forest Service uses tree canopy cover geospatial datasets with spatial resolutions of 30 
metres:  https://www.mrlc.gov/data/type/tree-canopy  
31 Quantum Inc. (2023, April 28). High-Res vs Mid-Res vs Low-Res: What type of satellite imagery fits the bill? 
Medium. https://medium.datadriveninvestor.com/high-res-vs-mid-res-vs-low-res-what-type-of-satellite-imagery-
fits-the-bill-78cbd45f5d79  
32  Smart Cities Glossary - Evergreen Resource Hub. (2023, November 24). Evergreen Resource Hub. 
https://futurecitiescanada.ca/portal/resources/smart-cities-glossary/  
33  Fighting climate change with the AI for the Planet Alliance. (2023, April). UNESCO. 
https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/fighting-climate-change-ai-planet-alliance  
34  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2022. “Annex II - Glossary - Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change.” https://archive.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg2/WGIIAR5-AnnexII_FINAL.pdf. 
35 What is Earth Observation? (2023, May 16). European Union Agency for the Space Programme. 
https://www.euspa.europa.eu/eu-space-programme/copernicus/what-earth-observation  
36 GIS (Geographic Information System). (n.d.). National Geographic Education. 
https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/geographic-information-system-gis/  
37 Smart Cities Glossary - Evergreen Resource Hub. (2023, November 24). Evergreen Resource Hub. 
https://futurecitiescanada.ca/portal/resources/smart-cities-glossary/ 
38 Natural Assets Initiative. (2018). Primer on Natural Asset Management for FCM’s 2018 Sustainable Communities 
Conference. In Natural Assets Initiative. https://mnai.ca/media/2018/01/FCMPrimer_Jan1_2018.pdf  
39 Brooke, R., O’Neill, S. J., & Cairns, S. (2017). Defining and scoping municipal natural assets. 
https://mnai.ca/media/2018/02/finaldesignedsept18mnai.pdf 
40 “Heat Island Effect.” 2023. United States Environmental Protection Agency. https://www.epa.gov/heatislands. 
 
 
 
     evergreen.ca 
Led by: 
Lead Technical Partner: 
With Fund Provided by: 
