Cheryl Evans
Dr. Anabela Bonada
Dr. Blair Feltmate
Supported by:
December 2023
WILDFIRE-READY 
PRACTICAL GUIDANCE TO STRENGTHEN 
THE RESILIENCE OF CANADIAN HOMES 
AND COMMUNITIES
Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy 
in Action
About the Intact Centre of Climate Adaptation
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is an applied research centre at the University of 
Waterloo. The Intact Centre was founded in 2015 with a gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s 
largest property and casualty insurer. The Intact Centre helps residents, communities, and businesses to 
reduce risks associated with climate change and extreme weather events. For additional information, visit: 
www. intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca.
About the University of Waterloo 
The University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation university. With more than 42,000 full and part-time 
students (Fall 2022), the university is home to the world’s largest co-operative education system of its kind. The 
university’s unmatched entrepreneurial culture, combined with an intensive focus on research, powers one of the 
top innovation hubs in the world. For additional information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca. 
About the Intact Financial Corporation 
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX: IFC) is the largest provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in 
Canada, a leading provider of global specialty insurance, and, with RSA, a leader in the U.K. and Ireland. Our 
business has grown organically and through acquisitions to over $21 billion of total annual premiums. In Canada, 
Intact distributes insurance under the Intact Insurance brand through a wide network of brokers, including its 
wholly-owned subsidiary BrokerLink, and directly to consumers through belairdirect. Intact also provides affinity 
insurance solutions through the Johnson Affinity Groups. In the US, Intact Insurance Specialty Solutions provides 
a range of specialty insurance products and services through independent agencies, regional and national brokers, 
and wholesalers and managing general agencies. In the U.K., Ireland, and Europe, Intact provides personal, 
commercial and specialty insurance solutions through the RSA brands. 
All findings and recommendations of this study are those of the Intact Centre. 
Acknowledgements
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation thanks the following “boots-on-the-ground” community wildfire 
resilience practitioners for their contributions and advice, including:
Jason Brolund, Fire Chief at City of West Kelowna, British Columbia
Chris Chopik, Director, Resilient Homes Canada, Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Dr. Mike Flannigan, BC Innovation Research Chair in Predictive Services, Emergency Management and Fire 
Science, Thompson Rivers University
Chris Gainham, Building Manager, Regional District of Central Kootenay 
Kelvin Hirsch, (Retired) Forest Research Director, Canadian Forest Service, Natural Resources Canada
Kelly Johnston, Fire and Forest Professional, Wildland Professional Solutions Inc.
Simon Massé, Risk Mitigation Coordinator, La Société de protection des forêts contre le feu (SOPFEU)
Dan Séguin, Manager of Community Sustainability, Regional District of Central Kootenay 
Laura Stewart, FireSmart Specialist, Alberta Forestry and Parks
Quentin Spila, Technical Coordinator, FireSmart Canada
Kelsey Winter, Manager of Wildfire Operations Research, FPInnovations
Rachel Woodhurst, FireSmart BC Provincial Liaison
Magda Zachara, Program Manager, FireSmart Canada
FireSmart, Intelli-feu and other associated Marks are trademarks of  the Canadian Interagency Forest Fire 
Centre (CIFFC).
Citation 
Evans, C., Bonada, A., & Feltmate, B. (2023). Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of 
Canadian Homes and Communities. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. 
Cover Photo: Fort McMurray, Alberta neighbourhood partially impacted by wildfire. Photo taken May 25, 2016, 
courtesy of Alan Westhaver, ForestWise Environmental Consulting Ltd.
For information about this report, contact Cheryl Evans: c8evans@uwaterloo.ca  
Disclaimer 
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible. The Intact Centre 
cannot make any guarantees of any kind, as to the completeness, accuracy, suitability, or reliability of the data provided in the report. This 
report has been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only and does not constitute professional advice. You should not act 
upon the information contained in this publication without obtaining specific professional advice. No representation or warranty (express 
or implied) is given as to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this publication, and Intact Centre employees and 
affiliates do not accept or assume any liability, responsibility, or duty of care for any consequences to you or anyone else acting, or refraining 
to act, in reliance on the information contained in this report or for any decision based upon it. All dollar figures are Canadian dollars.
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 
5
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires 
10
1.1 Wildfire and Climate Change 
11
1.2 Impacts of Wildfire 
11
1.2.1 Physical Impacts 
12
1.2.2 Environmental Impacts 
14
1.2.3 Social Impacts 
15
1.2.4 Economic Impacts 
17
2. Wildfire Management Across Canada 
20
2.1 Shifting the Way Wildfires are Managed 
22
2.2 Wildfire-Ready Best Practice Guidance 
24
2.3 Roadmap to Wildfire Resilience 
25
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities 
27
3.1 Wildfire-Ready Homes 
28
3.1.1 Benefits of Improving Home Wildfire Resilience 
28
3.1.2 Three Steps to a Cost-Effective FireSmartTM Home 
29
3.1.3 Free Self-Help Resources for Residents 
35
3.1.4 Accelerating the Uptake of Actions to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes 
36
3.2 Wildfire-Ready Communities 
38
3.2.1 Benefits of Improving Community Wildfire Resilience  
39
3.2.2 Three Features of a Wildfire-Ready Community 
39
3.2.3 Free Self-Help Resources for Communities 
44
3.2.4 Accelerating Uptake of Actions to Create Wildfire-Ready Communities 
45
4. Conclusions and Next Steps  48
References 
51
5
Executive Summary
Canada’s record-shattering 2023 wildfire season burned an area three 
times the size of Nova Scotia (approximately18.5 million hectares), 
more than doubling the previous record set in 1995, and representing 
eight times the annual average area burned over the past 25 years (2.3 
million hectares) (CIFFC, 2023). An unusually warm and dry winter 
and spring in much of the country set the stage for an unprecedented 
wildfire season that forced 200,000 Canadians from their homes and 
ignited nation-wide calls for large scale investment in preventative 
action to strengthen community wildfire resilience. 
Canadians living in 
forested and grassland 
regions can reduce 
their wildfire risk 
by up to 75%.
5
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
6
Addressing the United Nations in September 2023, one 
month after wildfire tore through his community, West 
Kelowna Fire Chief Jason Brolund drove home the 
wildfire-ready message, “Over $20 million was spent 
reacting to [the West Kelowna] fire, not to mention 
the insurance losses, which could be triple that. What 
could we have accomplished if we used that same 
amount of money proactively? We’re spending the 
money on the wrong end of the problem.” Chief 
Brolund emphasized the critical importance of wildfire-
ready investment to minimize damage and streamline 
recovery, “$10,000 worth of sprinklers and pumps 
were placed on our new water treatment plant, and it 
saved that $75 million critical infrastructure… It will 
start providing clean drinking water in just a couple of 
days.” (Peters, 2023)
Preventative action is urgently needed TODAY 
to help protect homes and communities from 
the growing threat of wildfires.
An estimated 60% of Canadian communities 
are located in the wildland-urban interface 
(WUI) – the area where human settlement meets or 
intermingles with forests and grasslands. Proximity 
to these wildfire-prone natural ecosystems make 
communities vulnerable to damage and disruption due 
to wildfire (Johnston and Flannigan, 2018). Home to 
an estimated 12.3% of Canadians, including 32.1% 
of the on-reserve Indigenous population (Erni et al., 
2021), community wildfire risk has escalated due 
to multiple factors. These include the expansion of 
urban and industrial development, lack of nationally 
accepted minimum building standards to safeguard 
against wildfire damage, an increase in the amount 
and continuity of fuels (e.g., vegetation) surrounding 
communities as a consequence of roughly 100 years 
of fire suppression (Parisien et al., 2020). These factors 
are further compounded by the impacts of climate 
change (Bénichou et al., 2021). Climate change is 
lengthening the wildfire season, contributing to larger, 
more destructive wildfires, and impacting areas across 
the country that are not typically regarded as wildfire-
prone (Coogan et al, 2020). The Halifax-area wildfire 
that destroyed 200 buildings in late spring, 2023, is a 
prime example of unprecedented impact in eastern 
Canada (CBC, 2023). 
Although wildfires may pose threats to Canadian 
homes and communities, they have also played a vital 
role in maintaining the ecological health of some of 
the country’s forests and grasslands for thousands of 
years. The good news is that with education 
and preventative action to protect homes and 
communities in the WUI, Canadians can work 
together to learn to live with wildfire. 
This guide identifies many practical actions that can be 
taken at the home and community level to reduce the 
risk of damage and disruption due to wildfire events 
and hasten community recovery. 
2023
18.5 million hectares (estimated)
Area burned by wildﬁre in Canada
Annual average (1998-2022)
2.3 million hectares
Executive Summary
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
7
The information presented is a user-friendly synthesis 
of voluntary best practice guidance developed by 
the National Research Council, Canada’s largest 
federal research and development organization, and 
by FireSmartTM Canada, a national program that has 
been helping WUI communities improve their wildfire 
resilience for 30 years.
Three Steps to a Cost-Effective FireSmart 
Home (Figure 1) is an easy-to follow, step-by-step 
guide for residents to make their homes and properties 
more resistant to wildfire ignition and minimize 
damage if ignition occurs. The steps are:
1.	Maintain What You’ve Got at Least 
Twice Per Year
2.	Complete Simple Upgrades
3.	Complete More Complex Upgrades
Three Features of a Wildfire-Ready 
Community (Figure 2) highlights best practice 
guidance that communities can integrate into their 
wildfire risk management plans, to limit damage 
and disruption from wildfire events and strengthen 
emergency preparedness. The three wildfire-ready 
features are:
•	Wildfire-Ready Structures and 
Infrastructure
•	Wildfire-Ready Community Design
•	Wildfire-Ready Emergency Response
Residents, governments, Indigenous Peoples, non-
governmental organizations, and businesses all have 
a role to play in creating resilient communities. 
Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy (NAS) 
(Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC), 
2023a) established short-term targets that can be 
achieved TODAY to help community members 
begin their collective journey to reduce risk, prepare 
for emergencies, and “build back better” following a 
wildfire event. The targets are:
•	Risk Awareness – By 2025, 60% of 
Canadians, including northerners and 
Indigenous Peoples, are aware of the disaster 
risks facing their household.
•	Preventative Action – By 2025, 50% of 
Canadians have taken concrete actions to better 
prepare for and respond to climate risks facing 
their household.
•	Community Protection Plans – 
Communities, including northern and 
Indigenous communities, in zones of high 
risk, as identified by provinces and territories, 
develop wildfire community prevention and 
mitigation plans by 2030, with up to 15% 
implemented by 2028.
•	Building Back Better – By 2025, complete 
the modernization of the Disaster Financial 
Assistance Arrangements to incentivize disaster 
risk reduction and improve recovery outcomes 
from large-scale disasters.
This report aims to advance the goals of the NAS by 
providing concise, user-friendly guidance that fosters 
participation, raises awareness, and supports on the 
ground action from the whole-of-society. 
Wildfire is not just one of the financially costliest perils 
in Canada, it can have significant long-term impacts 
on the environment, and importantly, the mental 
and physical health of Canadians. Investing in risk 
reduction for homes and communities will strengthen 
the fiduciary capacity of all orders of government, 
Indigenous Peoples, non-governmental organizations, 
businesses, and residents to prepare for the growing 
threat from wildfires, driven in part by irreversible 
climate change. 
Executive Summary
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
8
Figure 1: Practical actions to improve home wildfire resilience.
10 m
1.5 m
1.5 m
15 cm
2 m
<10 cm
1.5 m
10 m
5
4
1
3
2
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
5
4
3
2
1
Install Class A ﬁre-rated 
roof covering (e.g., 
cement ﬁbre, metal or 
asphalt shingles).
Install non-combustible 
siding (stucco, metal, 
stone, cement ﬁbre board).
Install multi-pane or 
tempered glass 
windows and exterior 
ﬁre rated doors.
Remove conifer trees 
that are within 10 m 
of the house.
Retroﬁt all deck 
components to be 
ﬁre-rated, with a 
continuous surface.
Step 3: Complete more complex upgrades
 Work with a contractor, $3,000 - $30,000
5
4
3
2
1
Install non-combustible 
fencing within 1.5 m of the 
house (cement ﬁber, 
metal, chain link or stone).
Install non-combustible 
ground surfaces within 
1.5 m of the house (mineral 
soil, rock, concrete or stone).
Create a 15 cm ground-to-
siding non-combustible 
clearance (e.g., install cement 
board or metal skirting).
Add a non-combustible 
3 mm screen to all 
external vents, except 
dryer vents.
Replace worn or 
missing weather 
stripping on all doors 
including garage doors.
Step 2: Complete simple upgrades
 $300 - $3,000
5
4
3
2
1
Remove needles, leaves and 
other debris from gutters, roof 
surfaces, decks and balconies. 
Regularly clean vents.
Remove combustible 
materials (ﬁrewood and 
lumber) stored within 10 m 
of house perimeter and 
under decks.
Remove all combustible 
ground cover (mulch and 
plants) within 1.5 m of the 
house perimeter.
Mow the lawn to <10 cm 
and plant low-growing, 
well-spaced shrubs and 
other ﬁre-resistant plants.
Prune trees to create a 
2 m clearance from the 
ground to the lowest 
tree branches.
Step 1: Maintain what you’ve got at least twice per year
 Do-it-yourself, $0 - $300
THREE STEPS TO A COST-EFFECTIVE
FIRESMART
TM HOME
Note: not all actions will be applicable to each home. Completing these steps does not eliminate the risk of home or structure ignition.
Firesmart, Intelli-feu and other associated Marks are trademarks of the Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre
Scan the code or click 
the link for additional 
resources at
www.intactcentre.ca
Executive Summary
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
9
Figure 2: Practical actions to improve community wildfire resilience.
Scan the code or click 
the link for additional 
resources at
www.intactcentre.ca
EMERGENCY
SHELTER
EMERGENCY
SHELTER
10 m
30 m
5 m
5 m
2 m
10 m
10 m
Feature 3: Wildﬁre-Ready Emergency Response
Provide two or more suitably sized 
access and egress routes to 
accommodate the movement of 
emergency vehicles.
Complete annual emergency planning 
and cross-training exercises that include 
multiple agencies (e.g., wildland and 
structural ﬁreﬁghters).
Ensure minimum water supply 
for ﬁreﬁghting.
Designate at least one emergency 
shelter per community.
4
3
2
1
Integrate minimum 30 m wide zones (ﬁre 
breaks) featuring ignition resistant materials 
(e.g., mowed grasses, ponds, roads) into 
community design to limit the spread of ﬁre. 
Increase minimum to 50 m on steep slopes.
Provide greater spatial separation 
between structures in hazard areas to 
limit the spread of ﬁre from one structure 
to another.
Require minimum 10 m setback from 
the crest of a hill to limit spread of 
ﬁre to structures.
Restrict development in hazard areas 
where mitigation measures cannot meet 
minimum standards for health, safety, 
and environmental protection.
Feature 2: Wildﬁre-Ready Community Design
4
3
2
1
Complete regular maintenance of 
structures, infrastructure, and landscaping 
within 10 m to limit accumulation of 
ﬂammable materials (e.g., leaves, brush 
piles, stored items, fuel tanks). 
Install/replace landscaping with ﬁre 
resistant materials within 10 m of 
structures and infrastructure.
Build/update structures and 
infrastructure using ﬁre resistant 
building materials (e.g., Class A 
rooﬁng/metal roofs, non-combustible 
siding, metal, or concrete hydro poles).
Design/update structures and 
infrastructure to be ignition resistant 
(e.g., 5 m distance between vegetation 
and power lines, power supply lines below 
ground where feasible).
Feature 1: Wildﬁre-Ready Structures & Infrastructure
4
3
2
1
THREE FEATURES OF A
WILDFIRE-READY COMMUNITY
Communities can integrate wildﬁre-ready features into their risk management plans to limit damage and disruption due to wildﬁre events and strengthen 
emergency preparedness. By working with Provincial/Territorial wildﬁre agencies and municipal/structural ﬁre departments, communities can access 
available tools, training, and resources to help them assess their unique risks, and create customized action plans.
Note: The guidance in this document is voluntary. Completion of actions should not conﬂict with 
applicable building and ﬁre codes. Wildﬁre-ready communities can reduce but not eliminate risk.
Executive Summary
10
1. The Urgent Need to 
Address the Growing 
Threat of Wildfires
Wildfires pose a growing threat to Canadian communities.  When 
wildfires occur, they can cause extensive damage to buildings, 
disruptions to communities and can even result in death. In Canada, 
wildfires are projected to become more frequent and extreme, in part 
driven by climate change (Coogan et al., 2019). Climate change is 
irreversible (IPCC, 2023) – Canadians need to adapt now to protect 
themselves from the devastating impacts of wildfire.
10
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
11
An estimated 60% of Canadian communities are 
in the wildland-urban interface (WUI), the zone 
where human settlements meet or intermingle with 
wildfire-prone natural ecosystems, like forests and 
grasslands (Johnston and Flannigan, 2018). Currently 
an estimated 12.3% of the Canadian population 
lives in the WUI, including 32.1% of the on-reserve 
Indigenous population. (Erni et al., 2021). The 
expansion of human settlement in the WUI, coupled 
with a lack of nationally accepted minimum building 
standards for wildfire protection, and an increase in 
the amount and continuity of fuels (e.g., vegetation) 
surrounding communities as a consequence of roughly 
100 years of fire suppression (Parisien et al., 2020), has 
exposed more people, structures and infrastructure to 
damage and disruption from wildfires. Additionally, the 
effects of climate change, such as prolonged periods 
of extreme hot, dry, and windy weather that create 
ideal conditions for wildfire ignition and fire spread, 
contributes to heightened risk (Bénichou et al., 2021). 
(Hanes et al., 2019). Scientists project that by the end 
of the century, fire weather season will be even longer, 
increasing on average by 30 days a year, but will vary 
across the country, with western Canada facing a 50% 
increase of hot and dry days, and eastern Canada a 200 
to 300% increase (Wang et al., 2017).
Climate change is irreversible–
Canadians need to adapt now 
to protect themselves from the 
devastating impacts of wildfire.
Wildfire is part of the complex 
positive feedback loop that 
exacerbates climate change, 
which in turn, creates the ideal 
conditions for more fire.
1.1 Wildfire and Climate Change
Climate change is increasing wildfire risk in Canada by 
lengthening the season of “fire weather”: hot, dry, and 
windy days that create more dry fuel, more lightning 
that ignites fuel, and strong winds that spread the 
flames (Bénichou et al., 2021). Wildfire season varies 
across the country, starting as early as April and ending 
typically in October (Coogan et al., 2020). 
According to historical records, current 
wildfire seasons start roughly one week earlier 
and end one week later than 70 years ago 
Wildfires also contribute to climate change through 
the release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere 
(Natural Resources Canada, 2022a). Over the past 
few decades, Canadian forests have shifted from being 
carbon sinks (removing carbon from the atmosphere), 
to becoming a source of carbon as the total annual 
area burned has increased (Natural Resources Canada, 
2022a). In 2020, wildfires were the second highest 
contributor of greenhouse gas emissions in Canada 
from natural disturbances (ECCC, 2022). In 2023, 
wildfires released an estimated two billion tonnes of 
CO2, representing roughly triple the country’s annual 
carbon footprint (Cecco, 2023). In this way, wildfire 
is part of the complex positive feedback loop that 
exacerbates climate change, which in turn, creates the 
ideal conditions for more fire (Whitman et al., 2022). 
1.2 Impacts of Wildfire
Although wildfires have a variety of  benefits in natural 
ecosystems (i.e., vegetation regeneration, soil nutrient 
dynamics, hydrology, etc.) (Coogan et al., 2020), 
when wildfires shift from consuming wildland fuels to 
human-made structures, their impact on communities 
can be catastrophic. Wildfire hazard varies widely 
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
12
across the country, based on topography, weather, and 
the flammability of  tree, shrub, and plant materials 
(fuel) (Figure 3). Figure 3 reflects historical conditions– 
however, currently, rapid changes in wildfire hazard 
are being observed in some parts of  Canada including 
the interior of  BC (Parisien et al, 2023). Impacts also 
vary widely across the country and can dramatically 
shift each year based on ignition of  fuels, the ability 
of  people to safely evacuate, and the amount of 
damage and disruption that occurs during and after 
a wildfire event. Impacts are often interconnected 
and compounding, but for the sake of  simplicity, they 
are presented below as physical, environmental, 
social, and economic.
Figure 3: Historical wildfire hazard mapped from spatial burn probability outputs based on 30-year fire history. Retrieved 
from Bénichou et al., 2021. Note: map to be updated to reflect rapid changes in wildfire hazard that are currently being 
observed in some parts of Canada including the interior of BC (Parisien et al, 2023).
1.2.1 Physical Impacts
The impacts of wildfires can be severe, causing 
significant damage to property, critical infrastructure, 
and services that are essential to Canadians. Therefore, 
it is crucial to consider the wildfire hazard when 
designing, operating, and maintaining infrastructure 
and systems, including emergency-management. 
The following are specific examples of how wildfires 
can affect various systems, many of which are 
interconnected and can cause cascading impacts.
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
13
Power Supply 
When large wildfires occur, power lines and 
transmission towers may get knocked down, 
becoming a potential new source of  ignition for 
wildfire, creating a safety hazard, and leading to 
power failures of  critical infrastructure like hospitals 
and water treatment plants (Bénichou et al., 2021). 
This can lead to further endangering the community 
and firefighters, as well as limit water supply for fire 
suppression (Bénichou et al., 2021). Furthermore, 
downed power lines can also obstruct access or 
egress roads required for evacuations and hinder 
the firefighters’ ability to reach the affected area 
(Bénichou et al., 2021). Power may also be cut off as 
a precautionary measure as a wildfire approaches 
a community, resulting in a variety of  unintended 
consequences and underscoring the need for backup 
power supplies.
Telecommunications
During wildfires, power outages can spread rapidly, 
severely impacting telecommunications. In 2019, a 
wildfire that tore through Pikangikum First Nation, 
Ontario, burned the broadband communications 
line, leaving the community without phone service or 
internet access (CBC News, 2019). Similarly, in 2017, 
wildfires in British Columbia damaged a cellphone tower 
near Ashcroft Indian Band, complicating evacuation 
plans and search efforts for missing Band members 
(Government of British Columbia, 2018). These 
incidents highlight the critical importance of reliable 
communication systems during wildfire events.
Transportation
During wildfires, access and egress roads play a vital 
role in facilitating evacuations and enabling firefighting 
services to reach affected communities (Bénichou et 
al., 2021). However, road closures during wildfire 
events can impede evacuation efforts and firefighting 
operations. Additionally, post-fire, there can be an 
increased risk of landslides in some areas, which can 
further disrupt road access, as exemplified by the 
temporary closure of a section of the Trans-Canada 
highway following the destruction of Lytton, BC. (CBC 
News, 2021).
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
14
1.2.2 Environmental Impacts
Certain wildfires can have extensive implications for the 
environment, including the loss of vegetation, and the 
potential for increased flood conditions (Morton et al., 
2003). The following sections describe these impacts.
Vegetation Loss
Wildfires that occur in dense, continuous, highly 
flammable ecosystems, such as boreal spruce forests, 
can generate intense heat and flames, and may 
consume vast areas of forest. Over the past 25 years, 
the number of fires per year has declined 
overall but the area burned has doubled to an 
average of 2.3 million hectares per year (about 
half the size of Nova Scotia) and projections 
indicate the area could quadruple by the end 
of the century (Hope et al., 2016). In 2023, the 
record for area burned in one year was shattered with 
a total estimated 18.5 million hectares (CIFFC, 2023), 
more than double the previous record of 7.1 million 
hectares, set in 1995 (Figure 4).
In addition to the loss of vegetation, climate change-
influenced drought stress can cause other disturbances 
such as insect outbreaks and tree mortality, which can 
have cascading effects on ecosystems. These changes 
in forest composition can negatively alter the habitat 
of Canada’s emblematic species, such as the Boreal 
woodland caribou (Barber et al., 2018). Additionally, 
heat and flames during a wildfire event and vegetation 
loss post-fire both contribute to wildlife mortality (Pau 
et al, 2023).
Increasing Flood Conditions
Wildfire has long-lasting effects after the flames are 
extinguished, such as increased flood risk. In 2021, 
British Columbia had the fourth worst wildfire season 
on record, which was closely followed by a devastating 
flood season, destroying highways and submerging 
homes (Chung, 2021). When high-intensity fire burns 
through an area, heat and flames consume materials 
on the forest floor and leave behind scorched, water-
repellent soil, increasing the risk of landslides, 
Year
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
20
Area burned
(million hectares)
‘02
‘92
‘12
‘20
‘00
‘90
‘10
‘18
‘98
‘88
‘08
‘16
‘96
‘86
‘06
‘14
‘94
‘84
‘04
‘22
18,496,051
hectares
burned
Figure 4: Annual area burned in Canada. Adapted from: Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre, 2023.
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
15
and flooding for up to five years after a wildfire 
(Government of British Columbia, 2021; Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, 2020). If there is 
rapid snowmelt or an intense rainfall event, the post-
wildfire impermeable soil can lead to the flooding 
of nearby homes (Government of British Columbia, 
2021). These post-wildfire impacts can have severe 
consequences for communities and infrastructure 
downstream, amplifying the costs of recovery and 
impacts of wildfire beyond the initial event.
1.2.3 Social Impacts
Wildfires can have far-reaching effects on the physical 
and mental health, as well as overall wellbeing, of 
affected communities. Below are some of the main 
social impacts.  
Physical Health 
Wildfire smoke can be carried in the wind for thousands 
of kilometres, crossing international boundaries and 
Figure 5: Smoke and fire danger require the closure of a community road. Courtesy of FireSmart Alberta, 2023.
exposing large populations to airborne contaminants 
(Lavoue and Stocks, 2011). The smoke contains small 
particles that can easily enter the lungs and bloodstream 
(Government of Canada, 2023) causing breathing 
problems, and affecting heart health (Rosenthal et al., 
2021). In addition, the toxic particles from smoke and 
the ash from burned materials can enter surface waters 
and contaminate the local drinking water, which can 
increase the risk of cancer (Rosenthal et al., 2021).
 
Between 2013 and 2018, Health Canada 
approximates that short-term exposure to wildfire 
smoke particles (PM2.5) may have contributed to 
as many as 240 premature deaths each year, while 
long-term exposure could be linked to up to 2,500 
premature deaths per year (Government of  Canada, 
2023). Additionally, wildfire season can coincide 
with extreme heat events, simultaneously exposing 
populations to an increased risk of  smoke inhalation 
and of  heat stroke (Government of  Canada, 2023; 
Eyquem and Feltmate, 2022).
Between 2013 and 2018, Health Canada approximates that short-term 
exposure to wildfire smoke particles (PM2.5) may have contributed to 
as many as 240 premature deaths each year, while long-term exposure 
could be linked to up to 2,500 premature deaths per year.
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
16
Mental Health and Wellbeing
Wildfires take a toll on the mental health and 
wellbeing of impacted community members. There 
is increasing evidence that following the destruction 
of one’s home, loss of belongings, and the threat to 
the safety of the community, survivors suffer from 
anxiety, depression, post traumatic stress 
disorder, and substance abuse (To et al., 2021).  
Following a severe wildfire season in the Northwest 
Territories (NT) in 2014, community members 
reported feeling “fear, stress, uncertainty and isolation” 
due to the constant threat of wildfire and presence of 
smoke (Dodd et al., 2018). 
When community members are given evacuation 
orders, they may experience anxiety and post-traumatic 
stress, particularly when separated by long distances 
and if orders last a long time or happen frequently 
Box 1.1 Fort McMurray Wildfire Recovery
In 2016, a catastrophic wildfire swept through Fort McMurray, triggering the largest evacuation in Alberta’s 
history, with more than 88,000 people forced to flee their homes. The slow process of recovery contributed 
to the financial and emotional distress of hundreds of families who not only lost their homes, but in seeking 
temporary housing were disconnected from their jobs, schools, friends, and neighbours. Seven years after 
the devastating event, the community has made significant strides toward recovery. However, it took two 
years to repair just 20% of the 2,400 homes and commercial buildings that were damaged 
by the wildfire (CTV News, 2018).  Six years after the fire, 86% of the affected structures had been 
reconstructed, with about 244 remaining lots that still await redevelopment (McDermott, 2022).
(Dodd et al., 2018). In August 2023, Yellowknife, 
NT, declared a state of emergency and issued the 
territory’s largest evacuation order to date to its 20,000 
residents (Minogue, 2023). The evacuation lasted 22 
days (Austen, 2023), with some residents travelling 
over 2,000 km to safety (Jones, 2023). The number 
of wildland fire evacuations and number of evacuees 
has been steadily rising in Canada, since the 1980’s 
(Natural Resources Canada, 2020), with 2023 setting 
a record of 200,000 residents evacuated for the year 
(Peters, 2023). 
Firefighters experience physical and mental 
health challenges that far exceed those of 
the broader population. Firefighters face cancer, 
traumatic injury, cardiovascular disease, respiratory 
disease, and mental health deterioration (Ramsden et 
al., 2018).
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
17
It can take years for a community to recover from 
wildfire (Box 1.1), adding to the mental health 
challenges experienced by survivors.
1.2.4 Economic Impacts
Until 2003, no single wildfire event had caused 
insured losses exceeding $10 million. In the years 
since, insurers have had to pay out between $250 
million and $3.8 billion for five separate wildfires 
(Bénichou et al., 2021). For every dollar that is covered 
by insurers, it is estimated that an additional $3 - 4 
in uninsured costs are borne by residents, businesses, 
and governments (Figure 6). Since 2010, 19% of 
the Federal Government’s Disaster Financial 
Assistance Arrangement expenditures have 
been spent supporting recovery from wildfire 
(Porter et al., 2021). 
In the last decade alone (ending 2020), the cost of fire 
suppression in Canada has increased to an average 
of $1 billion annually (Hoffman et al., 2022b). When 
the total direct fire damage and indirect costs (such 
as environmental, economic, and social impacts) are 
considered, the average rises to $2 - $30 billion annually 
(Hoffman et al., 2022b). As WUI wildfires increase in 
frequency and severity, Canada will need to double 
its current fire suppression budget by 2040 to 
maintain the same level of protection (Bénichou 
et al., 2021; Wooten et al., 2017). 
Proactive funding for wildfire risk reduction and 
emergency preparedness is disproportionately low 
compared to direct suppression costs (e.g., on the 
ground firefighting personnel, water bombers, etc.), 
often less than 10% (Hoffman et al., 2022b). In some 
jurisdictions, while budgets for proactive and reactive 
fire suppression are increasing, those designated for 
fuel management and emergency preparedness remain 
insufficient to adequately support risk reduction in 
at-risk communities. Population growth and climate 
change will put additional strains on limited risk 
$
$ $ $ $
=
         Note: values in 2022$ CAN, corrected for inﬂation and per capita wealth accumulation.
Source: IBC Facts Book, PCS, CatIQ, Swiss Re, Munich Re & Deloitte
$3-4 uninsured losses 
incurred by government, 
business, individuals
$1 
insured 
loss
Multiple
Events in
Provinces
Fort McMurray, Alberta
Wildﬁre
Alberta
& Toronto
Floods
Ontario
Wind & Rain
Eastern 
Ice Storm
Quebec
Floods
Estimated Trend
$ CAD Billion
Year
Costs of Extreme Weather: 
Catastrophic Insurable Losses
5.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
‘94
‘22
‘86
‘90
‘96
‘00
‘04
‘10
‘12
‘20
‘88
‘92
‘84
‘98
‘02
‘06
‘08
‘18
‘16
‘14
4.0
6.0
Figure 6: Annual catastrophic insurable losses in Canada from 1982-2022 (IBC, 2023).
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
18
reduction-focused budgets, unless significant new 
investments are made (Tymstra et al., 2020). 
Proactive funding for 
wildfire risk reduction and 
emergency preparedness 
is disproportionately low 
compared to direct suppression 
costs, often less than 10%.
Health-Related Financial Impacts
Wildfire events can have significant financial impacts 
associated with public health, from the direct costs 
of medical treatment as well as indirect costs, such as 
lost productivity. In the case of acute impacts, such as 
medical expenses and lost work time, estimates range 
from $410 million to $1.8 billion per year in Canada 
(Matz et al., 2020). However, when considering the 
long-term or chronic health impacts, the total cost rises 
substantially to between $4.3 billion and $19 billion 
annually (Matz et al., 2020). 
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
19
Box 1.2 Disproportionate Impacts on Indigenous Peoples
First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities face disproportionate impacts from wildfires in Canada. 
This is due in part to their greater exposure to wildfire hazards, as 60% of Indigenous communities 
are in remote and forested regions with limited access to firefighting personnel and equipment. 
Indigenous communities are 30% more likely to be evacuated due to wildfires than 
non-Indigenous communities, a stark disparity that underscores the impact of these events on 
Indigenous Peoples (Figure 7) (McGee et al., 2019; Natural Resources Canada, 2022).  
Indigenous Peoples are often removed from their traditional territories during evacuations, causing 
significant disruptions to their daily lives and having negative impacts on their mental health and 
overall wellbeing. Additionally, these evacuations may bring back historical trauma stemming from 
past forced relocations and government interference in the lives of Indigenous Peoples. (National 
Collaborating Centre for Indigenous Health (NCCIH), 2022).
Figure 7: Evacuations due to wildland fire 1980-2021 by community type, retrieved from Natural 
Resources Canada, 2022.
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000 km
Natural Resources
Canada
Ressources naturelles
Canada
Evacuations due to Wildland Fire
1980-2021
By Number of Evacuees (approx.)
and Community Type
(Indigenous/Non-indigenous)
Majority
Indigenous
pop.
Majority
Non-Indigenous
pop.
1 - 100 (evacuees)
101 - 1000
1001 - 10000
> 10000
Number of evacuees n/a
Forested Area
Data sources:
Canadian Wildland Fire Information System - cwfis.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca
Canadian Wildland Fire Evacuation Database
1. The Urgent Need to Address the Growing Threat of Wildfires
20
2. Wildfire Management 
Across Canada
Wildfires are a necessary and beneficial natural disturbance in many 
of Canada’s vast wildland ecosystems, such as forests and grasslands. 
About half of wildfires are ignited by lightning and play an important 
role in maintaining the health and diversity of the landscape (Natural 
Resources Canada, 2022b).  However, when wildfires shift from 
consuming natural fuels to consuming materials that humans value to 
safely live, work and play, they become natural disasters. These values 
at risk include structures, infrastructure, natural and cultural assets 
that hold significant measurable or intrinsic worth (Bénichou et al., 
2021). Effective wildfire management can help prevent loss of life, 
minimize economic and social disruption, and promote the ecological 
role of wildfire (Ministry of Northern Development, Mines, Natural 
Resources and Forestry (NDMNRF), 2014; Canadian Council of 
Forest Ministers, 2005 ).
20
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
21
(Adapted from FireSmart BC Homeowners Manual)
Wildfire Fast Facts
How Do Wildfires Start?
Extreme and Radiant Heat – Fires can generate extreme heat up to 30 m away from flames, making flammable materials more 
vulnerable to ignition. Radiant heat can break glass, melt siding and ignite flammable materials up to 10 m away from flames.
Direct Flame - Wildfires spread by igniting flammable materials with which they come in direct contact.
What Factors Influence Wildfire Spread?
Continuous Vegetation - The burning of vegetation generates intense heat and flame. Flames can move 
more quickly in areas with continuous vegetation than those with sparse, patchy vegetation. Flames can move 
horizontally by igniting ground-level materials and vertically by climbing from the ground into tree crowns. 
Weather - Prolonged periods of hot, dry weather can make vegetation more susceptible to ignition. Wind 
can help to speed up the movement of fire on the ground and transport burning embers 2 km away or more, 
igniting multiple fires upon landing on flammable materials.
Slope - Wildfires can move more quickly on slopes than on flat surfaces. The steeper the slope, the faster 
wildfires can spread. 
ABOUT 50%
of wildfires across Canada are ignited by humans (e.g., vehicle and engine 
use, industrial activity, windborne embers from open burning, arson, etc.).
ABOUT 50%
of wildfires are 
ignited by lightning.
How Do Wildfires Spread into Communities?
Embers – These small burning fragments, produced by wildfires, can be carried by wind and hot air 2 km 
or more from the active wildfire. These embers can ignite flammable materials on and around the home.
Ember
2 km
Extreme Heat 30 m
Radiant Heat 10 m
2. Wildfire Management Across Canada
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
22
2.1 Shifting the Way Wildfires 
are Managed
Approaches to managing wildfires in Canada 
have shifted over time (Pyne, 2008). For millennia, 
Indigenous Peoples have used preventative (cultural) 
burning techniques to mimic natural burn cycles. For 
example, Fire Keepers Joe Gilchrist (Secwepemc and 
Nlaka’pamux Nation) and Harry Spahan (Coldwater 
First Nation) note that a fire cycle for grassland is 2 
years, ponderosa pine is 7-15 years, and lodgepole pine 
is 60-100 years (FireSmart Canada, 2020). Cultural 
burning is an integral part of land stewardship 
practices and plays a significant role in reducing 
wildfire risk by managing fuel loads and controlling the 
frequency, timing, and severity of fires (Christianson, 
2015). These small, intentional “good fires” encourage 
the growth of culturally significant plants used for food 
and ceremonial purposes, and attract game animals, 
which are hunted for sustenance, clothing, and shelter 
(FireSmart Canada, 2020).  
Figure 8: Controlled burn. Courtesy of FireSmart Alberta, 2023.
Cultural burning is an integral 
part of land stewardship 
practices and plays a 
significant role in reducing 
wildfire risk by managing 
fuel loads and controlling the 
frequency, timing, and severity 
of fires.
European settlement and colonization in Canada led 
to the systemic displacement of Indigenous Peoples 
and prohibition of cultural burning, shifting the 
dominant risk reduction approach from proactive to 
reactive.  Fire suppression became the primary means 
of protecting “values at risk” (Dupuis et al., 2020; 
Hoffman et al., 2022a). The interruption of natural 
fire cycles led to homogenous, densely vegetated 
landscapes characterized by a buildup of dead and 
diseased materials, which in turn, contributed to 
the development of larger, more intense “bad fires,” 
increasing the threat to communities (Cohen, 2008; 
Parisien et al., 2020).
Wildfire research in Canada gained momentum in the 
1960s, resulting in another paradigm shift in wildfire 
management. This shift recognized the role wildfire 
plays in ecological processes. Current management 
policy includes a range of approaches including full 
suppression, fuel management, and allowing fires to 
burn (Coogan et al., 2020). 
About half of forest fires in Canada do not pose an 
immediate threat to populated or timber harvesting 
areas, and as a result, they are not actively suppressed 
by wildland firefighters (Johnston, 2016). Proactive 
fuel management strategies are regaining recognition 
as vital to limiting fuel pathways from wildlands to 
human-made structures. Unfortunately, longer wildfire 
2. Wildfire Management Across Canada
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
23
seasons may reduce the number of days available to 
apply weather-dependent fuel management strategies, 
such as controlled burns. Common fuel management 
strategies include: 
1.	 fuel removal - tree extraction and controlled 
burns (Figure 8),
2.	 fuel reduction - grazing, mowing, pruning, 
thinning, mulching vegetation (Figure 9), and
3.	 species conversion - replacing highly 
flammable vegetation (coniferous) with 
less flammable vegetation (deciduous) 
(Government of Alberta, 2013).
A Whole-of-Society Approach to Wildfire Management
The management of wildfires in Canada is evolving to 
embrace a comprehensive, whole-of-society approach 
aimed at enhancing the resilience of communities 
(Public Safety Canada, 2019). Creating wildfire-ready 
communities requires collaboration between wildfire 
management agencies, communities, Indigenous 
Peoples, industry, property owners and managers 
(Canadian Council of Forest Ministers, 2021, Natural 
Resources Canada, 2020). 
Figure 9: Forest thinning. Courtesy of FireSmart 
Alberta, 2023.
Wildfire Fast Facts
The WUI Disaster Sequence 
Hot, dry conditions, particularly exacerbated by multi-
year droughts, render wildland tree, shrub and plant 
materials—such as those found in forests as grasslands—
more prone to ignition. Once ignited, high winds can 
cause wildfires to spread rapidly, fueled by a combination 
of direct flame, radiant heat, and floating embers that 
can travel up to 2 km or more and ignite materials. 
When multiple embers land and ignite flammable 
materials within a community, it becomes challenging for 
firefighters to extinguish all fires that pose a threat to 
valued assets. Once multiple structures ignite, inadequate 
supply of firefighting equipment and personnel make 
it impossible to extinguish all fires, leading to the rapid 
spread of flames from building to building, ultimately 
culminating in a WUI wildfire disaster.
Breaking the WUI Disaster Sequence 
The most effective way to break the WUI 
disaster sequence is to reduce the property level 
vulnerability of structures and infrastructure to 
wildfire ignition. Jack Cohen, US Forest Service 
Scientist explained very simply, “If homes do not 
ignite, they cannot burn… If homes do not burn, 
then disaster is avoided” (Calkin et al., 2014).
2. Wildfire Management Across Canada
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
24
2.2 Wildfire-Ready Best 
Practice Guidance
A National Guide for Wildland-Urban 
Interface Fires (WUI Guide): the National 
Research Council, Canada’s foremost federal 
research and development organization, released a 
comprehensive WUI Guide (Bénichou et al., 2021), 
which identifies national best practices for enhancing 
the resilience of  buildings, infrastructure, and 
communities in the face of  wildfire threats. 
FireSmart Canada: FireSmart Canada is a 
national program that has been working with 
communities in the wildland-urban interface (WUI) 
for 30 years to develop action-focused educational 
materials and training programs that aim to reduce 
wildfire risks and enhance resilience to wildfires. 
FireSmart Canada works closely with its provincial 
and territorial chapters and operates under a 
mandate from the Canadian Interagency Forest Fire 
Centre (CIFFC). 
To improve community wildfire resilience, FireSmart 
Canada advocates for the balanced application 
of  a suite of  preventative actions that are divided 
into categories known as The Seven FireSmart 
Disciplines: 1) Interagency Cooperation, 2) 
Education, 3) Vegetation Management, 4) 
Legislation, 5) Development, 6) Emergency 
Planning, and 7) Cross Training. 
The Seven FireSmart Disciplines can be applied as 
a comprehensive system over time to develop and 
implement a coordinated, community-based action 
plan that addresses a community’s unique risks 
and priorities for action. This approach empowers 
communities to create their own customized risk 
reduction strategies and to coordinate the collective 
efforts of  multiple stakeholders. Applying FireSmart 
as a system allows communities to achieve the 
following objectives (Figure 10):
1.	 Enhance collaboration and coordination of all 
community stakeholders and rights holders
2.	 Educate and empower the whole-of-society to 
take preventative action
3.	 Reduce wildfire risk in a systematic way 
throughout the community
4.	 Improve emergency response to enhance 
protection of values at risk and public safety 
Figure 10: The FireSmart System. Courtesy of Stewart and 
Evans, 2023.
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
25
2.3 Roadmap to Wildfire Resilience
In 2023, the Government of Canada released its first 
National Adaptation Strategy (NAS) (ECCC, 
2023a)–a roadmap to create a more climate resilient 
Canada that is achieved by employing a whole-
of-society approach. The NAS highlights wildfire, 
flood, and extreme heat as the primary climate-
influenced perils affecting Canada and emphasizes that 
building resilience to these perils requires a collective 
effort. This means that all levels of governments, 
Indigenous Peoples, communities, non-governmental 
organizations, individuals, and the private sector must 
work together and coordinate their efforts to minimize 
costs and achieve maximum benefits. 
The core guiding principles of the NAS include: 
1.	 respecting and upholding Indigenous rights, 
2.	 advancing equity and environmental justice, 
3.	 taking proactive, risk-based measures to reduce 
climate impacts, and 
4.	 maximizing benefits when planning for the 
future by considering multiple perils (such 
as extreme heat, flooding and wildfires) to 
avoid addressing one problem while causing 
another (maladaptation). 
The NAS established short-term targets that can 
be achieved TODAY to help community members 
from the whole-of-society to embark on a collective 
journey to reduce risk, prepare for emergencies, and 
“build back better” following a wildfire event. The 
targets are:
•	Risk Awareness – By 2025, 60% of 
Canadians, including northerners and 
Indigenous Peoples, are aware of the disaster 
risks facing their household.
•	Preventative Action – By 2025, 50% of 
Canadians have taken concrete actions to better 
prepare for and respond to climate change risks 
facing their household (see Figure 11).
•	Community Protection Plans – 
Communities, including northern and 
Indigenous communities, in zones of high 
risk, as identified by provinces and territories, 
develop wildfire community prevention and 
mitigation plans by 2030, with up to 15% 
implemented by 2028.
•	Building Back Better – By 2025, complete 
the modernization of the Disaster Financial 
Assistance Arrangements to incentivize disaster 
risk reduction and improve recovery outcomes 
from large-scale disasters.
The NAS established short-
term targets that can be 
achieved TODAY to help 
community members from the 
whole-of-society to embark on 
a collective journey to reduce 
risk, prepare for emergencies, 
and “build back better” 
following a wildfire event.
2. Wildfire Management Across Canada
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
26
Figure 11: A FireSmart expert leads a community planning exercise. Courtesy of FireSmart Alberta, 2023.
2. Wildfire Management Across Canada
27
3. Practical Guidance to 
Create Wildfire-Ready 
Homes and Communities
This chapter summarizes nationally recognized best practice 
guidance to improve wildfire resilience by taking practical actions to 
create wildfire-ready homes and communities. By working together, 
residents, Indigenous Peoples, industry, businesses, non-governmental 
organizations, and governments can reduce disaster risks, and in 
turn minimize the physical, environmental, social, and economic 
impacts associated with WUI wildfires and get “back to normal” as 
quickly as possible following a wildfire event (see Figure 12). 
Figure 12: Neighbours work together to reduce 
risk during Wildfire Community Preparedness 
Day. Courtesy of FireSmart Alberta, 2023.
27
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
28
Implementing wildfire-ready guidance 
can help to reduce but not eliminate risk, 
much like speed limits on highways cannot 
guarantee “no accidents”. 
Three Steps to a Cost-Effective FireSmart 
Home and Three Features of a Wildfire-
Ready Community were developed to 
complement and reinforce the best practices 
identified in the following publications:
1.	 National Guide for Wildland-Urban 
Interface Fires (Bénichou et al., 2021), 
2.	 Wildfire-Resilience Best-Practice 
Checklist for Home Construction, 
Renovation and Landscaping (FireSmart 
Canada et al., 2022b), 
3.	 FireSmart Begins at Home: Home 
Development Guide (FireSmart Canada, 
2018a), and 
4.	 FireSmart Guidebook for Community 
Protection (Government of Alberta, 2013). 
The best practice guidance provided may have limited 
applicability to remote and Indigenous communities; 
additional research is needed to address these gaps. 
Please see the source documents for a full list of all 
best practices.  
Voluntary Best Practice Guidance
At this point in time, Canada’s National Building 
Code and Canada’s National Fire Code (both 
updated in 2020), do not include specific requirements 
to improve the wildfire resilience of homes and 
structures in the wildland-urban interface. Building 
codes also differ among provinces and territories. The 
best practices listed in this chapter should therefore 
be considered voluntary and should not conflict with 
applicable building codes (Bénichou et al., 2021). 
3.1 Wildfire-Ready Homes
Wildfire-ready homes are resistant to ignition. If they do 
ignite, they sustain lower levels of damage than wildfire-
vulnerable homes. This means lower repair costs, and less 
time to restore, allowing families to “get back to normal” 
faster than those in wildfire-vulnerable homes. Wildfire-
ready homes are NOT fireproof and are NOT intended 
to provide safe shelter to residents during a wildfire 
event. Residents should be aware of provincial, 
territorial, and local wildfire alerts and work 
with family, friends and neighbours to safely 
evacuate when ordered to do so (Porter et al., 2021).
3.1.1 Benefits of Improving Home 
Wildfire Resilience
Every resident faces unique risks, has unique 
opportunities to address those risks, and a unique set 
of opportunities and resources available to help them 
improve resilience. For example, only property owners 
can authorize physical changes to the structure of 
the home, not tenants. However, both tenants and 
owners typically have authority to complete important 
maintenance activities such as mowing lawns and 
moving firewood at least 10 m from the home.
Between 50-90% of homes that are destroyed 
by wildfires are initially ignited by burning 
embers. Up to 40% reduction of wildfire risk can be 
achieved by replacing fire-vulnerable with fire-resistant 
materials. Up to 75% reduction of wildfire risk 
can be achieved by updating both building 
materials and landscaping materials to 10 m 
away from the home (Czajkowski et al., 2020). 
FireSmart Canada describes the Home Ignition Zone 
as the area within 30 m of a home and its attachments 
(such as decks) that have a direct influence on the 
potential for home ignition by wildfires (Figure 13). To 
achieve the most significant risk reduction, residents 
should prioritize actions starting at the home and 
moving out to 30 m. Actions taken in the Immediate 
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
29
Zone (0 to 1.5 m) reduce the chance that wind-
blown embers will ignite the home. Actions taken 
in the Intermediate Zone (1.5 to 10 m) reduce the 
likelihood that fire will spread to the home. Actions 
in the Extended Zone (10 to 30 m) are designed to 
help reduce the intensity (extreme heat generated) 
by the flames (FireSmart Canada, 2023). Follow 
these same steps to protect sheds and outbuildings 
(Czajkowski et al., 2020).
By completing a series of cost-effective steps, residents 
can reduce the likelihood that their home and materials 
surrounding it will ignite. Working with neighbours to 
complete preventative actions is critically important 
to reduce the likelihood that fire will spread from one 
property to another, and to prepare for safe evacuation 
during a wildfire emergency.
3.1.2 Three Steps to a Cost-Effective 
FireSmartTM Home
Three Steps to a Cost-Effective FireSmart 
Home highlights practical actions that residents can 
take to make their home and property more resistant 
to wildfire ignition and minimize damage if ignition 
occurs (Figure 14). The guide identifies “no-cost” 
maintenance activities, “low-cost” upgrades, and 
“costlier”, more complex upgrades that can be planned 
for and completed as time and budget permits. 
Integrating Wildfire Resilience into New Builds
Wildfire resilience can be integrated most cost-
effectively into home and landscaping design and 
construction when a new home is being built, rebuilt 
following a wildfire, or when a new addition is being 
Figure 13: Home Ignition Zone, reproduced with the permission of FireSmart Canada, 2023.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
30
added.  Using  fire-resistant instead of fire-vulnerable 
building materials adds an estimated 2% to new 
construction costs (Porter et al., 2021).
Taking a Multi-Hazard Approach to Achieve Multiple 
Benefits and Avoid Maladaptation
When planning actions to improve wildfire resilience 
it is also important to consider opportunities to 
achieve multiple benefits and improve resilience to 
overall climate-related risks, such as flood, wildfire, 
extreme heat, hail, and wind. For example, in 
locations that are prone to wildfire and extreme 
heat, ground cover, plants, shrubs and trees within 
10 m of  the home can be selected that are both 
ignition resistant and drought tolerant.
It is also important to avoid maladaptation, or fixing 
one problem while creating another. For example, if 
a roof  is being updated to be wildfire resilient and the 
home is located in an area that regularly experiences 
hailstorms, installing a metal roof  that will be 
vulnerable to hail damage should be avoided.
Through careful planning and consideration of 
multiple extreme weather perils, residents can 
implement short-, medium- and long- term plans to 
create a climate-ready home. 
$
invested
=
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
saved
Wildfire-Ready Home Fast Facts
For high-hazard communities that implement wildfire-ready best practices over a 10-year period:
Cost to Benefit Ratio of Wildfire-Ready Home Retrofits
Building Materials: homes save an estimated $14 for 
every dollar invested in replacing fire-vulnerable with 
fire-resistant materials.
$
invested
=
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $
saved
$
invested
=
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $
saved
$
invested
=
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $
saved
Landscaping: homes save an estimated $32 for every 
dollar invested in replacing highly combustible vegetation 
with ignition-resistant vegetation. 
Cost to Benefit Ratio of Wildfire-Ready New Construction 
Building Materials: homes save an estimated 
$34 for every dollar invested in non-combustible 
construction.
Landscaping: homes save an estimated $93 for every 
dollar invested in ignition-resistant vegetation.
From Porter et al., 2021
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
31
Figure 14: Practical actions to improve home wildfire resilience (ICCA and FireSmart Canada, 2022).
10 m
1.5 m
1.5 m
15 cm
2 m
<10 cm
1.5 m
10 m
5
4
1
3
2
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
5
4
3
2
1
Install Class A ﬁre-rated 
roof covering (e.g., 
cement ﬁbre, metal or 
asphalt shingles).
Install non-combustible 
siding (stucco, metal, 
stone, cement ﬁbre board).
Install multi-pane or 
tempered glass 
windows and exterior 
ﬁre rated doors.
Remove conifer trees 
that are within 10 m 
of the house.
Retroﬁt all deck 
components to be 
ﬁre-rated, with a 
continuous surface.
Step 3: Complete more complex upgrades
 Work with a contractor, $3,000 - $30,000
5
4
3
2
1
Install non-combustible 
fencing within 1.5 m of the 
house (cement ﬁber, 
metal, chain link or stone).
Install non-combustible 
ground surfaces within 
1.5 m of the house (mineral 
soil, rock, concrete or stone).
Create a 15 cm ground-to-
siding non-combustible 
clearance (e.g., install cement 
board or metal skirting).
Add a non-combustible 
3 mm screen to all 
external vents, except 
dryer vents.
Replace worn or 
missing weather 
stripping on all doors 
including garage doors.
Step 2: Complete simple upgrades
 $300 - $3,000
5
4
3
2
1
Remove needles, leaves and 
other debris from gutters, roof 
surfaces, decks and balconies. 
Regularly clean vents.
Remove combustible 
materials (ﬁrewood and 
lumber) stored within 10 m 
of house perimeter and 
under decks.
Remove all combustible 
ground cover (mulch and 
plants) within 1.5 m of the 
house perimeter.
Mow the lawn to <10 cm 
and plant low-growing, 
well-spaced shrubs and 
other ﬁre-resistant plants.
Prune trees to create a 
2 m clearance from the 
ground to the lowest 
tree branches.
Step 1: Maintain what you’ve got at least twice per year
 Do-it-yourself, $0 - $300
THREE STEPS TO A COST-EFFECTIVE
FIRESMART
TM HOME
Note: not all actions will be applicable to each home. Completing these steps does not eliminate the risk of home or structure ignition.
Firesmart, Intelli-feu and other associated Marks are trademarks of the Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre
Scan the code or click 
the link for additional 
resources at
www.intactcentre.ca
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
32
Three Steps to a Cost-Effective FireSmart Home 
Residents can assess their unique risks and complete three cost-effective steps to reduce the likelihood that wildfires 
will spread to their homes and to minimize damage if ignition occurs (Figure 14). For actions listed under Step 
3, residents should check with their local/regional government about permit requirements and availability of 
wildfire-ready retrofit and new construction subsidies. 
Step 1: Maintain What You’ve Got at Least Twice per Year ($0-$300 )
Complete these low-cost maintenance tasks on a regular basis to reduce the likelihood that burning embers from 
wildfires will ignite flammable materials on and around the home. These actions will also reduce the likelihood 
that ignited materials on the property will provide a “fuel” pathway to the home and to neghbouring properties. 
 
1
Remove needles, leaves and other debris from gutters, roof surfaces, on or under decks, and 
balconies. Regularly clean vents. 
Regularly remove fine, highly flammable materials (such as pine needles and leaves) that collect on 
the structure and surfaces within 10 m of structures and attachments.
1.5 m
2
Remove all combustible ground cover (mulch and plants) within 1.5 m of the house perimeter. 
Create a “non-combustible” zone within 1.5 m of all structures and attachments that feature materials 
such as gravel, brick, or concrete. Remove plants and decorative items such as planter boxes from 
this area.
10 m
3
Remove combustible materials (firewood and lumber) stored within 10 m of the house 
perimeter and under decks. 
Remove combustible materials such as firewood and construction material at least 10 m from 
structures and attachments.
<10 cm
4
Mow the lawn to <10 cm and plant low-growing, well-spaced shrubs, and other vegetation. 
Install well-spaced, low-growing, ignition-resistant plantings within 1.5 - 10 m of the home. Regularly 
mow lawns to maintain a height below 10 cm.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
33
2 m
5
Prune evergreen trees to create a 2 m clearance from the ground to the lowest tree branches. 
Remove the bottom branches up to a height of 2 m, to a maximum of 1/3 crown (needles and 
branches) on evergreen trees within 10 - 30 m of the home to prevent ground-level flames from 
climbing into the upper tree branches.
Step 2: Complete Simple Upgrades ($300-$3,000)
Complete simple upgrades to reduce the likelihood of home ignition by preventing burning embers from entering 
the home and by using only non-combustible materials within 1.5 m of the home. Residents can complete these 
simple, low-cost upgrades themselves or with the help of a qualified contractor. 
1
Replace worn or missing weather stripping on all doors, including garage doors.
Fill gaps and cracks where burning embers can enter your home and cause ignition. Replace worn or 
missing weather stripping on all doors, including garage doors. Use fire resistant caulking or sealing 
products to seal exterior penetrations, joints, and gaps.
2
Add a non-combustible 3 mm screen to all external vents, except dryer vents. 
Fit external vents with 3 mm non-combustible screens to prevent ember penetration into the 
home. To ensure the safe discharge of hot air and dryer lint from the home, do not install screens 
on dryer vents or solid fuel or gas heating appliances. Clean dryer vents regularly.
15 cm
3
Create a 15 cm ground-to-siding non-combustible clearance (e.g., install cement fibre board 
or metal skirting).
Ensure that exterior siding ends 15 cm above grade. Cover the exposed foundation between grade and 
siding with non-combustible material such as stucco, metal, stone, or cement.
1.5 m
4
Install non-combustible fencing within 1.5 m of the house (e.g., cement fibre, metal, chain link 
or stone). 
To reduce the likelihood that flames will move from the fence to the home, ensure that any fence 
panel within 1.5 m of the home is made of non-combustible materials such as cement fibre, metal, 
chain link or stone.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
34
1.5 m
5
Install non-combustible ground surfaces within 1.5 m of the house (mineral soil, rock, concrete 
or stone). 
Remove any combustible materials within 1.5 m of the home and attachments. Replace with non-
combustible ground surfaces such as mineral soil, rock, concrete or stone. 
Step 3: Complete More Complex Upgrades ($3,000- $30,000)
Complete more complex upgrades to minimize the likelihood of structural damage to the home and deck if 
ignition occurs. Repair and replace aging and damaged home components with fire-resistant materials.
1
Install Class A fire-rated roof covering (e.g., cement fibre, metal, or asphalt shingles). 
Repair or replace any roofing material that is curling or damaged with Class A fire-rated roof covering 
(e.g., cement fibre, metal, or asphalt shingles).
2
Install non-combustible siding (stucco, metal, stone, and cement fibre board). 
Repair or replace combustible siding, such as vinyl cladding, with non-combustible siding composed 
of stucco, metal, stone, or cement fibre board. Ensure that siding terminates 15 cm from grade.
3
Install multi-pane or tempered glass windows and exterior fire-rated doors. 
Replace broken and/or non-fire rated windows and doors with multi-pane glass windows and exterior-
fire-rated doors.
4
Retrofit all deck components to be fire-rated, with a continuous surface. 
Repair and upgrade decks, balconies, patios, and porches to have a continuous, ignition-resistant, or 
non-combustible surface (e.g., fire-rated pressure treated wood or composite decking) and non-
combustible railings (e.g., metal, glass). Enclose space under decks with 12 mm sheathing or 3 mm 
non-combustible screens.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
10 m
5
Remove conifer trees that are within 10 m of the house. 
Remove conifer trees and shrubs located within 10 m of the house to reduce the likelihood that fire 
will spread to structures, attachments, and neighbouring properties.
3.1.3 Free Self-Help Resources for Residents
Examples of national-scale wildfire-ready home 
resources are provided below. Additional Indigenous, 
national, provincial, territorial, and locally adapted 
resources can be accessed for free with an online search.
Understand Risks
1.	 Infographic: Three Steps to a Cost-Effective 
FireSmart Home 
2.	 Online Risk Assessment: FireSmart Begins at 
Home Online Application 
3.	 Risk Assessment Score Card: Home Ignition 
Zone Self-Assessment Score Card 
Make and Implement a Risk Management Plan
4.	 FireSmart Home Ignition Zone: Self-Help 
Poster
5.	 Home Resilience Manual: FireSmart Begins 
at Home Manual  
6.	 Landscaping Guide: FireSmart Guide to 
Landscaping  
7.	 Technical Checklist: Wildfire-Resilience 
Best-Practice Checklist for Home 
Construction, Renovation and 
Landscaping 
8.	 On-site Assessment by Formally Trained 
Assessor: Advanced Home Assessment 
Program
Prepare for Emergencies
9.	 Interactive Wildfire Maps: Canadian 
Wildland Fire Information System 
10.	Emergency Alerts: Alert Ready Emergency 
Alert System 
11.	Emergency Preparedness Resources: What to 
Do Before, During and After a Wildfire 
Figure 15: Neighbours remove debris from eaves 
troughs to reduce risk of home ignition. Courtesy 
FireSmart Alberta, 2023.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
36
3.1.4 Accelerating the Uptake of Actions to 
Create Wildfire-Ready Homes
The following section provides examples of innovative 
programs that are accelerating the uptake of practical 
actions to create wildfire-ready homes. Many of 
these initiatives achieve multiple benefits and avoid 
maladaptation, thereby creating not just wildfire-ready 
homes but also climate-ready homes. 
FireSmart BC Plant Program 
Gardeners, landscapers, and suppliers can make 
properties more resilient to wildfire by choosing fire-
resistant plants that are less prone to burning. Through 
the FireSmart BC Plant Program, anyone can easily 
identify “FireSmart plants” through FireSmart Plant 
Tags (Figure 16) at participating garden centres. 
This program complements the FireSmart 
BC Landscaping Guide, and the interactive 
landscaping hub, that provides fire-resistant plant 
suggestions by hardiness zone specific to British 
Columbia.   
Figure 16: Garden centres participating in the FireSmart 
BC Plant Program. Retrieved from https://firesmartbc.ca/
landscaping-hub/plant-program/
Figure 17: Fire factor provides online wildfire risk scores. 
Retrieved from RiskFactor.com.
RiskFactor.com - Flood, Wildfire, Heat, and Wind 
Scores, USA 
RiskFactor.com is a free, online tool created by 
not-for-profit First Street Foundation to ensure that 
all American residents have the insights they need to 
understand their home’s current and future levels of 
risk associated with flood, wildfire, heat, and wind 
events. Residents enter their home address to instantly 
receive a simple risk score per peril ranging from 1 
(minimal) up to 10 (extreme) (Figure 17). Residents can 
also make informed and proactive long-term planning 
decisions by selecting from a range of climate change 
risk scenarios to understand future risk exposure of 
their home.
Developing a similar tool in Canada could empower 
home buyers to make risk informed decisions in 
advance of real estate purchases. It could also help 
property owners to prioritize climate-ready home 
upgrades to help safeguard, what is for most families, 
their greatest financial asset. 
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
37
Wildfire Prepared HomeTM , USA
An insurance-backed voluntary program that residents 
can follow to increase their home’s resilience to 
wildfire (Figure 18). Homeowners complete a checklist 
of actions to reduce the risk of home and property 
ignition, apply for designation, and after a home 
inspection, are eligible to receive a certificate they can 
present to their insurance provider.
The program launched in 2022 in Paradise, California, 
a town severely impacted by the 2018 Camp Fire, the 
deadliest and largest in the state’s history. Recognizing 
the importance of enhancing wildfire resilience, the 
Paradise City Council made a unanimous decision to 
require all homes in the city to obtain the institute’s 
basic certification. Additionally, the council is 
actively pursuing grants and financial aid to support 
homeowners in meeting the certification requirements 
(Insurance Institute for Business & Home Safety 
(IBHS), 2023). 
FireSmart Advanced Home Assessment Program 
FireSmart provides a free, voluntary on-site wildfire 
risk assessment service to residents in communities 
where project funding is available. A FireSmart trained 
professional (Figure 19) walks the resident through a 
review of wildfire risks within the home ignition zone 
(Figure 13), and highlights practical opportunities to 
reduce risk. The assessor provides a written report 
summarizing key findings and points to a variety of 
additional resources for the resident.
In British Columbia, in communities where 
project funding is available, residents may access 
the FireSmart Home Partners Program. In 
addition to an onsite assessment and a summary 
report identifying practical actions to reduce risk, 
the program also issues a certificate to residents 
whose homes and properties meet all recommended 
FireSmart best practices. Residents can share this 
certificate with participating insurance companies to 
receive insurance discounts.
Figure 18: Wildfire Prepared HomeTM offers wildfire resilient 
home designations. Retrieved from WildfirePrepared.org
Figure 19: A FireSmart assessor during a home visit. 
Courtesy of FireSmart Canada.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
38
3.2 Wildfire-Ready Communities
Wildfire-ready communities have structures and 
infrastructure that are resistant to ignition. If they 
do ignite, they sustain lower levels of damage 
than those that are wildfire-vulnerable. Wildfire-
ready communities are NOT fireproof. These 
communities have emergency plans in place to ensure 
that residents are aware of wildfire alerts and have the 
capacity to safely shelter in place and evacuate when 
orders are issued. Agreements are in place with nearby 
communities to share firefighting and public shelter 
resources, to ensure that in the event one community 
requires assistance, the neighboring community is 
prepared and capable of providing the necessary 
support. Wildfire-resistant communities 
sustain less damage than wildfire vulnerable 
communities–repair costs are lower, and the 
recovery period is shorter, facilitating a quicker 
return to “normal” (Porter, et al., 2021).
Figure 20: Wildland and structural firefighters participate in 
a cross-training exercise. Courtesy of FireSmart Alberta, 2023.
Wildfire-Ready 
Community Fast Facts
For high-hazard communities that implement 
wildfire-ready best practices over a 10-year period:
Cost-benefit ratio associated with improving 
community wildfire resilience
1.	 Communities will save an estimated $14 for every 
$1 dollar invested to improve wildfire resilience, 
when collective costs to homeowners, municipalities 
and utilities are taken into consideration. 
2.	 Nature-based solutions, such as vegetation control 
at the community scale, requires cooperation and 
ongoing maintenance, but it costs only one-third as 
much as structural updates and produces up to an 
estimated $100 return for every $1 invested. 
How many jobs can be created by improving 
wildfire resilience?
The work required to increase community resilience 
for 10,000 homes creates 50 long-term jobs.
How can improving wildfire resilience improve 
health and wellbeing?
Improving community wildfire resilience results in an 
estimated 20 lives saved, and avoids 75 injuries and 75 
instances of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
From Porter et al., 2021
$
Invested
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
Saved
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
$
Invested
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $
Saved
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
39
3.2.1 Benefits of Improving Community 
Wildfire Resilience 
Every community faces unique risks and has unique 
opportunities and resources to improve resilience. 
Vulnerability to wildfire damage differs among 
communities due to factors like proximity to hazardous 
fuel sources, housing quality, and population density 
(Beverly et al., 2010). For example, some higher risk 
communities may be located near dense boreal forests, 
while others may have poor quality, ignition-vulnerable 
housing. Others have densely constructed housing with 
minimal separation between structures, making it difficult 
to contain fire spread from one building to the next.
Rural and remote communities often face additional 
challenges due to limited access to essential firefighting 
infrastructure, including trained personnel, equipment, 
and water sources. They also face the challenge of being 
far from other communities with adequate infrastructure 
and shelter for evacuees. As a result, residents in these 
areas experience more frequent and extended evacuation 
periods compared to urban areas with better firefighting 
infrastructure (Hoffman et al., 2022a). 
Communities have unique assets, such as buildings, 
ecosystems, roads, and cultural heritage sites, which 
they aim to protect from wildfire damage. These 
“values at risk” are managed by various public and 
private organizations. Given that wildfires do not 
adhere to legal or jurisdictional boundaries and are 
influenced by fuel availability, it is critically important 
that multiple property owners, managers, wildfire 
managers, and jurisdictions work together to reduce 
risk and prepare for emergencies. 
3.2.2 Three Features of a 
Wildfire-Ready Community
Three Features of a Wildfire-Ready 
Community (Figure 21) highlights best practice 
guidance that communities can integrate into their 
wildfire risk management plans, where applicable, to 
limit damage and disruption from wildfire events and 
strengthen emergency preparedness. 
Integrating Wildfire Resilience into Existing Structures, 
Infrastructures and Community Expansions
It is important to consider opportunities to integrate 
wildfire-ready features when repairing or replacing 
existing structures and infrastructure and when 
designing and building community expansions. Wildfire 
resilience can be integrated most cost-effectively into 
structure, infrastructure and landscaping design and 
construction when new facilities are being built, rebuilt 
following a wildfire, or when a new addition is being 
added. It is estimated that in high-hazard areas over a 
10 year period, communities will save $34 for every $1 
invested in new wildfire-ready construction, and $14 for 
every $1 for retrofits (Porter et al., 2021).
Taking a Multi-Hazard Approach to Achieve Multiple 
Benefits and Avoid Maladaptation
When planning actions to improve wildfire resilience, it 
is also important to consider opportunities to improve 
the resilience of the community to other climate-related 
risks, including flood, wildfire, extreme heat, hail, and 
wind. For example, communities planning to build a 
new community centre, can achieve multiple benefits 
by adding features that enable the facility to function 
as a cooling shelter during extreme heat, while also 
functioning as a reception centre for wildfire evacuees 
from neighbouring communities. It is also important 
to avoid maladaptation or fixing one problem while 
creating another. For example, by building the new
community centre in a low wildfire and flood hazard 
location, the risk of damage from these perils is 
minimized, thereby avoiding maladaptation.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
40
Figure 21: Practical actions to improve community wildfire resilience.
Scan the code or click 
the link for additional 
resources at
www.intactcentre.ca
EMERGENCY
SHELTER
EMERGENCY
SHELTER
10 m
30 m
5 m
5 m
2 m
10 m
10 m
Feature 3: Wildﬁre-Ready Emergency Response
Provide two or more suitably sized 
access and egress routes to 
accommodate the movement of 
emergency vehicles.
Complete annual emergency planning 
and cross-training exercises that include 
multiple agencies (e.g., wildland and 
structural ﬁreﬁghters).
Ensure minimum water supply 
for ﬁreﬁghting.
Designate at least one emergency 
shelter per community.
4
3
2
1
Integrate minimum 30 m wide zones (ﬁre 
breaks) featuring ignition resistant materials 
(e.g., mowed grasses, ponds, roads) into 
community design to limit the spread of ﬁre. 
Increase minimum to 50 m on steep slopes.
Provide greater spatial separation 
between structures in hazard areas to 
limit the spread of ﬁre from one structure 
to another.
Require minimum 10 m setback from 
the crest of a hill to limit spread of 
ﬁre to structures.
Restrict development in hazard areas 
where mitigation measures cannot meet 
minimum standards for health, safety, 
and environmental protection.
Feature 2: Wildﬁre-Ready Community Design
4
3
2
1
Complete regular maintenance of 
structures, infrastructure, and landscaping 
within 10 m to limit accumulation of 
ﬂammable materials (e.g., leaves, brush 
piles, stored items, fuel tanks). 
Install/replace landscaping with ﬁre 
resistant materials within 10 m of 
structures and infrastructure.
Build/update structures and 
infrastructure using ﬁre resistant 
building materials (e.g., Class A 
rooﬁng/metal roofs, non-combustible 
siding, metal, or concrete hydro poles).
Design/update structures and 
infrastructure to be ignition resistant 
(e.g., 5 m distance between vegetation 
and power lines, power supply lines below 
ground where feasible).
Feature 1: Wildﬁre-Ready Structures & Infrastructure
4
3
2
1
THREE FEATURES OF A
WILDFIRE-READY COMMUNITY
Communities can integrate wildﬁre-ready features into their risk management plans to limit damage and disruption due to wildﬁre events and strengthen 
emergency preparedness. By working with Provincial/Territorial wildﬁre agencies and municipal/structural ﬁre departments, communities can access 
available tools, training, and resources to help them assess their unique risks, and create customized action plans.
Note: The guidance in this document is voluntary. Completion of actions should not conﬂict with 
applicable building and ﬁre codes. Wildﬁre-ready communities can reduce but not eliminate risk.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
41
Three Features of a Wildfire-Ready Community
Communities can integrate wildfire-ready features into their wildfire risk management plans to limit damage and 
disruption due to wildfire events and strengthen emergency preparedness. 
Wildfire-Ready Structures and Infrastructure
To reduce the likelihood of  ignition and spread of  wildfires from wildlands into communities and from structure 
to structure, complete regular maintenance of structures, infrastructure, and landscaping within a 10 m radius. 
Update existing structures using fire resistant materials. Integrate wildfire-resilient design and materials into all 
new projects. 
10 m
1
Complete regular maintenance of structures, infrastructure, and landscaping 
within 10 m.
Regularly remove fine, highly flammable materials (such as pine needles and leaves) that 
collect on surfaces within 10 m of structures, infrastructure, and attachments.
 
Remove all flammable items (e.g., fuel tanks, brush piles) within 10 m of structures, 
infrastructure, and attachments. 
Keep lawn mown below 10 cm.
2 m
10 m
2
Install/replace landscaping with fire resistant materials within 10 m of a structure 
and infrastructure.
Replace combustible materials (e.g., wood mulch) with non-combustible ground surfaces 
such as mineral soil, rock, concrete or stone within 1.5 m of structures, infrastructure, and 
attachments. 
Install well-spaced, low-growing, ignition-resistant plants and remove evergreen trees 
within 1.5 - 10 m of structures, infrastructure, and attachments.
3
Build/update structures and infrastructure using fire resistant building materials.
Repair or replace any roofing material that is curling or damaged with Class A fire-rated 
roof covering (e.g., cement fibre, metal, or asphalt shingles).
Repair or replace combustible siding, such as vinyl cladding, with non-combustible siding 
composed of stucco, metal, stone, or cement fibre board.
Ensure that siding terminates 15 cm from grade. 
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
42
5 m
5 m
4
Design/update structures and infrastructure to be wildfire resilient feasible.
Design structures to minimize buildup of flammable debris (e.g., simple roof lines with 
no valleys).
Locate fire vulnerable components underground (e.g., power supply lines), where not 
exposed to flood or earthquake risk.  
Replace fire vulnerable support structures (e.g., wooden poles) with fire resistant poles 
(e.g., metal or concrete).
Where replacing fire vulnerable support structures is not feasible, maintain a 1.5 m non-
combustible surface around them (e.g., stone, mineral soil).
Locate and maintain power lines at a minimum distance of 5 m from vegetation.
Remove hazardous trees that may fall on power lines (e.g., trees with a height greater than 
1.5x their distance to the power line).
Wildfire-Ready Community Design
To reduce the likelihood of ignition and spread of wildfires, integrate wildfire resilient design into new residential 
communities. To ensure continuity of business operations and critical infrastructure delivery, integrate wildfire 
resilient community design into new commercial, industrial, and critical infrastructure projects. 
30 m
1
Integrate minimum 30 m wide zones (fire breaks) featuring ignition resistant 
materials (e.g., mowed grasses, ponds, roads) into community design to limit spread 
of fire. Work with a qualified professional to determine appropriate treatment.
Create a minimum 30 m fire break for slopes of less than 5%. 
Create a minimum 40 m fire break for slopes 5-15%.
Create a minimum 50 m fire break for slopes greater than 15%.
2
Provide greater special separation between homes in hazard areas to limit the spread 
of fire from one structure to nearby structures.
Require greater spatial separation between structures in residential neighbourhoods 
located in hazard areas (e.g., minimum 10 m).
Require additional separation for structures on moderate (5-15%) to steep (15% +) slopes.
In areas of high-density housing, increase the fire resistant requirements for the exposed 
building faces.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
43
10 m
3
Require minimum 10 m setback from crest of a hill.
Require home/structure setback of no less than 10 m from the crest of a hill. 
Require greater setbacks for structures on moderate (5-15%) to steep (15% +) slopes.
Where a 10 m setback is not possible, increase the fire-resistant requirements for the 
exposed building face.
4
Restrict development in hazard areas where mitigation measures cannot meet 
minimum standards for health, safety, and environmental protection.
Limit or discourage the construction of critical infrastructure in hazard areas (e.g., facilities for food 
supply, electricity, fuel, water, wastewater, telecommunications services, and transportation).
Limit or discourage the construction of public services (e.g., schools, community centres, 
government offices, hospitals, police stations).
Limit or discourage the construction of residential development.
Wildfire-Ready Emergency Response
To strengthen the capacity of the community to safely evacuate residents and halt the advance of wildfires into 
communities, emergency responders can complete annual training exercises and update emergency plans and 
procedures. Communities can also integrate wildfire-resilience into community design by designating emergency 
shelters, ensuring minimum water supply for firefighting and providing at least two access and egress routes.
1
Complete annual emergency planning and cross-training exercises that include 
multiple agencies (e.g., wildland and structural firefighters, infrastructure managers, 
Indigenous/provincial/territorial/local government agencies, non-governmental 
organizations, etc.).
Complete annual desktop and in-field emergency response simulation exercises to coordinate 
activities between firefighters, emergency managers and critical infrastructure managers. 
Complete annual reviews and updates to resource sharing agreements between jurisdictions.
Complete annual reviews and updates to emergency plans and procedures.
EMERGENCY
SHELTER
EMERGENCY
SHELTER
2
Designate at least one emergency shelter per community.
Designate at least one publicly accessible emergency shelter if residents cannot safely 
shelter in place during a wildfire emergency (for example, if unhoused individuals require 
shelter from smoke or high air temperatures during extreme heat events).
The emergency shelter may also be used as a “reception centre” to host members of 
neighbouring communities who have been displaced by wildfire events.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
44
3
Ensure minimum water supply for firefighting.
Specify standards for availability of water for firefighting in the event of a wildfire 
emergency (e.g., municipal water supply and/or surface water supply).
4
Provide two or more suitably sized access and egress routes to accommodate 
emergency vehicles.
Specify roadway design standards or guidelines for access and egress of emergency 
vehicles and residents during wildfire emergencies.
If the community has fewer than 600 households, provide two or more access/egress routes.
If the community has more than 600 households, provide three or more access/egress routes.
3.2.3 Free Self-Help Resources for Communities
Examples of national-scale wildfire-ready community 
resources are provided below. Additional Indigenous, 
national, provincial, territorial, and locally adapted 
resources can be accessed for free with an online search.
Local/ Regional Government Self-Help Resources
1.	 Community Wildfire Exposure Assessment 
Guide: FireSmart Wildfire Exposure 
Assessment 
2.	 Community Wildfire Resilience Planning Guide: 
FireSmart Guidebook for Community 
Protection 
3.	 Neighbourhood Scale Education Program: 
FireSmart Neighbourhood Recognition 
Program 
4.	 Free Online Wildfire Literacy Training 
Program: FireSmart 101 
5.	 Interactive Wildfire Maps: Canadian 
Wildland Fire Information System 
6.	 Wildfire Grading Index: Fire Underwriters 
Survey Municipal Portal
7.	 Toolkit for Public Health Authorities: 
Provincial/ Territorial Guidance 
Document Links
Free Self-Help Tools for Non-Governmental Agencies 
Responsible for Managing Wildfire Risks
8.	 Industry: Industrial Wildfire Control Plan 
(IWCP) User Manual 
9.	 Power Supply: Power Line Hazard 
Assessment 
10.	Railways: CN Extreme Weather Fire Risk 
Mitigation Plan 
11.	Farms: The Farm/Ranch Wildfire Plan 
Guide and Workbook 
12.	Oil and Gas: FireSmart Guidebook for the 
Oil and Gas Industry 
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
45
3.2.4 Accelerating Uptake of Actions to Create 
Wildfire-Ready Communities
The following section highlights just a few of the many 
examples of innovative programs that are driving the 
uptake of practical actions to create wildfire-ready 
communities.  These projects not only achieve multiple 
benefits but also avoid maladaptation, making them 
instrumental in fostering both wildfire-ready and 
climate-ready communities.
Unprecedented Risk Mitigation Projects in Quebec
Since 2022, nine northern communities in Quebec 
have received funding from the Ministry of Public 
Security and the Northern Plan Corporation for the 
implementation of risk mitigation measures related 
to forest fires. This program is the first of its kind 
for Quebec. Northern communities are particularly 
vulnerable to forest fires due to their remote locations, 
geographical isolation, and close proximity to dense 
coniferous areas with a high susceptibility to ignition.
Based on expert advice and technical guidance from the 
Société de protection des forêts contre le feu (SOPFEU), 
these projects involve the implementation of practical 
strategies to limit impacts when a wildfire approaches a 
community (Figure 21). These measures include:
•	vegetation control in prioritized areas (Figure 22),
•	public awareness, and
•	training for local first responders. 
For more information about the work of SOPFEU 
and a variety of self-help resources for residents and 
communities visit sopfeu.qc.ca/en/.
Rocky View County: Alberta Home Fire & Flood 
Risk Assessments 
Rocky View County in Alberta prioritized increasing 
disaster resilience in their community through 
a door-to-door home risk reduction education 
Figure 23: Door-to-door risk reduction education campaign 
(Canadian Red Cross, 2023).
campaign that was delivered by Canadian Red 
Cross volunteers (Figure 23). The program ran from 
2019-2022 and residents were provided access to 
free onsite home flood and wildfire risk assessments 
completed by trained assessors. Following the 
assessment, residents were eligible for a home 
improvement grant of  up to $9,054 to support 
specific flood and wildfire resilient retrofits. The 
program was actively promoted by the Insurance 
Brokers Association of  Alberta. 
Wildfire-Ready Construction Protects West Kelowna 
Figure 22: Fuel management near a residential area in 
Fermont, Quebec (SOPFEU, 2023).
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
46
Water Treatment Plant
After 12 years of fundraising, planning and four phases 
of construction, the Rose Valley Water Treatment Plant, 
located in West Kelowna, BC was finally completed in 
the spring of 2023 (Figure 24). On August 16, 2023, 
the McDougall Creek wildfire spread rapidly, launching 
embers across Okanagan Lake, igniting the drought-
stricken forest on the opposite side. This prompted 
the City of Kelowna to declare a state of emergency 
and ordered the evacuation of 10,000 residents. The 
blaze engulfed 140 km2, damaging, or destroying 
approximately 200 homes and structures (Clarkson 
et al., 2023). Fortunately, wildfire-ready planning and 
construction protected the plant, supporting a swift 
community recovery.
Figure 24: Rose Valley Water Treatment Plant. Retrieved 
from WestKelownaCity.ca, 2023.
One month after the blaze tore through his 
community, West Kelowna Fire Chief  Jason 
Brolund shared the importance of  investing in risk 
reduction with members of  the United Nations, 
“Over $20 million was spent reacting to [the West 
Kelowna] fire, not to mention the insurance losses, 
which could be triple that. What could we have 
accomplished if  we used that same amount of  money 
proactively? We’re spending the money on the wrong 
end of  the problem…$10,000 worth of  sprinklers and 
pumps were placed on our new water treatment plant, 
and it saved that $75 million critical infrastructure… 
It will start providing clean drinking water in just a 
couple of  days.” (Peters, 2023)
“Over $20 million was spent 
reacting to [the West Kelowna] 
fire, not to mention the 
insurance losses, which could 
be triple that. What could we 
have accomplished if we used 
that same amount of money 
proactively? We’re spending 
the money on the wrong end 
of the problem…$10,000 
worth of sprinklers and pumps 
were placed on our new 
water treatment plant, and it 
saved that $75 million critical 
infrastructure… It will start 
providing cleaning drinking 
water in just a couple of days.”
Australia: Controlled Burns Yield GHG Credits and 
Income for Indigenous Peoples
In northern Australia, the Nature Conservancy has 
partnered with Indigenous communities to combine 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge with the latest in 
fire science to manage wildfire (Nature Conservancy of 
Australia, 2023). In the months leading up to the dry 
season, residents burn small, controlled fires removing 
dry grass that would otherwise act as fuel for larger 
wildfires. In addition, avoiding large fires reduces the 
volume of greenhouse gases released to the atmosphere.
Indigenous groups document the controlled burns, 
calculate the greenhouse gas reduction associated with 
catastrophic wildfire prevention, and receive carbon 
credits from the Australian government (Figure 25). 
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
47
Each tonne of carbon dioxide reduced results in one 
carbon credit awarded. The sale of carbon credits by 
Indigenous groups helps to generate income, which 
supports sustainable land management and increases 
biodiversity (Nature Conservancy of Australia, 2023).
Figure 25: An Indigenous ranger ignites a controlled burn. 
Courtesy of Ted Wood, 2023.
Indigenous groups document 
the controlled burns, calculate 
the greenhouse gas reduction 
associated with catastrophic 
wildfire prevention, and 
receive carbon credits from the 
Australian government.
3. Practical Guidance to Create Wildfire-Ready Homes and Communities
48
4. Conclusions and 
Next Steps
Wildfires pose a growing threat to homes and communities in 
the wildland-urban interface (WUI). To reduce the devastating 
physical, environmental, social, and economic impacts of 
WUI wildfire, Canadians must work together to adapt NOW. 
48
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
49
This report highlights nationally applicable best 
practice guidance that residents and communities 
can consider to reduce their risk of  damage and 
disruption due to wildfire events and strengthen 
emergency preparedness.
In line with the wildfire-ready targets set out in 
Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy, by taking a 
whole-of-society approach, residents, governments, 
non-governmental organizations, Indigenous 
Peoples, industry and businesses can work together 
to promote existing FREE programs and resources 
and implement a variety of  low cost, low effort, high 
impact actions TODAY. 
MOVING FORWARD
The following improvements to current programs, new 
research, and policy updates should be considered to 
help Canada make additional progress towards creating 
wildfire-ready homes and communities.
Scale up Wildfire-Ready Education 
The Government of Canada (i.e., Public Safety 
Canada, Environment and Climate Change Canada, 
and Natural Resources Canada) should launch a 
National Home and Community Wildfire-
Ready Education Program. A wide variety of tools, 
including FireSmart Canada resources, are already in 
hand. As a fiduciary, the federal government of Canada 
should promote these tools.
Support Indigenous-Led Research and 
Knowledge Mobilization 
Support Indigenous-led research to develop and share 
practical, cost-effective and culturally appropriate wildfire-
ready home and community tools and resources that 
address the unique needs of Indigenous communities.
Develop Simple Risk Assessment Tools
Develop and share simple, low cost, user-friendly 
climate-risk assessment, mapping and scoring tools for 
use by residents and local authorities.
Take a Multi-Hazard Approach 
Identify climate-ready best practices at the home and 
community scales to achieve multiple benefits and 
avoid maladaptation.
All orders of  government, Indigenous Peoples, 
industry, businesses and residents have a role to play 
in helping Canada to be wildfire-ready. By embarking 
on a collective journey TODAY to create wildfire-
ready homes and communities —as clearly spelled 
out in Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy 
(Table 1)— Canadians will be READY to face the 
flames during the longer, hotter, drier wildfire seasons 
of  the future.
The Government of Canada 
(i.e., Public Safety Canada, 
Environment and Climate 
Change Canada, and Natural 
Resources Canada) should 
launch a National Home 
and Community Wildfire-
Ready Education Program. 
A wide variety of tools, 
including FireSmart Canada 
resources, are already in hand. 
As a fiduciary, the federal 
government of Canada should 
promote these tools.
4. Conclusions and Next Steps
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
50
National Adaptation Strategy Target
Act Today
#1: Increase Risk Awareness
By 2025, 60% of Canadians, including 
northerners and Indigenous Peoples, are aware 
of the disaster risks facing their household.
Support Wildfire-Ready Education
1.	
Distribute Three Steps To A Cost-Effective FiresmartTM Home to 
residents living in the WUI
2.	 Promote FireSmart home self-help resources and training programs 
and other resources developed with the Provinces and Territories, 
such as SOPFEU in Quebec
#2: Preventative Action 
By 2025, 50% of Canadians have taken 
concrete actions to better prepare for and 
respond to climate change risks facing their 
household.
Create Wildfire-Ready Homes
Promote:
1.	
FireSmart Risk Self-Assessment tools that highlight practical actions 
to reduce risk and other resources developed with the Provinces 
and Territories
2.	 Online wildfire risk reduction training programs (e.g., FireSmart 101 
and how-to videos)
3.	 Available financial incentives and low interest loans to complete 
resilient home retrofits and lot-level actions to reduce risk of the 
ignition and spread of fire
#3: Community Protection Plans
Communities, including northern and 
Indigenous communities, in zones of high 
risk, as identified by provinces and territories, 
develop wildfire community prevention and 
mitigation plans by 2030, with up to 15% 
implemented by 2028.
Create Wildfire-Ready Communities
1.	
Distribute Three Features of a Wildfire-Ready Community to 
communities located in the WUI
Promote:
2.	 Community-scale wildfire hazard maps and emergency 
preparedness resources 
3.	 Community wildfire risk assessment and planning guides
4.	 Available funding programs to develop and implement wildfire-ready 
community plans 
5.	 Case studies featuring communities demonstrating wildfire-ready 
leadership
#4: Building Back Better
By 2025, complete the modernization of the 
Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements to 
incentivize disaster risk reduction and improve 
recovery outcomes from large-scale disasters.
Support Wildfire-Ready Recovery
Promote:
1.	
Wildfire resilient community national best practice guidance 
2.	 Available funding programs to develop and implement wildfire-ready 
community plans 
3.	 Case studies featuring communities that have “built back better” 
following a catastrophic wildfire event
Table 1: National Adaptation Strategy Targets that Can be Achieved with Immediate Action.
4. Conclusions and Next Steps
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
51
References
Alam, R, Islam, S, Mosely, E., Thomas, S., Dowdell, V, & Doel, D. (n.d.). Rapid Impact Assessment of Fort 
McMurray Wildfire. Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction and MacEwan University. http://0361572.
netsolhost.com/images/AlamIslam_QuickResponseSummary-ICLR.pdf
Austen, I. (2023, September 6). After 3 Weeks of Wildfire Exile, a City of 20,000 Returns. The New York Times. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/06/world/canada/wildfire-yellowknife-evacuation-return.html
Barber, Q. E., Parisien, M. A., Whitman, E., Stralberg, D., Johnson, C. J., St‐Laurent, M. H., … & Flannigan, 
M. D. (2018). Potential impacts of climate change on the habitat of boreal woodland caribou. Ecosphere, 9(10), 
e02472.
BC Climate Change Adaptation Program.  Farm/Ranch Wildfire Plan Guide and Workbook. Retrieved on Jan. 
19, 2023, from https://bcclimatechangeadaptation.ca/resource-items/farm-ranch-wildfire-guide-and-workbook/
Bénichou N., Adelzadeh M., Singh J., Gomaa I., Elsagan N., Kinateder M., … Sultan M. (2021) National guide 
for wildland-urban-interface fires. National Research Council Canada. https://doi.org/10.4224/40002647 
Beverly, J., Bothwell, P., Conner, J., & Herd, E. (2010). Assessing the exposure of the built environment to the 
potential ignition sources generated from vegetative fuel. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 19(3), 299-313. 
Bruce, G. (2023, June 9). Canada’s wildfires: Where they are, how much has burned and how it’s changing air 
quality. CBC News. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/canada-fires-map-air-quality-1.6871563
Calkin, D. E., Cohen, J. D., Finney, M. A., & Thompson, M. P. (2014). How risk management can prevent future 
wildfire disasters in the wildland-urban interface. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 111, 746-751. https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1315088111
Canadian Council of Forest Ministers. (2005). Canadian Wildland Fire Strategy: A Vision for an Innovative 
and Integrated Approach to Managing the Risks. Retrieved from https://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2008/nrcan/Fo134-1-2005E.pdf
Canadian Council of Forest Ministers. (2021). Wildland Fire Management Work Group - Action Plan 2021 
- 2026. Retrieved from https://www.ccfm.org/releases/wildland-fire-management-working-group-action-
plan-2021-2026/
Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre Inc. (2023, September 27). Fire Statistics. Retrieved from https://ciffc.
net/statistics 
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
52
Canadian Pacific. (2021, July 27). Interim Extreme Weather Fire Risk Mitigation Plan. https://www.cpr.ca/en/
safety-site/PublishingImages/Pages/Interim-Extreme-Weather-Fire-Risk-Mitigation-Plan/CP_Interim_Extreme_
Weather_Fire_Risk_Mitigation_Plan_2021-07-27.2pdf
Canadian Wildland Fire Information System (CWFIS). 2023. Canadian National Fire Database (CNFDB).  
https://cwfis.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/interactive-map 
CBC News. (2023, May 29). About 200 homes, structures ‘damaged’ as Halifax-area wildfire burns out of control, 
officials say. CBC News. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/nova-scotia/tantallon-hammonds-plains-pockwock-
wildfire-evaucations-forest-fire-halifax-1.6857729
CBC News. (2019, June 1). Evacuation from Pikangikum First Nation continues as forest fire burns nearby. CBC 
News. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/pikangikum-update-saturday-1.5158794
CBC News. (2021, August 18). What you need to know about B.C. wildfires for Aug. 18. CBC News. https://
www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/wyntk-bc-wildfires-aug-18-1.6144391
CBC News. (2023, May 29). About 200 homes, structures ‘damaged’ as Halifax-area wildfire burns out of control, 
officials say. CBC News. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/nova-scotia/tantallon-hammonds-plains-pockwock-
wildfire-evaucations-forest-fire-halifax-1.6857729
CBC News. (2023, May 31). ‘Take the wildfire situation as seriously as we are,’ minister urges Nova Scotians. 
CBC News. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/nova-scotia/tantallon-hammonds-plains-pockwock-wildfire-
evaucations-forest-fire-halifax-may-31-1.6860135 
Cecco, Leyland. (September 22, 2023). Wildfires turn Canada’s vast forests from carbon sink into super-emitter. 
The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/sep/22/canada-wildfires-forests-carbon-emissions
Christianson, A. C. (2015). Social science research on Indigenous wildfire management in the 21st century and 
future research needs. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 24(2), 190–200.
Chung, Emily. (November 18, 2021). Why are the B.C. floods so bad? Blame the wildfires, at least in part. CBC 
News. https://www.cbc.ca/news/science/post-wildfire-floodring-1.6253544
Clarkson, B., Holliday, I. & Frisk, A. (2023, August 18). Structures burned, people trapped as parts of B.C.’s 
Okanagan ordered to evacuate. CTV News Vancouver. https://bc.ctvnews.ca/kelowna-declares-state-of-
emergency-evacuation-orders-issued-as-wildfire-jumps-okanagan-lake-overnight-1.6524568
Climenhaga, C. (2022, November 7). This year’s wildfire season fluctuated wildly across provinces. Here’s 
a look at the numbers. CBC News. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/prairie-wildfire-season-
numbers-1.6637306
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
53
Cohen, J. (2008). The Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Problem. Forest History Today. https://foresthistory.org/
wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Cohen_wildland-urban-interface-fire-problem.pdf
Cohen, J. & Westhaver, A. (2022). An examination of the Lytton, British Columbia Wildland-urban fire 
destruction. Institute for Catastrophic Loss.  https://FireSmartbc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/An-
examination-of-the-Lytton-BC-wildland-urban-fire-destruction.pdf  
Coogan, S.C.P., Daniels, L.D., Boychuk, D., Burton, P.J., Flannigan, M.D., Gauthier, S., … Wotton, B.M. (2020). 
Fifty years of wildland fire science in Canada. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 51(2): 283-302. https://doi.
org/10.1139/cjfr-2020-0314
Coogan, S.C.P., Robinne, F-N., Jain, P. & Flannigan, M.D. (2019) Scientists’ warning on wildfire — a Canadian 
perspective. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 49(9): 1015-1023. https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2019-0094
CTV News. (2022, May 3). Two years later: 20 per cent of homes lost during Fort McMurray wildfires fully 
rebuilt. CTV News.
Czajkowski, J., Young, M., Giammanco, I., Nielsen, M., Russo, E., Cope, A., Brandenburg, A., & Groshong, L. 
(2020). Application of Wildfire Mitigation to Insured Property Exposure. CIPR Research Report. https://content.
naic.org/sites/default/files/cipr_report_wildfire_mitigation.pdf
Dodd, W., Scott, P., Howard, C., Scott, C., Rose, C., Cunsolo, A., & Orbinski, J. (2018). Lived experience of a 
record wildfire season in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Canadian Journal of Public Health, 109(3), 327-337. 
doi:10.17269/s41997-018-0070-5
Dupuis, S., Gauthier, S., Bergeron, Y., & Leduc, A. (2020). Forest transformation following European settlement in 
the Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean Valley in Eastern Québec, Canada. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 8, 257.
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2022). Canadian Environmental Sustainability Indicators: Land-based 
greenhouse gas emissions and removals. Retrieved April 13, 2023, from https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-
climate-change/services/environmental-indicators/land-based-greenhouse-gas-emissions-removals.html
Environment and Climate Change Canada. (2023a). Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy: Building 
Resilient Communities and a Strong Economy. https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/
climatechange/climate-plan/national-adaptation-strategy.html
Environment and Climate Change Canada. (2023b). Wildfire smoke, air quality, and your health. Retrieved 
April 6, 2023, from https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/air-quality-health-index/
wildfire-smoke.html
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
54
Erni, S., Boulanger, Y., Manka, F., Bernier, P., Eddy, B., Christianson, A., Swystun, T., & Gauthier, S. (2021). 
Exposure of  the Canadian wildland-human interface and population to wildland fire, under current and future 
climate conditions. Canadian Science Publishing, 51(9). https://cdnsciencepub.com/doi/full/10.1139/cjfr-
2020-0422 
Eyquem, J. L, & B. Feltmate. (2022). Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities 
from a Lethal Future. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/irreversible-extreme-heat-protecting-canadians-and-communities-from-a-lethal-
future/
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (2020). Flood Risk Increase After Fires. Retrieved April 17, 
2023, from https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_flood-after-fire_factsheet_nov20.pdf
FireSmart British Columbia. (n.d.). FireSmart Plant Program. https://FireSmartbc.ca/landscaping-hub/plant-
program/
FireSmart Canada. (2018a). FireSmart Begins at Home: Home Development Guide. https://FireSmartcanada.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/FireSmart_Canada_Home_Development_Guide.pdf
FireSmart Canada. (2018b). FireSmart Begins at Home Manual. https://FireSmartcanada.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2022/01/FS_Generic-HomeOwnersManual_Booklet-November-2018-Web.pdf
FireSmart Canada. (2020). Blazing the Trail: Celebrating Indigenous Fire Stewardship.
FireSmart Canada. (2020). FireSmart Guide to Landscaping: Second Edition. https://FireSmartcanada.ca/
product/FireSmart-guide-to-landscaping/
FireSmart Canada. (2023). FireSmart Home Igntion Zone Poster. Retrieved from https://firesmartcanada.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2023/02/Home-Ignition-Zone-Poster-EN-SCREEN.pdf
FireSmart Canada. (n.d.). FireSmart Home Ignition Zone Assessment Score Card. Retrieved on Jan. 19, 2023 
from https://FireSmartcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/FSC_NRP_HIZ-ScoreCard_Form-final-03-15-
TM-1.pdf
FireSmart Canada. (n.d.). The Seven FireSmart Disciplines. Retrieved January 19, 2023, from https://
FireSmartcanada.ca/about-FireSmart/the-seven-FireSmart-disciplines/
FireSmart Canada, Canada Wildfire, & Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation. (2022). Wildfire-
Resilience Best-Practice Checklist for Home Construction, Renovation and Landscaping. https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/FSC_ConstructionChecklist_FINAL.pdf
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
55
FireSmart Canada & Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation. (n.d.). Three Steps to a Cost-Effective FireSmart 
Home. https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/IntactCentre_3-steps-to-a-
cost-effective-FireSmart-Home.pdf 
Flannigan, M.D., Logan, K.A., Amiro, B.D., Skinner, W.R. & Stocks, B.J. (2005). Future Area Burned in 
Canada. Climatic Change 72, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-005-5935-y
Government of Alberta. (2013). FireSmart Guidebook for Community Protection: A Guidebook for 
Wildland/Urban Interface Communities. https://wildfire.alberta.ca/FireSmart/documents/FireSmart-
GuideCommunityProtection-Nov2013.pdf
Government of British Columbia. (2018). BC Flood and Wildfire Review: Addressing the New Normal - 21st 
Century Disaster Management in BC. Retrieved from https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/public-safety-and-
emergency-services/emergency-preparedness-response-recovery/embc/bc-flood-and-wildfire-review-addressing-
the-new-normal-21st-century-disaster-management-in-bc-web.pdf
Government of British Columbia. (2021). Landslide Flooding Risks Due to Wildfires Brochure. Retrieved April 
17, 2023, from https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/farming-natural-resources-and-industry/natural-resource-
use/resource-roads/local-road-safety-information/landslide_flooding_risks_due_to_wildfires-brochure.pdf
Government of British Columbia. (2023). Wildfire Averages. Retrieved April 12, 2023, from https://www2.gov.
bc.ca/gov/content/safety/wildfire-status/about-bcws/wildfire-statistics/wildfire-averages.
Government of Canada. (2023, May 12). Wildfire smoke, air quality and your health. Retrieved June 1, 2023, from 
https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/air-quality-health-index/wildfire-smoke.html
Hanes, C., Wang, X., Jain, P., Parisien, M.-A., Little, J., & Flannigan, M. (2019). Fire regime changes in Canada 
over the last half century. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 49(3), 256-269.
Hoffman, K. M., Christianson, A. C., Dickson-Hoyle, S., Copes-Gerbitz, K., Nikolakis, W., Diabo… & Daniels, L. 
D. (2022a). The right to burn: barriers and opportunities for Indigenous-led fire stewardship in Canada. FACETS, 
7(1), 464-481. https://doi.org/10.1139/facets-2021-0062
Hoffman, K. M., Christianson, A. C., Gray, R., & Daniels, L. (2022b). Western Canada’s new wildfire reality 
needs a new approach to fire management. Environmental Research Letters, 17. https://iopscience.iop.org/
article/10.1088/1748-9326/ac7345/pdf
Hope, E. S., McKenney, D. W., Pedlar, J. H., Stocks, B. J., & Gauthier, S. (2016). Wildfire Suppression Costs 
for Canada under a Changing Climate. PLoS ONE, 11(8), e0157425. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0157425 
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
56
Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC). (2023). Severe Weather in 2022 Caused $3.1 Billion in Insured Damage – 
making it the 3rd worst year for insured damage in Canadian history. Media Releases. Retrieved January 18, 2023, 
from https://www.ibc.ca/news-insights/news/severe-weather-in-2022-caused-3-1-billion-in-insured-damage-
making-it-the-3rd-worst-year-for-insured-damage-in-canadian-history
Insurance Institute for Business & Home Safety (IBHS). (2023). Wildfire Prepared: A program of IBHS. https://
wildfireprepared.org/
IPCC. (2023). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. A Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, H. Lee and J. 
Romero (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/
Johnston, L., & Flannigan, D. (2018). Mapping Canadian wildland fire interface areas. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire, 27, 1-14. https://www.publish.csiro.au/wf/pdf/WF16221
Jones, D. (August 17, 2023). Out-of-control wildfires in Canada force all 20,000 residents of Yellowknife to flee. 
npr. https://www.npr.org/2023/08/17/1194388692/wildfire-yellowknife-canada-evacuation
Lavoue, D., Stocks, B.J. (2011). Emissions of air pollutants by Canadian wildfires from 2000 to 2004. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire. 20:17-34. https://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/publications?id=33061 
Matz, C. J., Egyed, M., Xi, G., Racine, J., Pavlovic, R., Rittmaster, R., Henderson, S. B., & Stieb, D. M. (2020). 
Health impact analysis on PM2.5 from wildfire smoke in Canada (2013-2015, 2017-2018). Science of Total 
Environment. 725, 138506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138506
McDermott, V. (2022, May 3). Roughly 86 per cent of properties destroyed in 2016 have been rebuilt. Fort 
McMurray Today. https://www.fortmcmurraytoday.com/news/roughly-86-per-cent-of-properties-destroyed-in-
2016-wildfire-have-been-rebuilt
McGee, T. K., Nation, M. O., & Christianson, A. C. (2019). Residents’ wildfire evacuation actions in 
Mishkeegogamang Ojibway Nation, Ontario, Canada. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 33, 
266–274.
Ministry of Northern Development, Mines, Natural Resources and Forestry’s (NDMNRF). 2014. Wildland 
Fire Management Strategy. Toronto: Queen’s Printer for Ontario. https://www.ontario.ca/page/wildland-fire-
management-strategy
Minogue, S. (2023, August 16). Yellowknife begins evacuation as wildfires approach. CBC News. https://www.cbc.
ca/news/canada/north/nwt-wildfire-emergency-update-august-16-1.6938756
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
57
Morton, D. C., Roessing, M. E., Camp, A. E., & Tyrrell, M. L. (2003). Assessing the Environmental, Social, and 
Economic Impacts of Wildfire. GISF Research Paper 001. Forest Health Initiative. Yale University. School of 
Forestry and Environmental Studies. Global Institute of Sustainable Forestry. 360 Prospect Street, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06511 USA.
Mosleh, Omar. (2023, May 17). Canada’s wildfires are getting worse. Here are some of the long-term effects 
they’re having. Toronto Star. https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2023/05/17/behind-the-smoke-canadas-
worsening-wildfires-are-exacting-a-hidden-toll.html
National Collaborating Centre for Indigenous Health (NCCIH). (2022). Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ 
Health in Canada. In P. Berry & R. Schnitter (Eds.), Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing our 
Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada
Natural Resources Canada (2020, July 15). Wildland fire evacuations. Retrieved October 5, 2023, from https://
natural-resources.canada.ca/climate-change/impacts-adaptations/climate-change-impacts-forests/forest-change-
indicators/wildland-fire-evacuations/17787
Natural Resources Canada (2022). Evacuations due to wildland fire 1980-2021. Retrieved from Christianson, A., 
August 2023.
Natural Resources Canada (2022a, May 31). Forest Carbon. Retrieved April 13, 2023, from https://natural-
resources.canada.ca/climate-change-adapting-impacts-and-reducing-emissions/climate-change-impacts-forests/
forest-carbon/13085.
Natural Resources Canada. (2022b). The State of Canada’s Forests: Annual Report 2022. https://natural-
resources.canada.ca/sites/nrcan/files/forest/sof2022/SoF_Annual2022_EN_access (4).pdf
Natural Resources Canada. (2023, May 30). Forest Fires. Retrieved June 1, 2023, from https://natural-resources.
canada.ca/our-natural-resources/forests/wildland-fires-insects-disturbances/forest-fires/13143
Natural Resources Canada. (2023, September 27). Wildland Fire Evacuations. Retrieved September 27, 2023, 
from https://natural-resources.canada.ca/climate-change/impacts-adaptations/climate-change-impacts-forests/
forest-change-indicators/wildland-fire-evacuations/17787 
Parisien, M.-A., Barber, Q.E., Hirsch, K.G., Stockdale, C.A., Erni, S., Wang, X., Arsenault, D., & Parks, 
S.A. (2020). Fire deficit increases wildfire risk for many communities in the Canadian boreal forest. Nature 
Communications, 11(2121), 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15961-y
Parisien, M-A., Barber, Q., Bourbonnais, M., Daniels, L., Hoffman, K., Gray, R., Jain, J., Taylor, S., Whitman, E., 
& Flannigan, M. (2023). Abrupt, climate-induced increase in wildfires in British Columbia since the mid-2000s. 
Communications Earth & Environment, 4, 309. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00977-1
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
58
Pau, M., Gauthier, S., Boulanger, Y., Ouzennou, H., Girardin, M. P., & Bergeron, Y. (2023). Response of forest 
productivity to changes in growth and fire regime due to climate change. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 
https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2022-0207
Peters, J. (2023, September 21). Canadian fire chiefs deliver climate change message to United Nations 
following devastating season. CBC. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/fire-chief-brolund-un-
speech-1.6974427
Porter, K.A., Scawthorn, C.R., & Sandink, D. (2021). An Impact Analysis for the National Guide for Wildland-
Urban Interface Fires. Prepared for the National Research Council of Canada. Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction, Toronto, ON. https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/ICLR-SPA-Risk-Impact-Analysis-
for-the-National-WUI-Fire-Guide-2021.pdf
Province of Alberta (2022a). Industrial Wildfire Control Plan (IWCP) User Manual. https://wildfire.alberta.ca/
prevention/industry/industrial-wildfire-control-plan.aspx
Province of Alberta (2022b). Power Line Hazard Assessment. Retrieved January 19, 2023, from https://wildfire.
alberta.ca/prevention/industry/powerline-hazard-assessment-plan.aspx 
Public Safety Canada. (2019). Emergency Management Strategy for Canada: Toward a Resilient 2030. Retrieved 
January 19, 2023, from https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/mrgncy-mngmnt-strtgy/mrgncy-
mngmnt-strtgy-en.pdf
Pyne, Stephen J. (2008) Awful Splendor: A Fire History of Canada. UBC Press. https://www.ubcpress.ca/awful-
splendour-1
Ramsden, R., Smith, J., Turcotte, K., Garis, L., Kunz, K., Maxim, P., Pike, I., & Pike, I. (2018). Determinants 
of injury and death among Canadian firefighters. Injury Prevention, 24, A213. doi: https://dx.doi.
org/10.14288/1.0397309
RiskFactor.com. Find your Property’s risk. Retrieved on January 19, 2023, from https://riskfactor.com/
Rocky View County, Alberta. (2022). Residential Resilience Grant. https://www.rockyview.ca/Portals/0/Files/
Emergency/Protect/Residential-Resilience-Grant-Funding-Application.pdf 
Rosenthal, A., Stover, E., & Haar, R. J. (2021). Health and social impacts of California wildfires and the 
deficiencies in current recovery resources: An exploratory qualitative study of systems-level issues. PloS one, 16(3), 
e0248617. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0248617
Stewart, L., & Evans, C. (n.d.). Applying the FireSmart System to Stengthen Community Wildfire Resilience. 
Adapted from FireSmart Canada.
Wildfire-Ready: Practical Guidance to Strengthen the Resilience of Canadian Homes and Communities
59
The Nature Conservancy Australia (2023, February 28). The smart use of fire for huge reductions in greenhouse 
gas emissions. Retrieved January 19, 2023 from https://www.natureaustralia.org.au/what-we-do/our-priorities/
climate-change/climate-change-stories/fighting-fire-with-fire/
To, P., Eboreime, E., & Agyapong, V. I. (2021). The impact of wildfires on mental health: a scoping review. 
Behavioral Sciences, 11(9), 126. https://doi.org/10.3390/bs11090126
Tymstra, C., Stocks, B., Cai, X, & Flannigan, M. (2020) Wildfire management in Canada: Review, challenges, 
and opportunities. Progress in Disaster Science. 5. 100045. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2590061719300456 
Wang, X., Parisien, M.-A., Taylor, S. W., Candau, J.-N., Stralberg, D., Marshall, G. A., … & Flannigan, M. D. 
(2017). Projected changes in daily fire spread across Canada over the next century. Environmental Research 
Letters. 12(2), 025005. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa5835
Weichel, Andrew. (2023, August 22). Nearly 200 structures lost or damaged by wildfires in Kelowna, B.C., area, 
officials say. CTV News Vancouver. https://bc.ctvnews.ca/nearly-200-structures-lost-or-damaged-by-wildfires-in-
kelowna-b-c-area-officials-say-1.6529455
West Kelowna, British Columbia. (2023) Rose Valley Water Treatment Plant. https://www.westkelownacity.ca/
en/our-community/rose-valley-water-treatment-plant-project.aspx?_mid_=38297
Whitman, E., Parks, S. A., Holsinger, L. M., & Parisien, M. A. (2022). Climate-induced fire regime 
amplification in Alberta, Canada. Environmental Research Letters, 17(5), 055003. https://iopscience.iop.org/
article/10.1088/1748-9326/ac60d6/meta
Wotton B.M., Flannigan M.D. (1993). Length of the fire season in a changing climate. The Forestry Chronicle, 
69,187-192. https://doi.org/10.5558/tfc69187-2
Wotton B.M., Flannigan M.d. & Marhsall G.A. (2017) Potential climate change impacts on fire intensity and key 
wildfire suppression thresholds in Canada. Environmental Research Letter, 12(9), 095003. https://iopscience.iop.org/
article/10.1088/1748-9326/aa7e6e
To find out more:
Cheryl Evans, BES
Director, Flood and Wildfire Resilience
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
c8evans@uwaterloo.ca  |  226-338-4815
www.intactcentre.ca
