A FLOOD RISK CHECK-UP FOR 
CANADIAN MUNICIPALITIES: 
TACKLING FLOODING 
TOGETHER
!
!
!
Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy 
in Action
Joanna Eyquem 
Mélie Monnerat
Supported by:
April 2024
About the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is an applied research institute with a national 
focus, located within the Faculty of Environment at the University of Waterloo. The Intact Centre works 
with residents, communities, governments, and businesses to identify and reduce risks associated with climate 
change, such as flooding, wildfire, and extreme heat. The Centre has developed numerous guidelines and is 
quoted almost daily in the media, focusing consistently on the need to act with urgency to limit the impacts 
of climate change and extreme weather.
To this end, the Intact Centre is an incubator of new adaptation ideas, conducting research, knowledge 
mobilization and promoting initiatives aimed at de-risking the negative impacts of a changing climate and extreme 
weather, including flooding. For additional information, visit: www. intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca.
About the University of Waterloo 
The University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation university. With more than 42,000 full and part-time 
students (Fall 2022), the university is home to the world’s largest co-operative education system of its kind. The 
university’s unmatched entrepreneurial culture, combined with an intensive focus on research, powers one of the 
top innovation hubs in the world. For additional information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca. 
About the Intact Financial Corporation 
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX: IFC) is the largest provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in 
Canada, a leading provider of global specialty insurance, and, with RSA, a leader in the U.K. and Ireland. Our 
business has grown organically and through acquisitions to over $21 billion of total annual premiums. In Canada, 
Intact distributes insurance under the Intact Insurance brand through a wide network of brokers, including its 
wholly-owned subsidiary BrokerLink, and directly to consumers through belairdirect. Intact also provides affinity 
insurance solutions through the Johnson Affinity Groups. In the US, Intact Insurance Specialty Solutions provides 
a range of specialty insurance products and services through independent agencies, regional and national brokers, 
and wholesalers and managing general agencies. In the U.K., Ireland, and Europe, Intact provides personal, 
commercial and specialty insurance solutions through the RSA brands.
About Intact Public Entities 
Intact Public Entities (IPE) is a leader in providing specialized insurance programs, including risk management 
and claims services to municipal, public administration and community service organizations across Canada. 
Proven industry knowledge, gained through over nine decades of partnering with insurance companies 
and independent brokers, gives IPE the ability to effectively manage the necessary risk, advisory and claims 
services for both standard and complex issues. IPE is a Managing General Agent (MGA) with the authority 
to write and service business on behalf of strategic partners who share our commitment and dedication to 
protecting specialized organizations. Because our partners are long-term participants on our program, they 
understand the nature of fluctuating market conditions and complex claims and are prepared to stay the 
course. Intact Public Entities is a wholly owned subsidiary of Intact Financial Corporation. For additional 
information, visit intactpublicentities.ca.
Citation 
Eyquem, J.L. and Monnerat, M. (2024). A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding 
Together. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo.
All findings and recommendations of this study are those of the Intact Centre.
For information about this report, contact the Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation: intact.centre@uwaterloo.ca 
Disclaimer 
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible. The Intact Centre 
cannot make any guarantees of any kind, as to the completeness, accuracy, suitability, or reliability of the data provided in the report. This 
report has been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only and does not constitute professional advice. You should not act 
upon the information contained in this publication without obtaining specific professional advice. No representation or warranty (express 
or implied) is given as to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this publication, and Intact Centre employees and 
affiliates do not accept or assume any liability, responsibility, or duty of care for any consequences to you or anyone else acting, or refraining 
to act, in reliance on the information contained in this report or for any decision based upon it. All dollar figures are Canadian dollars.
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements	 6
Executive Summary 
8
1. The Urgent Need for Municipal Action to Reduce Flood Risk 
11
1.1 Costs of Flooding  
12
1.2 Types of Flooding  
15
1.3 Gaps in Current Flood Preparedness 
16
1.4 Supporting Municipalities  
17
1.5 The Role of the Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up 
18
2. Method: Developing the Check-Up 
19
2.1 Desktop Research and Analysis 
20
2.2 Engagement with Interested Parties 
20
3. Review of Existing Standards, Guidance and Tools  
21
3.1 International Standards for Risk Management (ISO 31000) 
22
3.2 Canadian Flood Risk Management Standards and Guidance 
23
3.3 Existing Flood Risk Management Evaluation Tools  
26
4. What We Heard: Needs in Municipal Flood Risk Management 
28
4.1 Insights into Current Practices and Lessons Learned 
29
4.2 Shaping the Check-Up Tool: Workshop Outputs 
30
4.3 Links to Municipal Insurance 
31
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up 
33
5.1 Overview  34
5.2 Scope and Use of the Check-Up 
34
5.3 Format and Structure 
35
5.4 Question Design 
37
5.5 Results   39
5.6 Resources 
43
6. Moving Forward Together: Supporting Municipal Action 
44
6.1 Empowering Municipalities 
45
6.2 Other Users 
46
6.3 Scaling-Up Use of the Check-Up 
46
Appendix A: Online Workshop – Overview	
47
Appendix B: Key Sources Used to Develop Check-Up Questions 	
48
References	
55
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
6
Acknowledgements
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation thanks the contributors listed below, from across Canada and beyond, 
for their shared experiences, advice, comments, and participation in workshops that have shaped the development 
of the Municipal Flood Risk Check-up. A special thanks to Fady Ghattas for his support in developing the Check-
Up spreadsheets, and to Kathryn Bakos for her contribution regarding the financial impacts of flooding.
Susan Ancel, Director, One Water Planning, EPCOR	
Kathryn Bakos, Director, Finance and Resilience, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Lynn Barber, Manager, Strategic Initiatives, CSA Group
Jenica Batanga, Operations Coordinator (Co-op Student), Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Anabela Bonada, PhD, Manager and Research Associate, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Dustin Carey, Lead, Climate Adaptation, Green Municipal Fund, Federation of Canadian Municipalities
Shonnie Cline, (formerly) Communication and Management Strategist, Corona Environmental Consulting
Simon Couture, Advisor, Risk Management and Vulnerabilities, Communauté métropolitaine de Québec
Nathan de Witt, CPA, Specialist II, Corporate Asset Management, City of London
Anaïs Desmarest, Project Manager - Asset Management, Centre d’expertise et de recherche en infrastructures 
urbaines (CERIU)
Amy Elliott, CRM, CIP, Team Manager, Specialist (CS) and Training, Intact Public Entities
Cheryl Evans, (formerly) Director, Flood and Wildfire Resilience, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Blair Feltmate, PhD, Head, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Victoria Fernandez Martinez, P.Eng., Water Resources and Coastal Engineer, City of Halifax
Melissa Ferreira, Director, Insurance and Risk Management, City of Toronto 
Fady Ghattas, Operations Coordinator (Co-op Student), Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Jillian Hudgins, PhD, Environmental Strategist and Program Manager, City of Fredericton
Zahra Jandaghian, PhD, MASHRAE, Research Officer and Nature-Based Solutions Leader, Climate Resilient 
Built Environment Initiative, National Research Council of Canada
Jessica Jaremchuk, LL.B, Vice President, Risk Management Services, Intact Public Entities 
Sangita Kamblé, PhD, CAE, President and CEO, Canadian Association of Mutual Insurance Companies
Amir Ali Khan, P.Eng., Senior Researcher, Ocean, Coastal and River Engineering Research Centre (OCRE), 
National Research Council of Canada 
Natalie Lagassé, RPP, MCIP, Senior Planner and Project Manager, Winnipeg Metropolitan Region	
Steffen Lajoie, PhD candidate, Faculty of the Built Environment, School of urban planning and landscape 
architecture, Université de Montréal
Caryn Lalonde, Vice President, Marketing, Communications and CX, Intact Public Entities
Helen Langille, P.Eng.,  Stormwater Resiliency Engineer, Halifax Regional Municipality
Marie-Ève Larouche, Coordinator, Risk Management and Resilience, Communauté métropolitaine de Québec
Sean Lee, P.Eng., Assistant Director, Engineering and Operations, City of Fredericton 
Michael Leering, P.Eng., Director, Environment and Business Excellence Standards, CSA Group
Anne-Marie Legault, Manager, Quebec Office, ICLEI Canada
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
7
Michelle Lewis, Natural Asset Technician, Town of Gibsons
Ryan Litovitch, Planner, Winnipeg Metropolitan Region
Kyle Mckenzie, Infrastructure and Sustainability Officer, Nova Scotia Federation of Municipalities
David McLeod, Senior Environmental Specialist, City of Toronto
Mitchell McMann, P.Eng., Stormwater Utility Manager, City of Saskatoon
Jenna Miller, Climate Change Adaptation Specialist, Government of New Brunswick and CLIMAtlantic Inc.
Ian Morrison, Director of Operations and Communications, Nova Scotia Federation of Municipalities
Shannon O’Connell, P.Eng., Senior Program Engineer, Resilient Infrastructure Standards, Halifax Regional 
Municipality
Alistair Ozon, Water Coordinator, City of Charlottetown
Louis Poirier, PhD, P.Phys., Research Council Officer, Ocean, Coastal and River Engineering, National 
Research Council of Canada 
Stephanie Poirier, Sector Specialist, Climate Change and Infrastructure, Standards Council of Canada 
Jeff Price, P.Eng., Manager, Loss Control, Intact Public Entities 
Jo-Anne Rzadki, Manager, Business Development and Partnerships, Conservation Ontario
Amadou Saidou, Sector Specialist, Standards Council of Canada
Sam Sidawi, P.Eng., Director of Enterprise Asset Management, Corporate Services, Region of Peel
Colleen Smith, CIP, Property Underwriting Specialist, Intact Public Entities
Yuna Song, Sector Specialist, Infrastructure and Climate Change, Standards Council of Canada
Michelle Tetreault, President, Public Works Management Corp.
David Toro, Junior Policy Analyst, Infrastructure Canada
Barbara Veale, PhD, CIP, RPP, Senior Director, Watershed Management and Climate Change at 
Conservation Halton
Adrienne Yuen, Sector Specialist, Standards Council of Canada 
Harry Zhang, PhD, PE, Research Program Manager – Integrated Water and Stormwater, The Water Research 
Foundation, United States
Christine Zimmer, Senior Manager, Water and Climate Change Sciences, Credit Valley Conservation
8
Executive Summary
8
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
9
Municipalities are on the frontlines of adapting to 
climate change impacts, including flooding. Action and 
investment are required, not only to understand and 
map flood risks, but also to implement measures 
on the ground to reduce the risks.
 
The key challenge is reducing flood risk, RAPIDLY. 
Flooding is already a drain on Canadians, both 
financially and socially, and costs are expected to 
keep rising under the influence of irreversible climate 
change. Municipalities, businesses, and residents that 
may not be at risk of flooding today, may be at risk of 
flooding tomorrow if flood risk reduction measures are 
not taken.
 
The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up has been 
developed to support Canadian municipalities in 
better preparing for heavy rainfall, river, and coastal 
flooding. It is a self-assessment questionnaire with 50 
questions designed to assess potential flood hazards 
(flood exposure), and implementation of actions to 
reduce flood risks (flood preparedness). The Check-Up 
helps users navigate the variety of existing standards, 
guidance, and tools available, and focuses on the role of 
municipal action at multiple levels: from the localized 
protection of individual homes to the management of 
flooding processes at the watershed scale .
Municipalities are encouraged to use the Check-Up to:
1.	 Gain an understanding of flood exposure, even 
where flood mapping is not available.
2.	 Benchmark and document their current flood 
preparedness by drawing on Canadian guidance 
and standards.
3.	 Document progress towards reduction of 
municipal flood risk over time. 
4.	 Access a library of key resources on flood risk 
and preparedness, including National Standards 
of Canada.
5.	 Demonstrate municipal flood preparedness to 
interested parties.
6.	 Prioritise actions for different flood types and 
at different scales.
7.	 Inform future investment planning and 
funding applications.
8.	 Anticipate and answer questions that may 
be asked by municipal insurers in developing 
insurance policies.
9.	 Contribute to objectives and targets identified 
in Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy.
10.	Support municipal staff and service delivery.
Municipalities, businesses, and 
residents that may not be at 
risk of flooding today, may be 
at risk of flooding tomorrow if 
flood risk reduction measures 
are not taken.
Increased attention is required to reduce municipal 
flood risk. Many Canadian municipalities are 
currently more advanced in climate mitigation 
(reducing greenhouse gas emissions) than they are in 
climate adaptation (reducing climate impacts). Some 
municipalities, particularly those serving small and 
medium-sized communities, also face challenges due 
to resource constraints and gaps in their understanding 
of flood risk. This limits their awareness of available 
guidance and ability to identify appropriate actions 
to reduce flood risk. While there is emphasis on, and 
benefit from, flood mapping activities to understand 
hazards, many “no-regrets” actions to prepare for 
flooding and reduce risk can be undertaken without 
detailed flood mapping.
Executive Summary
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
10
Positive municipal action aligns with several National 
Adaptation Strategy targets, including:
By 2025, 50% of 
Canadians have taken 
concrete actions to better 
prepare for and respond to 
climate change risks facing 
their household.
By 2027, 80% of coastal 
communities and 60% of 
businesses located in coastal 
regions are implementing 
adaptation actions to 
increase climate resilience 
and reduce the economic 
impacts of climate change.
By 2030, 80% of public and 
municipal organizations 
have factored climate 
change adaptation into their 
decision-making processes.
and encourage use of the Municipal Flood Risk 
Check-Up to accelerate widespread action.
Tackling flood risk requires a whole-of-society 
approach. Support from multiple actors will be critical 
to operationalize the Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up 
to really make a change on the ground. By facing 
flooding together, we can make lives better 
and safer.
Reducing flood risk is in the interest of all parties that 
live and work in municipalities, including residents, 
businesses, governments, and financial institutions. 
While municipalities act on the front lines, other 
parties also have a key role to play in supporting them. 
Organizations including the Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities, provincial and territorial municipal 
associations, standards organizations, municipal 
insurers, financial institutions, and non-governmental 
organizations are called upon to help raise awareness 
Executive Summary
11
1. The Urgent Need for 
Municipal Action to 
Reduce Flood Risk
11
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
12
The impacts of flooding are felt in municipalities 
across Canada, from coast to coast to coast. It is the 
most common and costly natural hazard in terms 
of property damage.1 Flood events can also cause 
loss of life, physical injuries, and negative impacts 
on mental health.2 Certain vulnerable populations, 
for example those in underserved communities, may 
be disproportionately at risk and require additional 
support to adapt.
Flood risks can be reduced by applying flood risk 
management best practices, for which there are several 
national standards and guidance publications. The 
key challenge is to reduce flood risk with the urgency 
required, as these risks are expected to increase over 
time due to the influence of irreversible climate 
change, particularly in urban and coastal areas.3 This 
means that municipalities, businesses, and homes that 
may not be at risk of flooding today, may be at risk of 
flooding “tomorrow” if flood risk reduction measures 
are not taken. 
While flood risk management and land use planning 
regulation is largely the responsibility of Canada’s 
provinces and territories, the responsibility for 
managing flood risk on the ground is often delegated 
to municipal governments. Activities including flood 
mapping, flood risk assessment, planning and design 
of adaptation measures, emergency response and 
recovery, are therefore frequently executed at the 
local level, rather than at the provincial, territorial, or 
federal level. 
Municipalities, however, need support in understanding 
and managing their flood risks. Small and medium-sized 
municipalities do not necessarily have the resources or 
dedicated staff to effectively tackle flood risk on their 
own. Additionally, organizations with an interest in 
assessing the flood risk profile of municipalities, such 
as municipal insurers, institutional investors, securities 
commissions, and credit rating agencies, also have 
limited access to information on flood preparedness. 
This report describes the development of a 
Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up tool that will 
help municipalities of  all sizes and other users assess 
flood risk in a way that combines flood hazard and 
exposure, and flood preparedness. 
1.1 Costs of Flooding 
Flooding is a significant cost to Canada, including 
Canadian municipalities and their residents. In 
terms of residential flooding, the cost of risk from 
intense rainfall flooding, river and coastal flooding, 
is estimated at $2.9 billion per year. Most of the risk 
is concentrated in a small number of the highest 
risk homes—of the $2.9 billion, 89% ($2.6 billion) 
is associated with the top 10% highest risk homes.4 
These figures are based on Average Annual Loss 
(AAL), which is the cost of flood damage that is 
expected to occur each year, averaged over the long 
term. The average masks the fact that losses may be 
very small most of the time but have the potential to 
be catastrophic for major events. Since flood insurance 
is currently not available to residents in high-risk flood 
zones, the costs of damages in these areas are mostly 
paid by governments and the residents themselves.
The rise in catastrophic insured losses in Canada 
between 1983 and 2023 indicates that the costs of 
extreme weather events, such as floods, are already on 
the rise (Figure 1). Between 1983 and 2008, insured 
losses averaged $456 million a year. Since 2008, losses 
have surged and now regularly exceed $2 billion per 
year, mostly due to water-related damage.5 The rising 
trend in claims is not solely due to changes in extreme 
weather; other factors, such as the loss of natural 
infrastructure and continued development in high-risk 
areas, contribute to these costs.6 It should also be noted 
that, for every dollar of losses borne by insurers in 
Canada, an estimated three to four dollars are incurred 
by governments, homeowners and business owners. 
For example, for the $3.4 billion of insured losses in 
1. The Urgent Need for Municipal Action to Reduce Flood Risk
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
13
2022,7 this would be an estimated $10 to $13 billion in 
uninsured losses.
Flooding is already having an impact on the housing 
market. A recent study indicated that over the past 
eight years, catastrophic flooding in communities 
studied resulted in an average 8.2% reduction in the 
final sale price of houses, 44.3% reduction in the 
number of houses listed for sale, and 19.8% more days 
on market to sell a house.8
In addition to impacts on the housing market, 
businesses may also be impacted. The costs of flooding 
to businesses can vary depending on the scale of the 
event, the industry, the size of the company, as well as 
the measures in place to reduce risks. Importantly, this 
also includes the effectiveness of measures implemented 
by the municipalities in which the business is located. 
Some potential financial impacts on businesses are 
outlined in Table 1. Ultimately, unmanaged impacts 
of extreme weather events, like flooding, can result in 
Figure 1: Catastrophic insured losses, Canada 1983 – 2023 
negative impacts on cash flows, which can lead to a 
reduction in the per-share value of a publicly traded 
company’s stock.9
As urban flood risks increase, municipalities that are 
exposed and not appropriately prepared for flooding 
may be less attractive to businesses, with knock-on 
impacts on the local economy. 
As urban flood risks increase, 
municipalities that are 
exposed and not appropriately 
prepared for flooding may be 
less attractive to businesses, 
with knock-on impacts on the 
local economy.
$
$ $ $ $
=
*2023 preliminary values in 2023$ CAD, corrected for inﬂation and per capita wealth accumulation.
Source: IBC Facts Book, PCS, CatIQ, Swiss Re, Munich Re & Deloitte
$3-4 uninsured losses 
incurred by government, 
business, individuals
$1 
insured 
loss
Multiple
Events in
Provinces
Fort McMurray,
Alberta Wildﬁre
Alberta
& Toronto
Floods
Ontario
Wind & Rain
Eastern
Ice Storm
Quebec
Floods
Estimated Trend
British 
Columbia 
Wildﬁres & 
Nova Scotia 
Floods
$ CAD Billion
Year
Costs of Extreme Weather: 
Catastrophic Insurable Losses
5.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
4.0
6.0
‘93
‘21
‘85
‘89
‘95
‘99
‘03
‘09
‘11
‘19
‘87
‘91
‘83
‘97
‘01
‘05
‘07
‘17
‘15
‘13
‘23*
1. The Urgent Need for Municipal Action to Reduce Flood Risk
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
14
Table 1: Potential financial impacts of flood risk on businesses
Costs
Description
Insurance Costs
Companies may face increased flood insurance costs and raised premiums. In high-risk 
locations, coverage may be unavailable or unaffordable. 
Direct Property Damage and 
Opportunity Costs
Floods may damage buildings, equipment, inventory, and other physical assets. For 
damage not covered by insurance policies, the expenses incurred for repairing or 
replacing these assets can be substantial, directly impacting a company’s financial 
health. The need to address flood damages also represents an “opportunity cost” to a 
business. Resources—both time and money—that are diverted to repairs and recovery 
could have been allocated to other beneficial initiatives (e.g., equipment and facility 
upgrades, business expansion). The “opportunity cost” reflects the fact that the 
resources are now unavailable, and the business misses out on the associated benefits.
Investment in Adaptation
To prevent future losses, companies may need to invest in flood resilience measures to 
protect their assets. These measures may be associated with upfront financial costs. It 
is important to note that early adaptation is more cost-effective than both late and no 
adaptation.10 
Health and Safety Costs
Employee health and safety might be compromised during flood events and companies 
may incur costs related to ensuring employee well-being, medical expenses, or even 
potential liabilities if safety measures are inadequate. The toll of time missed from 
work due to flooded homes extends beyond economic losses, causing mental distress 
for affected individuals, disrupting both personal and work lives. From a business 
perspective, this absenteeism directly impacts productivity, compacting a year’s worth 
of workdays lost per employee into a condensed period.
Business Interruption
Floods often disrupt operations, halting or reducing activities, which results in delayed 
production, missed deadlines, increased operating costs, and revenue losses.
Supply Chain Disruption
Companies reliant on suppliers and/or distributors may face disruptions in the supply 
chain leading to delays in receiving products/services, impacting production schedules 
and sales.
Market Share and Reputation
Extended disruptions or negative community impacts can reduce market share and 
damage a company’s reputation, impacting long-term profitability. 
Regulatory Compliance and Fines
Failure to comply with environmental regulations or safety standards related to flooding 
can lead to fines and legal expenses.
1. The Urgent Need for Municipal Action to Reduce Flood Risk
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
15
1.2 Types of Flooding 
Most flooding in Canada can be described in the 
following broad types:11
banks. This is a natural process, and occurs seasonally 
in response to snowmelt, as well as at other times of 
the year. However, many municipalities are located 
along rivers and are susceptible to this type of flooding, 
particularly where development is on river floodplains.
Intense rainfall flooding (pluvial flooding) is 
the temporary inundation of normally dry land, 
independent of an overflowing body of water. This 
includes floods triggered by heavy rain falling within 
a short amount of time, and floods that occur when 
drainage systems are overwhelmed by rainfall. Intense 
rainfall flooding is unpredictable and can occur across 
Canada. Pluvial flooding can lead to groundwater 
flooding, which occurs when water levels underground 
rise to, and surpass, surface level.
River flooding occurs when the flow of water in a 
river or stream exceeds its channel and overspills its 
Coastal flooding occurs when seawater or 
freshwater—in the case of large lakes—inundates the 
land. Coastal municipalities are susceptible to this type 
of flooding where development is on coastal floodplains.
Flood risk in urban areas across Canada is expected to 
increase, due to more intense and frequent rainfall events 
driven by climate change. Coastal flooding is expected 
to increase in many areas of Canada due to local sea 
level rise. Particularly, Atlantic Canada is at increased 
risk of damage from larger storm surges and waves, 
due to the loss of sea ice from a warming climate.12
There are also other types of flooding, for example 
flooding associated with ice jams, dam failures, and 
tsunamis, which are not covered by this Check-Up. The 
role of permafrost is also not addressed.
1. The Urgent Need for Municipal Action to Reduce Flood Risk
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
16
1.3 Gaps in Current Flood 
Preparedness
According to Canada’s National Risk Profile, 
approximately 83% of the Canadian population live in 
urban areas, and about 80% of major Canadian cities 
are located wholly or in part in flood zones.13 In the 
report, a capability assessment identified critical needs 
to reduce flooding risk, including: 
•	Effective coordination among different levels and 
departments of government to manage flood risk.
•	Opportunities to accelerate and scale-up the 
deployment of nature-based flood risk solutions.
•	Clear communication of flood risk information.
•	Greater awareness among residents of their 
personal flood risk.
In support of the last point, a separate 2020 survey 
found that 94% of Canadians living in high-risk areas 
remain unaware of their flood risk.14 
At the local level, many Canadian municipalities 
are lagging in climate adaptation (reducing climate 
impacts) when compared to climate mitigation 
(reducing greenhouse gases). As an indicator, the 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities released 
a report on their  “Municipalities for Climate 
Innovation Program” showing that of the participating 
municipalities, 94 have developed mitigation plans, 
with 70 in the implementation stage, while only 62 have 
developed adaptation plans, of which 46 are in the 
implementation stage (Figure 2).15 It is also notable that 
there are around 3,600 local governments in Canada,16 
and FCM itself has over 2,000 members. Reporting 
members therefore only represent a small sample.
Figure 2: Progress on Mitigation and Adaptation Plans reported under the Municipalities for Climate Innovation 
Program (MCIP)17
with plans (94)
implementing plans (70)
Municipalities:
with plans (62)
implementing plans (46)
MITIGATION
ADAPTATION
78%
56%
40%
30%
1. The Urgent Need for Municipal Action to Reduce Flood Risk
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
17
In relation to the flood preparedness of 16 major 
Canadian cities, a recent study indicated that: (1) 
between 2015 and 2019/2020, there was limited 
overall progress in the state of flood preparedness 
(the average score remained unchanged at C+), and 
(2) comparing different cities, there was significant 
variance in terms of their level of flood preparedness 
(scores ranged from B+ to D).18 While some major 
cities are making progress on reducing flood risks, 
progress remains slow. The study results also suggest 
that reliance on flood exposure data alone is not a 
robust method to assess actual flood risk, since it does 
not account for differences in the level of effort applied 
by municipalities to limit the consequences of flooding. 
1.4 Supporting Municipalities 
Much work is still needed to reduce municipal flood 
risks. Some of this work is supported by the recent 
launch of the National Adaptation Strategy, which set 
several quantifiable, time-bound targets for adaptation. 
The following targets are directly relevant to municipal 
flood risk management:
•	By 2025, 60% of Canadians, including northerners 
and Indigenous Peoples, are aware of the disaster 
risks facing their household.
•	By 2025, 50% of Canadians have taken concrete 
actions to better prepare for and respond to climate 
change risks facing their household.
•	By 2027, 80% of coastal communities and 
60% of businesses located in coastal regions are 
implementing adaptation actions to increase 
climate resilience and reduce the economic impacts 
of climate change.
•	By 2030, 80% of public and municipal 
organizations have factored climate change 
adaptation into their decision-making processes.
In parallel, the Government of Canada Adaptation 
Action Plan, published in 2023, expanded the 
Green Municipal Fund by up to $530 million to 
support community-based adaptation initiatives 
in collaboration with the Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities. The national Disaster Mitigation and 
Adaptation Fund19 also received a top-up of $489 
million over 10 years to continue to help municipalities 
and townships build new infrastructure to increase the 
resilience of communities.20
Funding is provided by the federal government, as well 
as via provincial and territorial government funding 
programs, however, it is often allocated on a competitive 
basis. This means that municipalities that apply must 
have the resources (i.e., time, staff, knowledge) to 
complete a convincing application. Small and medium-
sized municipalities may not have these resources, or 
Funding is provided by the 
federal government, as well as 
via provincial and territorial 
government funding programs, 
however, it is often allocated 
on a competitive basis. This 
means that municipalities that 
apply must have the resources 
(i.e., time, staff, knowledge) 
to complete a convincing 
application. Small and 
medium-sized municipalities 
may not have these resources, 
or the fundamental 
understanding of flood risk 
required to know what actions 
they need to undertake.
1. The Urgent Need for Municipal Action to Reduce Flood Risk
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
18
the fundamental understanding of flood risk required to 
know what actions they need to undertake. 
While there is considerable emphasis on, and benefit 
from flood mapping activities, it is important to note 
that many actions can be undertaken without detailed 
mapping. For example, there are opportunities to 
embed existing flood resilience standards in municipal 
documents (e.g., Official Plans, municipal by-laws), 
as demonstrated in “The Municipal How-to Guide 
for CSA Community Water Standards”, which 
includes suggested example language for different 
documents.21 Existing programs are also available 
to guide municipalities in implementing adaptation 
solutions on the ground, such as Green Shores for 
Local Governments.22
1.5 The Role of the Municipal Flood 
Risk Check-Up
The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up has been 
developed to support Canadian municipalities—
including small and medium municipalities that may 
have less resources—in preparing for heavy rainfall, 
river, and coastal flooding. 
The Check-Up is a self-assessment questionnaire with 
50 questions on flood exposure and flood preparedness 
(see Appendix B). This report documents the 
development of the Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up 
(Section 2), including review of existing standards, 
guidance, and tools (Section 3); inputs provided by over 
50 contributors (Section 4); a description of the Check-
Up, its development and use (Section 5); and ideas for 
scaling-up use of the Check-Up to reduce flood risk 
(Section 6).
The Check-Up will be useful to municipalities 
of  all sizes that are charged with ensuring the 
safety of  residents, maintenance of  public 
infrastructure, and continuity of  community 
operations (e.g., transport, water supply and 
treatment facilities, and emergency services). 
Organizations with an interest in assessing 
the flood risk profile of municipalities, such 
as municipal insurers, institutional investors, 
securities commissions, and credit rating 
agencies, may also find the Check-Up useful. 
The Check-Up and the report are freely available and 
may be useful in identifying appropriate questions and 
information that may be requested from municipalities 
in order to assess flood risk. 
1. The Urgent Need for Municipal Action to Reduce Flood Risk
19
2. Method: Developing 
the Check-Up
19
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
20
Developing the Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up 
involved a combination of desktop research and 
analysis, combined with engagement with a variety of 
interested parties. 
2.1 Desktop Research and Analysis
The focus of desktop research and analysis was on 
understanding current practices relating to municipal 
flood risk management in Canada. Specific tasks were to:
•	Collate and review key national standards and 
guidance relating to management of flood risk 
in Canada.
•	Review existing tools that have been designed to 
support municipal climate adaptation and flood 
risk management in Canada.
2.2 Engagement with 
Interested Parties
Over 50 interested parties from British Columbia, 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, 
New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward 
Island, contributed to the development of the 
Check-Up tool and report. Contributors included 
representatives from municipalities of different sizes, 
the Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM), 
federal and provincial governments, national standards 
agencies, provincial municipal organizations, asset 
management organizations, watershed management 
organizations, and non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs). Representatives of Intact Public Entities 
(IPE) generously provided insight into how flood risk 
is currently assessed as part of their role as municipal 
insurers. Research perspectives from the United 
States were kindly shared by members of The Water 
Research Foundation. All contributors are listed in the 
acknowledgements at the start of this report.
Interested parties were engaged throughout the 
development of the Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up, 
which included the following stages:
•	One-on-one meetings to gather individual 
insights into municipal flood risk management 
practices and needs (January 2023 onwards).
•	Participation in an online workshop to 
shape the structure and technical content of the 
Check-Up tool (February 2023)—see Appendix A  
for details.
•	Review of the Check-Up tool in Excel, the 
rating system, and supporting information, with 
collection of comments using online surveys 
(October to November 2023).
Interested parties were also invited to review and 
provide comments on this report.
2. Method: Developing the Check-Up Tool
21
3. Review of Existing 
Standards, Guidance 
and Tools 
21
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
22
This section presents key international and national 
standards, guidance, and practical tools for flood risk 
management that provided direction for developing the 
Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up.
3.1 International Standards for Risk 
Management (ISO 31000)
ISO 31000 is a family of standards relating to 
risk management published by the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO). The 
publication ISO 31000:2018 – Risk Management — 
Guidelines provides the principles, framework, and 
guidelines for managing any form of risk, including 
flooding (Figure 3).23 
According to the ISO 31000 process, risk 
assessment is at the heart of risk management 
(Figure 3). In the context of flooding, this is 
accomplished by understanding flood hazards, as 
well as analyzing vulnerabilities. However, to reduce 
risks, it is important to implement risk treatment 
strategies. In the context of flooding, this may 
include (1) the use of built or natural infrastructure 
measures to slow down, store, divert or soak up water, 
and (2) “non-structural” measures, such as land-use 
planning regulations, insurance incentives or public 
communication to reduce potential flood damages.
It is important to note that the ISO 31000 risk 
management framework is an ongoing process 
meant to continually improve risk management. 
This is accomplished through communication and 
consultation, recording and reporting, and monitoring 
and review. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-
Up has been developed to reflect the risk 
management framework (see Section 4). 
Figure 3: ISO 31000 Risk Management (adapted from International Organization for Standardization, 2018)
Recording and Reporting
Scope, Context, Criteria
Monitoring
and Review
Communcation
and Consultation
Risk Identiﬁcation
Risk Analysis
Risk Evaluation
Risk Assessment
Risk Treatment
3. Review of Existing Standards, Guidance and Tools
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
23
3.2 Canadian Flood Risk Management 
Standards and Guidance
Flood risk management requires interventions at 
multiple levels: from the localized protection of 
individual homes to the management of natural 
processes at the watershed scale.24 While Canada’s 
municipalities have direct responsibilities for flood risk 
management within their municipal boundaries, they 
also play a central role in reducing flood risk at all 
scales (Figure 4). 
Several national standards and guidelines to improve 
flood resilience at different scales have already been 
developed (Table 2). A full list is being compiled and 
maintained by Infrastructure Canada.25 
Since 2018, a number of National Standards of 
Canada (NSCs) have been developed to support flood 
resilience (Table 2). NSCs are developed through 
a rigorous process that involves subject matter 
experts who are members of accredited Standards 
Development Organizations.
Many standards and guidelines have been developed as 
part of established climate resilience programs, such as:
•	The Resilient Infrastructure Standards Program (2016-
2021)26, and now the Standards to Support Resilience 
in Infrastructure Program (2021-2028), led by the 
Standards Council of Canada.27
•	The Climate-Resilient Buildings and Core Public 
Infrastructure Initiative (CRBCPI) (2016-2021)28, 
and now the Climate Resilient Built Environment 
(CRBE) Initiative (2021-2026)29, led by the 
National Research Council of Canada, funded by 
Infrastructure Canada.
The documents are the result of the collaboration 
of hundreds of multidisciplinary experts across the 
country, from both the public and private sectors, 
comprising thousands of hours of volunteer time.
 
Figure 4 : Three levels of flood risk management - the horizontal axis reflects the physical space involved, and the vertical 
axis reflects the time typically necessary for carrying out actions (adapted from Eyquem, 2022)30
Buildings: Residential
and Commercial
Time Required
Space
Communities /
Municipalities
Watersheds /
Littoral Cells
3. Review of Existing Standards, Guidance and Tools
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
24
Table 2: Selected national flood resilience standards and guidance that informed development of the Municipal Flood 
Risk Check-Up
Level of 
Application
Publication
Date and Type
Content
Buildings
Water on the Rise: Protecting 
Canadian Homes from the Growing 
Threat of Flooding.31 
2018
Free Guidance
Practical measures for basement flood 
protection for residents to reduce their 
flood risk.
CSA Z800-F18 Guideline on 
basement flood protection and risk 
reduction.32 
2018
CSA Standard 
Measures to reduce the risks of basement 
flooding, and to mitigate the adverse 
effects on property, public safety, and 
public health in case of a flood event. 
Covers existing, new, rebuilt, and renovated 
houses in rural and urban settings.
Ahead of the Storm: Developing 
Flood-Resilience Guidance for 
Canada’s Commercial Real Estate.33 
2019
Free Guidance
20 measures that can be implemented 
by commercial real estate owners and 
managers to enhance flood-resilience. 
Supported by BOMA Canada and REALPac.
Communities 
and 
Municipalities
Weathering the Storm: Developing 
a Canadian Standard for Flood-
Resilient Existing Communities.34 
2019
Free Guidance 
Outlines a prioritization framework for 
selecting areas within communities 
that should be targeted for flood risk 
management measures.
CSA W210:21 Prioritization of flood 
risk in existing communities.35 
2021
National Standard 
of Canada
Framework that supports assessment 
and decision-making regarding flood 
risk-reduction at the community level, for 
existing communities.
Preventing Disaster Before It 
Strikes: Developing a Canadian 
Standard for Flood-Resilient 
Residential Communities.36 
2019
Free Guidance
20 best practices to design and build new 
residential communities that are more flood 
resilient.
CSA W204:19 Flood resilient design 
of new residential communities.37 
2019
National Standard 
of Canada
Compliance criteria and guidance on the 
design of flood-resilient new residential 
communities as it relates to greenfield 
development.
CSA W211:21 Management standard 
for stormwater systems.38 
2021
National Standard 
of Canada
Provides a standardized guidance process 
to manage a stormwater system, given a 
changing climate and hydrologic conditions.
3. Review of Existing Standards, Guidance and Tools
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
25
Level of 
Application
Publication
Date and Type
Content
Watersheds 
and Coasts
Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal 
and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk 
Management.39 
2021
Free Guidance
Review of the use of nature-based solutions 
across Canada, including recommendations, 
case studies, and a review of international 
technical guidance.
Managing Flooding and Erosion at 
the Watershed-Scale: Guidance 
to Support Governments Using 
Nature-Based Solutions.40 
2023
Free Guidance
Review of watershed management and 
flood risk management practices in Canada 
and provides recommendations for future 
flood risk reduction using nature-based 
solutions.
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: 
Combining Natural and Grey 
Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s 
Coastal Communities.41 
2021
Free Guidance
Outlines the range of practical measures 
that can be used to protect coastal 
communities on Canada’s East and 
West coasts from flooding and erosion, 
combining grey infrastructure and nature-
based solutions.
All Scales
Getting Nature on The Balance 
Sheet: Recognizing the Financial 
Value Provided by Natural Assets in 
A Changing Climate.42 
2022
Free Guidance
Outlines actions that are being taken to 
manage natural assets in Canada, methods 
established for valuing the services natural 
assets provide, and steps that can be taken 
to recognize and value these services in 
accounting and decision-making.
CSA W218:23 Specifications for 
natural asset inventories.43 
2023
National Standard 
of Canada
Outlines requirements for creating and 
reporting a natural asset inventory, a key 
element of the overall process of managing 
natural assets.
3. Review of Existing Standards, Guidance and Tools
26
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
3.3 Existing Flood Risk Management Evaluation Tools 
Several practical tools exist to support municipalities in planning and implementing flood risk management actions 
and self-assessing municipal performance. An overview of the tools identified and reviewed to inform development 
of the Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up is presented in Table 3.
Table 3: Practical tools supporting municipal flood risk management
Tool
Use
Scope
Prioritization of Flood Risk in 
Existing Communities, CSA 
Group44 
•	 Foundational assessment details provided in standard CSA W210:21. 
•	 Application and method left up to the user.
•	 Questionnaire not readily useable.
Canadian 
communities
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit Flood 
Risk, Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation45 
•	 Self-assessment of flood risk preparedness according to set criteria. 
•	 Ratings (A to E) assigned using qualitative scales.
•	 Undertaken twice to benchmark progress.
•	 Does not assess flood hazard or exposure.
•	 Questionnaire not readily useable.
Large Canadian 
cities
The Municipal How-to Guide 
for CSA Community Water 
Standards, CSA Group46 
•	 Step-by-step process to identify where National Standards of Canada 
can support flood resilience.
•	 Includes draft language demonstrating how and where Standards 
can be referenced in key municipal documents, (e.g. official plans, 
development by-laws).
Canadian 
Municipalities
Community Rating System, 
Federal Emergency 
Management Association 
(FEMA), United States47
•	 Voluntary incentive program to recognize and encourage floodplain 
management practices that exceed the requirements of the National 
Flood Insurance Program in the US.
•	 Potentially a similar approach could be adopted in Canada to reward 
flood prepared communities.
Communities 
in the United 
States of America 
(available in 
English only)
Building Adaptive and 
Resilient Communities (BARC) 
Online Tool, ICLEI Canada48
•	 Designed to assist communities developing a community climate 
change adaptation plan. 
•	 User-friendly online repository of information that guides users in 
achieving each of the five milestones of the BARC program.
•	 Recommended to be completed before using the Cost of Doing 
Nothing Toolbox (below).
Canadian 
Municipalities
Cost of Doing Nothing (CODN) 
Toolbox, ICLEI Canada49 
•	 Provides a template for understanding the cost of doing nothing.
•	 Supports building a business case for municipal climate adaptation 
funding.
Canadian 
municipalities
3. Review of Existing Standards, Guidance and Tools
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
27
Tool
Use
Scope
Climate Adaptation Maturity 
Scale, Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities50
•	 Tool for municipalities to assess and enhance their climate 
adaptation practices. 
•	 Self-assessment on how municipalities incorporate climate 
adaptation in policy, human resources and governance, and risk 
management capacity. 
Canadian 
municipalities
Risk Return on Investment 
Tool (RROIT), Credit Valley 
Conservation and Climate Risk 
Institute51
•	 Multi-flood hazard tool to support evidence-based, cost-effective 
decisions to reduce flood and erosion risks under existing and future 
climate scenarios.
•	 Assesses the ROI associated with each mitigation solution, or a 
combination of mitigation solutions.
•	 Currently online, desktop application in development.
Canadian 
municipalities 
(available in 
English only)
The Coastal Adaptation 
Toolkit, CLIMAtlantic52
•	 An assessment on flooding and erosion issues to help identify the 
most suitable options to manage those issues at a specific site in a 
community. 
•	 Options include land use planning tools as well as coastal 
interventions and engineering tools.
Atlantic coastal 
communities 
(primarily for 
community staff 
and elected 
officials)
Resilience Self-Assessment 
Tool for Water Assets in the 
context of Climate Change, 
CERIU53 
•	 An assessment for municipalities on the climate vulnerabilities of 
water assets, considering hazards such as heavy precipitation, 
storms, and drought. 
•	 A draft roadmap is generated upon completion of the tool, guiding 
users to practical guides.
Canadian 
municipalities 
(available in 
French only)
Public Infrastructure 
Engineering Vulnerability 
Committee (PIEVC), ICLR and 
Climate Risk Institute54 
•	 Protocol designed to help factoring climate change impacts into 
plans for design, operation, and maintenance of public infrastructure.
•	 Risk-based approach by specific infrastructure asset element. 
•	 High Level Screening Guide also available.
Infrastructure 
owners and 
managers
Holistic Approaches to Flood 
Mitigation Planning and 
Modeling under Extreme 
Events and Climate Impacts, 
The Water Research 
Foundation55 
•	 Summary of the state-of-the-practice with 15 utility holistic flood 
management case studies in North America and Europe.
•	 Methodologies relevant to integrated planning framework for flood 
management at the community level.
Municipalities 
in the United 
States of America 
(available in 
English only)
Enhancement of Resilience 
to Extreme Weather and 
Climate Events: Proactive 
Flood Management, The Water 
Research Foundation56 
•	 Interactive pocket guide for enhancement of wastewater and 
stormwater utility resilience to extreme weather and climate events.
•	 Assists utility users selecting datasets, methods, models, and tools 
appropriate to their flood conditions and management objectives.
Municipalities 
in the United 
States of America 
(available in 
English only)
3. Review of Existing Standards, Guidance and Tools
28
4. What We Heard: Needs 
in Municipal Flood Risk 
Management
28
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
29
This section summarizes key insights and input 
provided by contributors during one-on-one meetings 
and an online workshop. These insights were used 
to shape development of the Municipal Flood Risk 
Check-Up. 
4.1 Insights into Current Practices 
and Lessons Learned
Key themes that arose in discussions with contributors 
regarding their experiences in managing flood risk 
within a municipal context are summarized below.
Small and medium municipalities should be 
considered a key target audience.
Small and medium-sized municipalities typically have 
less resources to understand and manage flood risk, and 
frequently do not have flood risk mapping or specialist 
staff dedicated to flood risk management. They would 
particularly benefit from a tool that provides additional 
guidance and support without the need for in-depth 
technical knowledge.
Appropriate land use planning is key to manage 
flood risk. 
Municipalities are typically responsible for 
implementing land use planning regulations that are 
set by provinces and differ between provinces. Several 
participants identified the need to routinely incorporate 
climate change scenarios into land use planning to 
manage flood risk.
Climate change scenarios need to be fully 
considered in flood risk assessment.
Participants stressed the need for a proactive approach 
focused on anticipating future climate scenarios, rather 
than based on historical data. There is a recognized 
need to update flood mapping to reflect current 
projections for climate change and its impacts.
There is growing understanding of risks from 
heavy rainfall flooding.
Flood mapping has historically focused on river and 
coastal flooding, however, many municipalities are 
actively working to better understand heavy rainfall 
flooding, particularly in the context of climate 
change. Several municipalities are working with 
topographical data (such as LiDAR), to map potential 
heavy rainfall flood risks. In certain areas, intense 
rainfall (pluvial) flood mapping is being funded by the 
federal government’s Flood Hazard Identification and 
Mapping Program (FHIMP).57
Asset management planning is key for 
implementing infrastructure solutions. 
Embedding flood risk management measures into 
asset management planning is key to maintaining 
levels of service, particularly with aging municipal 
infrastructure. This will also help municipalities 
incorporate flood risk management as part of long-
term infrastructure investment. 
Natural infrastructure needs integrating into 
flood risk and asset management. 
Many municipalities are already working on natural 
asset management to understand the role and value of 
natural assets, and the ecosystem services they provide 
in municipal flood risk management. Grey, natural, and 
green infrastructure should all be considered as part 
of municipal asset management planning. Experiences 
with innovative practices, such as converting public 
green space into water retention facilities, could be 
shared between municipalities and with the public.
Municipalities need to work with others.
River and coastal flooding processes often operate 
4. What We Heard: Needs in Municipal Flood Risk Management
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
30
beyond municipal boundaries. Flood management 
responsibilities are also shared among government 
agencies, municipalities, and other entities, including 
watershed management organizations. Municipalities 
need to work together, and with other organizations 
and levels of  government to ensure a streamlined and 
coordinated approach. A watershed or regionalized 
approach to emergency response planning may also 
be beneficial.
Communication and public engagement are key 
areas for improvement.
There is an urgent need for effective communication 
tools to engage residents in understanding and 
managing flood risks. Flood risk management also 
needs to apply an equity lens, addressing vulnerable 
populations in both urban and rural contexts.
4.2 Shaping the Check-Up Tool: 
Workshop Outputs
Contributors were engaged at an online workshop 
on February 22, 2023, providing an opportunity to 
shape the development of the Municipal Flood Risk 
Check-Up. The focus was on the overall structure, 
terminology, and feedback on a draft list of questions. 
Details of the workshop are contained in Appendix A. 
A summary of the key feedback received is summarized 
in this section.
Overarching Comments
Participants indicated that the tool should:
•	Be easy to use, without need for in-depth specialist 
knowledge, or additional costs.
•	Frame flood risk management as a continual 
process supporting ongoing action to manage risk.
•	Lead users to take positive actions to understand 
and reduce flood risk, based on best practices, 
standards, and guidance.
•	Encourage mulitple staff members, departments, 
and other organizations to provide input to gain 
the fullest understanding of flood exposure and 
flood preparedness possible.
•	Deliver outputs that help municipal staff 
communicate with elected officials and support 
investment in flood risk management action. 
•	Provide a visual display of results to 
support communications.
Structure 
Workshop participants were asked to comment on two 
key approaches relating to flood risk management: the 
ISO 31000 Risk Management Framework (Section 3.1, 
Figure 2), and a conceptual matrix combining flood 
exposure and flood preparedness (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Conceptual matrix combining flood exposure and 
flood preparedness
HIGH
MEDIUM
LOW
HIGH
MEDIUM
LOW
Level of 
Exposure 
to Flood 
Hazards
Level of Flood Preparedness
HIGH
MEDIUM
LOW
HIGH
MEDIUM
LOW
HIGH
HIGH
MEDIUM
4. What We Heard: Needs in Municipal Flood Risk Management
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
31
Participants highlighted that different elements of these 
two approaches were useful, and recommended they 
were combined in the Municipal Flood Risk Check-
Up, as follows:
•	Integrate use of  a matrix as an easy to 
understand, visual way of  combining flood 
exposure and flood preparedness.
•	Align with the structure of the ISO 31000 Risk 
Management Framework to frame flood risk 
management as a continual process, including the 
need for communication, documentation, and 
regular review. This is not accomplished using 
a matrix approach alone as it appears work is 
complete once municipalities have achieved a low 
risk rating.
•	Include rating of performance at different 
stages of the risk management process to enable 
municipalities to understand where they are on 
their risk management journey, and to compare 
themselves with other municipalities. Ratings 
should be based on readily available information.
•	Refer to “reduction of risks” rather than 
“treatment of risks”. “Risk treatment” identified 
in the ISO 31000 Risk Management Framework 
appears final and does not reflect the ongoing 
efforts that are required, or the fact that risks are 
not eliminated in many cases.
•	Clearly identify actions that can be taken to 
reduce risk and next steps. 
Content
Workshop participants were presented with a draft list 
of questions to review on flood exposure and flood 
preparedness. Specific feedback points included the 
need to:
•	Balance simplicity of assessment with obtaining 
sufficient information to make the self-
assessment useful.
•	Address both river and coastal flooding specifically.
•	Align the assessment with information municipal 
insurers consider when developing policies, 
allowing municipalities to explain their flood 
management strategies.
•	Include the importance of long-term capital 
improvements, operational warning systems, and 
efficient maintenance management.
•	Incorporate social vulnerability assessment.
•	Consider different time horizons and the need to 
update information.
4.3 Links to Municipal Insurance
Based on feedback from participants it is 
understood that:
•	Municipal insurance policies are developed 
based on specific municipal circumstances. Some 
municipalities purchase insurance directly from 
an insurance provider, and others are part of 
insurance pools that use their size to negotiate 
competitive premiums for their members. Some 
municipalities and pools also choose to self-insure 
certain risks.
•	Flood risk is only one aspect that is considered in 
developing a municipal insurance policy. This is 
typically a package covering liability, legal expenses, 
and others, such as automobile, equipment 
breakdown, cyber insurance, and property 
insurance. Flood risk is not a specific line item in 
this type of insurance policy and is rather a factor 
4. What We Heard: Needs in Municipal Flood Risk Management
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
32
used to determine the property insurance element 
that feeds into the overall policy.
•	Insurers also play a role in supporting 
municipalities in reducing their flood risks, for 
example by providing seminars, webinars, training 
opportunities, newsletters, and collated information. 
•	Municipal insurers do not currently offer specific 
rebates for flood preparedness actions. However it 
is something they and municipalities are interested 
in discussing to incentivize action to reduce risks. 
•	The Check-Up can benefit both municipal insurers 
in developing policies, and municipalities in 
communicating flood risk actions to their insurer.
The Check-Up can benefit 
both municipal insurers 
in developing policies, 
and municipalities in 
communicating flood risk 
actions to their insurer.
4. What We Heard: Needs in Municipal Flood Risk Management
33
5. The Municipal Flood 
Risk Check-Up
!
!
!
33
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
34
5.1 Overview
The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up is a spreadsheet 
tool that is free to download. The tool has been 
developed to support Canadian municipalities—
including small and medium municipalities that may 
have limited resources—in preparing for heavy rainfall, 
river, and coastal flooding.
 
It is a self-assessment questionnaire with 50 questions 
relating to flood exposure and flood preparedness. 
Municipalities are encouraged to use the Check-Up to:
1.	 Gain an understanding of flood exposure, even 
where flood mapping is not available.
2.	 Benchmark and document current flood 
preparedness, drawing on Canadian guidance 
and standards.
3.	 Document progress towards reduction of 
municipal flood risk over time. 
4.	 Access a library of key resources on flood risk 
and preparedness, including National Standards 
of Canada.
5.	 Demonstrate municipal flood preparedness to 
interested parties.
6.	 Prioritise actions for different flood types and 
at different scales.
7.	 Inform future investment planning and 
funding applications.
8.	 Anticipate and answer questions that may 
be asked by municipal insurers in developing 
insurance policies.
9.	 Contribute to objectives and targets identified 
in Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy.	
10.	Support municipal staff and service delivery.
5.2 Scope and Use of the Check-Up
The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up can be used 
to help understand, assess, and plan action to reduce 
intense rainfall, river, and coastal flood risk. 
Other types of flooding, for example associated with 
ice jams, dam failures, and tsunamis, are not covered by 
this Check-Up tool. Additionally, the role of permafrost 
is not covered by this tool.
The Check-Up is designed as a tool that is accessible 
and useful to all municipalities, including those of 
small and medium size. Assessment of flood exposure 
and flood preparedness is largely based on qualitative 
benchmarks and application of best practices. It does 
not replace detailed, quantitative assessment of flood 
risk, including flood mapping. 
•	For municipalities at the beginning of their 
flood risk management journey, the tool can 
provide a robust first step in assessing needs and 
prioritising actions.
•	For municipalities with existing flood mapping 
and established flood risk management practices, 
the tool provides a useful way of objectively 
benchmarking progress. Findings from flood 
mapping can be integrated into the assessment by 
answering the additional quantitative questions 
when prompted. 
The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up may be used 
to assess flood risks within a whole municipality 
or within specific areas of a municipality. It is 
recommended that the user define the area of interest 
prior to starting the assessment. Larger municipalities 
may choose to complete multiple assessments for 
different areas.
All municipalities are strongly recommended to 
complete the assessment as a team, involving 
relevant municipal staff and other organizations 
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
35
external to the municipality (e.g., water and wastewater 
utilities, watershed management organizations), to 
answer the questions with the best available knowledge. 
The usefulness of the outputs will depend on 
the accuracy of the responses provided. 
The assessment should be completed regularly, 
for example once a year, to document progress in 
preparing for and reducing flood risk and to allocate 
resources for future action. It is important to note 
that a low flood exposure score or high flood 
preparedness score does not indicate that 
flood risk has been eliminated—flood risk 
management is an ongoing activity that will 
require sustained municipal action.
5.3 Format and Structure
The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up has been 
designed as a standalone spreadsheet. There are several 
advantages to this approach:
•	Analysis: the responses to the questions can be 
readily analyzed to provide an overview of flood 
exposure and flood preparedness, highlighting key 
areas of risk, strengths and need for improvement.
•	Collaboration: the tool can be readily shared 
electronically, or saved at a central location, and 
worked on by several users at once.
•	Accessibility: the tool is freely available for 
download by any user and does not require any 
access permissions. Most users will have access to 
software to edit spreadsheets. 
•	Control: the user retains control of the data 
entered into the tool, as with any other spreadsheet 
file. No data is collected or shared with any third 
party and no outside party has access to the answers.
Alternative formats, including online surveys and 
interactive websites, were considered but did not offer 
these same advantages. 
The spreadsheet consists of ten worksheets, labelled, 
and organized as indicated in Table 4.
It is important to note that a 
low flood exposure score or 
high flood preparedness score 
does not indicate that flood risk 
has been eliminated—flood 
risk management is an ongoing 
activity that will require 
sustained municipal action.
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
36
Table 4: Structure of the Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
Category
Sheet Name
Description
Introduction
Start
Here
Start Here
Provides the user with information on how to complete and 
use the Check-Up.
Questions
!
Section I: Flood Hazard 
and Exposure - Identifying 
Potential Risks
Provides a basic assessment of how municipalities may be 
exposed to flood hazards using qualitative indicators.
!
Section II: Flood Preparedness - 
Analysing Risks
Assesses the level of understanding of heavy rainfall, 
river, and coastal flood risk, providing the basis for 
effective action.
!
Section III: Flood Preparedness 
- Reducing Risks
Evaluates the degree to which measures have been 
implemented to reduce flood risks.
Results
Scorecard
Summarizes responses to all questions and 
sub-section averages.
Web Diagrams
Provides a visual presentation of all ratings, grouped by 
section and flood type.
Overview
Assesses the results, overall and by flood type.
Background Calculations
Provides insight into how ratings are calculated in the 
analysis (editable with password).
Resources
Supporting Information
Practical guidance on key concepts used in the Check-Up.
Glossary
Definitions of key terms.
References
Direct links to key references.
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
37
5.4 Question Design
The 50 questions of the Municipal Flood Risk Check-
Up are divided into “flood hazard and exposure” 
(Section I) and “flood preparedness” (Sections II and III):
Section I: Flood Hazard and 
Exposure – Identifying Potential 
Risks (16 questions)
Section II: Flood Preparedness – 
Analysing Risks (12 questions)
Section III: Flood Preparedness – 
Reducing Risks (22 questions)
The Check-Up ultimately combines all sections to 
provide an overall rating.
The sections have been designed to mirror elements of 
the ISO 31000 Risk Management framework (see Section 
3.1) with “reducing risks” representing “risk treatment” 
based on feedback from the online workshop. The Check-
Up analyzes responses for each section to provide ratings 
for identifying, analyzing, and reducing risks. This is 
the process at the heart of risk management and is to 
be undertaken alongside other elements of the ISO 
31000 framework— communication and consultation, 
recording and reporting, and monitoring and review.
Sections I, II, and III, are organised into four parts 
based on flood type: 
A.	 Combined Flood Hazards 
B.	 Intense Rainfall/Sewer Flooding 
C.	 River Flooding 
D.	 Coastal or Shoreline Flooding (including 
Great Lakes and tidal portions of the St-
Lawrence River)
Responses to the questions are standardized to facilitate 
completion of the questionnaire. Potential responses are: 
•	High, Medium and Low Ratings: to be 
selected based on the guidance provided in 
the sections.
•	For flood exposure: “High” denotes a factor 
contributing to a higher level of flood hazard 
exposure, and “Low” denotes a factor 
contributing to a lower level of flood hazard 
exposure (the desired outcome). 
•	For flood preparedness: “High” denotes a 
factor contributing to a higher level of flood 
preparedness (the desired outcome), while 
“Low” denotes a factor contributing to a lower 
level of flood preparedness.
•	Unsure: to be selected when there is 
insufficient information to select a High, 
Medium, or Low response. To take a 
conservative approach to risk management, 
an “unsure” response is considered either as 
“High” exposure or “Low” preparedness.
•	Not applicable (N/A): to be selected only 
where river or coastal/lake flood questions are 
not applicable, based on the responses to Section 
I. Combined flood hazard and intense rainfall 
flooding are risks considered common to all users, 
therefore the “N/A” option is not offered in the 
drop-down menus. River and coastal/shoreline 
flooding related questions can be answered N/A 
following the initial responses in Section I.
The design of the questions is based on existing 
national guidance and standards. The key resources 
used to develop the Check-Up are highlighted in Table 
5. The resources relevant to specific questions are 
detailed in Appendix B .
!
!
!
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
38
Table 5: Key Resources Used to Develop the Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
Section
Overview and Key Resources Used
!
•	 Provides a basic assessment of flood hazard and exposure based on qualitative indicators 
for intense rainfall, river, and coastal/shoreline flooding. 
•	 Draws heavily on the foundational assessment of the National Standard of Canada CSA 
W210:21 Prioritization of Flood Risk in Existing Communities,58 which was developed based 
on the guidance publication “Weathering the Storm: Developing a Canadian Standard for 
Flood-Resilient Existing Communities.”59 
Section I: Flood Hazard 
and Exposure – Identifying 
Potential Risks
!
•	 Assesses the application of best practices to analyse and evaluate flood risks, including 
climate change scenario analysis, vulnerability assessments, strategic planning, and flood 
risk mapping assessment. 
•	 Draws heavily on the benchmarking of flood preparedness undertaken for major 
Canadian cities in 2015 and 2019/2020.60 Additional key resources relate to natural asset 
management, watershed management, and coastal flood risk management.
Section II: Flood Preparedness 
– Analysing Risks
!
•	 Assesses the application of best practices to reduce flood risks, including implementation 
of strategic plans, grey and natural infrastructure solutions, land use planning, operations 
and maintenance and emergency management. 
•	 Draws on the benchmarking of flood preparedness undertaken for major Canadian cities 
in 2015 and 2019/2020.61 Additional key resources relate to municipal adaptation capacity, 
natural asset management, watershed management, and coastal flood risk management.
Section III: Flood 
Preparedness - Reducing 
Risks
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
39
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
5.5 Results 
As users choose responses to the questions in Sections I, II and III, the results are automatically analyzed and 
presented in three results worksheets:
Scorecard
Shows the responses to each question and calculates an average rating for each sub-section. 
Averages are calculated by converting each response to a numerical score between 1 and 3 
(Low = 1, Medium = 2 and High = 3) and averaging. Non-applicable questions are excluded 
from the average. By default, an average score of below 1.5 is classified as “Low”. An average 
score between 1.5 and 2.15 is classified as “Medium”. A score that is higher than 2.15 is 
classified as “High” to take a conservative approach to risk management. Where questions 
have been broken into different components, the components have been weighted so that the 
result is combined into one response.
As questions are completed, the corresponding response becomes coloured, using the 
colour-scheme that is established in the Check-Up for the standardized responses – “High”, 
“Medium”, “Low”, “Unsure” and “N/A”. The scorecard provides a detailed overview of 
all the responses provided in the Check-Up, and the colouring allows users to see trends at 
a glance and appreciate how different aspects of flood exposure and flood preparedness are 
currently affecting their overall flood risk performance.
Web Diagrams
Provides web diagrams, grouped by section and flood type, showing the Low, Medium, and 
High ratings on a scale of 1 to 3 for each aspect assessed in the Check-Up (Low = 1, Medium 
= 2 and High = 3).
Overview
Compiles ratings of flood exposure and flood preparedness, providing an overall score and 
by different flood risk types. A series of rings, matrices and pyramid diagrams are used to 
visualize and combine the ratings to form an overall representation of municipal flood risk. 
Results are presented for:
•	The overall assessment (considering all questions)
•	A breakdown of the assessment considering:
A.	 Combined Flood Hazard questions
B.	 Intense Rainfall/Sewer Flooding questions
C.	 River Flooding questions
D.	 Coastal or Shoreline Flooding questions
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
40
The worksheets are designed to be printable so that users can document and share their results.
Figure 6: Understanding the Scorecard
Background Calculations
Details on how ratings are calculated based on responses, including weightings for questions 
that have multiple parts and boundaries between “High”, “Medium” and “Low” ratings. 
This section can be made editable by unprotecting the sheet (In Excel, select the “Review” 
menu/select “Unprotect sheet”/enter the password “FloodRisk2023”).
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
1
2
3
4
1.	
First column shows the subsection of the assessment.
2.	 Second column contains the questions asked in each subsection.
3.	 The ratings highlight the answers selected for each question.
4.	 Subsection rating is the average score obtained in each subsection.
5.	 In Section I, ‘Low’ rating means a lower level of flood hazard exposure (the desired outcome).
6.	 In Section II and III, ‘Low’ means a lower level of flood preparedness (unprepared).
5
6
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
41
Figure 7: The Web Diagrams
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
:
1
2
3
4
1.	
Each web diagram displays the results, on a scale of 1 to 3, for each indicator. Scores are higher towards the outside of the web 
and indicate more exposure to flood risk for Section I.
2.	 Examples shows exposure to risk is higher for ‘history of flooded building and infrastructure’, ‘age of development’, and 
‘vulnerable populations’.
3.	 Example shows exposure to risk is smaller considering ‘sewer design type’.
4.	 In Section II and III, higher scores towards the outside of the web indicate more preparedness for flood risk.
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
42
Figure 8: Overview of the Assessment Results 
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
1
1.	
Visual indicators of flood exposure rating (Section I).
2.	 Visual indicators of flood preparedness ratings - subdivided into risk analysis (Section II, on the left) 
and risk reduction (Section III, on the right).
3.	 Matrix combining flood exposure rating (Section I) and flood preparedness rating (Section II and III).
4.	 Pyramid-style visual comparison of the three Section ratings obtained (blue line), compared to the 
ideal ratings (dotted green line). More “risky” ratings result in a narrower-based, taller pyramid.
5.	 Display of scores on a scale of 1 to 3. This is not a precise quantitative assessment. Scores are a 
qualitative performance indicator included to monitor progress over time.
Note that the above metrics are provided for the overall assessment, as well as by type of flooding:
A.	 Combined Flood Hazards
B.	 Intense Rainfall/Sewer Flooding 
C.	 River Flooding 
D.	 Coastal or Shoreline Flooding
2
3
4
5
43
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
5.6 Resources
The Check-Up provides users with additional resources to support their understanding of the questions asked, and 
to support further action to manage and reduce flood risk. The additional worksheets are: 
Supporting Information
Information describing key concepts and best practices, presented directly in the 
Check-Up for ease of reference. Each section provides a definition, links to key 
resources and background information to assist users in their understanding of the 
questions being asked.
Glossary
A list of definitions of key terms, taken predominantly from Canadian standards and 
guidance. Hyperlinks to the definitions are located alongside the questions where the 
terms are used. For ease of navigation, users can click on the hyperlinks to navigate 
to the definition, and then click on links that take them back to the section where they 
were working. 
References
A list of key references with direct hyperlinks for ease of access.
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
44
6. Moving Forward Together: 
Supporting Municipal Action
44
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
45
The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up is a practical 
tool that can help accelerate action to reduce flood risk 
across Canada. Reducing flood risk is in the interest 
of all parties that live and work in municipalities, 
including residents, businesses, governments, and 
financial institutions. While municipalities act on the 
front lines, other parties have a key role to play in 
supporting them. 
6.1 Empowering Municipalities
The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up can be used 
as a catalyst for action to reduce flood risk within 
municipalities by:
•	Bringing municipal staff together across 
departments to take action on flood risk.
•	Encouraging cross-sector and 
multidisciplinary collaboration.
•	Increasing internal knowledge and 
understanding of flood risk management.
•	Providing easy access to key standards, guidance, 
and best practices, including National Standards 
of Canada.
•	Enabling benchmarking and documentation 
of progress over time to support continual 
improvement in flood risk management.
•	Distilling information into a format that can be 
readily communicated to elected officials and City 
Managers, and funding agencies.
•	Informing conversations with 
municipal insurers.
•	Demonstrating how nature-based solutions and 
natural asset management are integral to flood 
risk management.
•	Serving as a tool to strengthen partnerships with 
the private sector and community groups.
Completion of the Check-Up itself is an excellent 
first step in the flood risk management journey. To 
make a significant change, municipalities will need to 
use the Check-Up to identify, prioritize and complete 
additional actions to understand, manage and reduce 
flood risk. 
It is highly recommended that municipalities undertake 
communication and consultation, recording and 
reporting, and monitoring and review activities to 
maximize the benefits of the tool (as set out in ISO 
31000 Risk Management – see Section 3.1 ) This 
includes, for example, completing the Check-
Up and using it on a regular basis to identify 
priorities to inform asset management 
planning, annual budgeting and other multi-
year strategies. 
Completion of the Check-Up 
itself is an excellent first step 
in the flood risk management 
journey. To make a significant 
change, municipalities will 
need to use the Check-Up 
to identify, prioritize and 
complete additional actions 
to understand, manage and 
reduce flood risk.
6. Moving Forward Together: Supporting Municpal Action
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
46
6.2 Other Users
The Check-Up may be beneficial to any organization 
with an interest in assessing the flood risk profile of 
municipalities and their associated disclosures. This 
includes, but is not limited to:
•	Municipal insurers
•	Institutional investors
•	Securities commissions
•	Credit rating agencies
The Check-Up may also provide a useful starting point 
for a system, similar to FEMA’s Community Rating 
System in the United States,62 incentivizing community 
flood risk management actions as part of the national 
flood insurance program that was announced by the 
federal government in Budget 2023.63
6.3 Scaling-Up Use of the Check-Up
In Canada there are around 3,600 local governments.64 
A key challenge is to raise awareness and encourage 
use of the Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up among 
potential users to accelerate widespread action.
Many different organizations already established 
relationships with municipalities and have a key role 
to play in raising awareness, providing information, 
and encouraging the use of the Municipal Flood Risk 
Check-Up to reduce flood risk. These include:
•	Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM): 
members include more than 2,000 municipalities and 
20 provincial and territorial municipal associations. 
Together, they represent more than 92% of all 
Canadians from coast to coast to coast.65 
•	Standards Organizations: the Standards 
Council of Canada and the standards development 
organization, CSA Group, have already identified 
the need to increase the uptake of available flood 
resilience standards and are actively working to 
increase awareness among municipalities. 
•	Provincial and territorial municipal 
associations: in Canadian provinces and 
territories, municipal associations actively support 
their members through collaboration, training, 
events, and regular communications.
•	Municipal insurers, insurance pool 
operators and financial institutions: have 
privileged relationships with their clients and 
members, and a mutual interest in reducing risk.
•	Professional associations: a wide range 
of professionals work within, and support, 
municipalities in areas such as accounting, financial 
analysis, management consulting, engineering, and 
planning and design of flood risk solutions. 
•	Regional climate service providers: 
regional knowledge networks share information 
across Canada, including Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium (PCIC) and Pacific 
Institute for Climate Solutions (PICS) (British 
Columbia), ClimateWest (Alberta, Manitoba, and 
Saskatchewan), CLIMAtlantic (Atlantic Canada), 
Ouranos (Quebec) and the Ontario Resource 
Centre for Climate Adaptation (ORCCA).
•	NGOs: numerous NGOs actively partner with 
municipalities in projects, including some directly 
related to flood risk-management.
Tackling flood risk requires a whole-of-society 
approach. Support from these organizations 
will be critical to operationalize the Municipal 
Flood Risk Check-Up to make change on the 
ground. By facing flooding together, we can 
make lives better and safer.
6. Moving Forward Together: Supporting Municpal Action
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
47
Appendix A: Online Workshop – Overview
This appendix provides an overview of the virtual workshop held on February 22, 2023. The workshop was 
attended by 30 subject matter experts from across Canada. Attendees are recognized in the acknowledgements list 
at the beginning of this report. 
Stated Workshop Goals
1.	 Review structure of the assessment tool and terminology, and questions to assess different elements of risk 
identification, evaluation, and treatment.
2.	 Capture additional subject matter expertise regarding assessment of municipal flood risk.
3.	 Collaborate on draft framework production.
Workshop Activities
Context Setting
•	 Welcome and Introduction 
•	 Project Need and Progress to Date (presentation by Joanna Eyquem)
•	 Workshop Overview (presentation by Mélie Monnerat)
Group Task #1
Structure of assessment tool and terminology 
•	 Participants were asked to work in four small groups of 7-8 people, focused on intense rainfall (1 
group), coastal (1 group) and river flooding (2 groups).
•	 Input was gathered through facilitated discussion relating to questions: 
1.	What are the advantages and disadvantages of using the ISO Risk Management Framework or risk 
matrix approaches for measuring progress in flood risk management?
2.	What terms should we use, and what should we avoid?
Group Task #2
Review of questions to assess different elements of risk identification, evaluation and treatment 
and innovative approaches 
•	 In the same groups, participants were asked to discuss the following questions:
1.	Are there elements you would move between risk identification, risk analysis and risk treatment? 
2.	Are there elements that should be added/removed?
3.	Are there innovative approaches you would recommend, especially for small municipalities?
Review and 
Structured 
Plenary 
Discussion
•	 Full group discussion on the following questions:
1.	What are key enabling factors that have helped you progress on flood risk management  ?
2.	Who would use this tool within municipalities according to your perspective?
3.	How do city leaders prioritize urban flood risk at present?
4.	How can we help move it up the list?
Closing
•	 Next Steps and Closing Remarks
Appendix A: Online Workshop - Overview
48
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
Appendix B: Key Sources Used to 
Develop Check-Up Questions 
!
Section I: Flood Hazard and Exposure – Identifying Potential Risks
Key Source(s)
A: Combined Flood Hazard Exposure
Question A1 – History of Flooded Buildings and Infrastructure:
How would you categorise the occurrence of flooding according to historical records?
CSA W210:21 
Prioritization of flood risk 
in existing communities
Question A2 – Age of Development:
Stormwater management has been increasingly well integrated into urban planning and 
development over time. Select the period of urban development that best applies to the area you 
are assessing.
Question A3 – Vulnerable Populations:
How would you categorise the exposure of vulnerable populations according to historical flood 
records and current understanding of social vulnerability?
B: Intense Rainfall/Sewer Flood Exposure
Question B1 - Surface Ponding:
How would you categorise the contribution of topography to surface ponding in the municipality?
CSA W210:21 
Prioritization of flood risk 
in existing communities
Question B2 - Impervious Surfaces:
How would you categorise the extent of impervious surfaces vs natural/vegetated surfaces?
Question B3 - Basement Flooding:
How would you categorise the presence of basements and occurrence of basement flooding in the 
past 10 years?
Question B4 - Sewer Design Type
How would you best categorise the sewer system type?
*Question B5 – Buildings at risk of intense rainfall/sewer back-up flooding:
Based on your assessment, what percentage of buildings do you estimate are at risk of intense 
rainfall / sewer back-up flooding?
Adapting to Rising Flood 
Risk
*Optional quantitative question if updated flood mapping is available.
Appendix B: Key Sources Used to Develop Check-Up Questions
49
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
!
Section I: Flood Hazard and Exposure – Identifying Potential Risks
Key Source(s)
C: River Flood Exposure
Question C1 – Watercourses:
How would you categorise the presence of watercourses and occurrence of river flooding to date?
CSA W210:21 
Prioritization of flood risk 
in existing communities
Question C2 – Proximity to River Floodplain Areas:
How would you categorize development in relation to river floodplain areas? (either regulatory 
floodplain areas, or areas estimated to be river floodplains based on other data – e.g., topography, 
historical flood extents).
*Question C3 –Buildings at risk of river flooding:
What percentage of buildings do you estimate are at risk of river flooding (e.g., 1 in 100-year 
floodplain, taking into account climate change projections)?
Adapting to Rising Flood 
Risk
*Question C4 –Buildings at high-risk of river flooding:
What percentage of buildings do you estimate are at high-risk of river flooding (e.g., in the current 
1 in 20-year floodplain)?
D: Coastal or Lake Shoreline Flood Exposure
Question D1 – Shorelines
How would you categorise the presence of shorelines and occurrence of coastal flooding to date?
CSA W210:21 
Prioritization of flood risk 
in existing communities
Question D2 – Proximity to Coastal or Lake Shoreline Floodplain Areas
How would you categorize development in relation to coastal or shoreline floodplain areas? (either 
regulatory floodplain areas, or areas estimated to be coastal or shoreline floodplains based on 
other data – e.g., topography, historical flood extents).
*Question D3 - Buildings at risk of coastal/lake flooding
What percentage of buildings do you estimate are at risk of coastal/lake flooding (e.g., 1 in 100-
year floodplain, taking into account climate change projections)?
Adapting to Rising Flood 
Risk
Question D4 - Buildings at high-risk of coastal/lake flooding
What percentage of buildings do you estimate are at high-risk of coastal/lake flooding (e.g., in the 
current 1 in 20-year floodplain)?
*Optional quantitative question if updated flood mapping is available.
Appendix B: Key Sources Used to Develop Check-Up Questions
50
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
!
Section II: Flood Preparedness – Analysing Risks
Key Source(s)
A: Combined Flood Hazard Preparedness
Measure A1: Climate Change Projections
The municipality has analysed a range of climate change projections and the likely impacts on 
different types of flood risk.  
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
Measure A2: Strategic Stormwater Management Plan
The municipality has a current strategic stormwater management or drainage plan that identifies 
key flood risks, including the impacts of climate change (completed or reviewed in the last 5 years).
Measure A3: Socio-Economic Assessment
The municipality has undertaken socio-economic vulnerability assessment to identify the 
exposure of vulnerable populations to flooding and integrated the findings into flood risk 
assessments and climate adaptation planning.
Measure A4: Critical Infrastructure Vulnerability Assessment
The municipality has access to an up-to-date risk assessment to identify the vulnerability of 
critical infrastructure systems to flooding (completed or reviewed in the last 5 years).
Measure A5: Natural Asset Inventory
The municipality has an up-to-date inventory of natural assets (completed or reviewed in the last 
5 years) and has an understanding of their role in managing flood risk.
CSA W218:23 
Specifications for natural 
asset inventories
Measure A6: Property-Level Flood Resilience Assessments
The municipality subsidises or encourages property-level flood resilience assessments.
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
B: Intense Rainfall/Sewer Flood Preparedness
Measure B1: Rainfall Flood Risk Maps
The municipality has an up-to-date risk assessment of rainfall flooding, including the impacts of 
climate change (completed or reviewed in the last 5 years), AND the flood risk maps have been 
made public.
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
Measure B2: Sewer-Backup Flood Risk Maps
The municipality has an up-to-date risk assessment of sewer back-up flooding, including the 
impacts of climate change, AND the flood risk maps have been made public (completed or 
reviewed in the last 5 years).
Appendix B: Key Sources Used to Develop Check-Up Questions
51
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
!
Section II: Flood Preparedness – Analysing Risks
Key Source(s)
C: River Flood Preparedness
Measure C1: Watershed Management
The municipality is actively engaged in flood risk management at a watershed-scale, working 
with other municipalities and organizations where watershed boundaries extend outside of the 
municipality’s own jurisdiction.
Managing Flooding and 
Erosion at the Watershed 
Scale
Measure C2: River Flood Risk Maps
The municipality has an up-to-date river flood risk assessment, including the impacts of climate 
change (completed or reviewed in the last 5 years), AND flood risk maps have been made public
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
D: Coastal or Lake Shoreline Flood Preparedness
Measure D1: Strategic Coastal/Shoreline Management
The municipality is actively engaged in strategic coastal/shoreline management planning that 
directly addresses flood risk for sections of coast/shoreline within its jurisdiction.
Rising Seas and Shifting 
Sands
Measure D2: Coastal/Lake Flood Risk Maps
The municipality has an up-to-date risk assessment of coastal/lake flooding, including the 
impacts of climate change, AND the flood risk maps have been made public (completed or 
reviewed in the last 5 years).
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
!
Section III: Flood Preparedness – Reducing Risks
Key Source(s)
A: Combined Flood Hazard Preparedness
Measure A1: Climate Adaptation Plan
The municipality has developed a climate adaptation plan that includes specific actions to reduce 
relevant flood risks.  
MCIP: Climate Adaptation 
Maturity Scale
Measure A2: Critical Infrastructure
The municipality, or others, have secured funding, developed plans and are implementing 
necessary flood mitigation measures to protect key infrastructure and services to a desired level. 
The municipality is aware of the actions taken where they do not have jurisdiction.
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
Appendix B: Key Sources Used to Develop Check-Up Questions
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
52
!
Section III: Flood Preparedness – Reducing Risks
Key Source(s)
Measure A3: Flood Risk in Asset Management Planning
The municipality has an asset management plan that addresses the impacts of climate change on 
flood risk and the investments required to maintain appropriate levels of services in relation to 
flood protection.
MCIP: Climate Adaptation 
Maturity Scale
Measure A4: Natural Asset Management
The municipality has an asset management plan that addresses the role of natural assets in 
managing flood risk. The plan includes the investments required for protection, rehabilitation and 
management of natural assets to maintain appropriate levels of services in relation to flood risk 
management.
CSA W218:23 
Specifications for natural 
asset inventories
Measure A5: Home Flood Resilience
The municipality provides residents with information that indicates whether a property is located 
in a flood-prone area, alongside property-level resilience measures that can be taken (e.g., 
distribution of infographics, campaigns by post, radio, television, public information events etc.)?
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
Measure A6: Commercial Real-Estate Flood Resilience
The municipality provides commercial real-estate owners and tenants with information that 
indicates whether a property is located in a flood-prone area, alongside property-level resilience 
measures that can be taken (e.g., distribution of infographics, campaigns by post, radio, television, 
public information events etc.)?
Ahead of the Storm: 
Developing Flood-
Resilience Guidance for 
Canada’s Commercial Real 
Estate.
Measure A7: Emergency Management Response
The municipality has prepared a robust emergency management response plan for relevant types 
of flood risk, including measures to ensure communications continuity.
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
Measure A8: Flood Forecasting and Alert Systems
The municipality has prepared a robust emergency management response plan for relevant types 
of flood risk, including measures to ensure communications continuity.
Measure A9: Climate Adaptation Officer
The municipality has a full-time “Climate Adaptation Officer” or equivalent, who is responsible for 
delivering flood risk reduction actions (as part of climate adaptation duties).
Measure A10: Municipal Staff and Council Capacity
Municipal Staff and Council are equipped with the mandate, knowledge, training, and tools needed 
to support flood risk reduction actions.
MCIP: Climate Adaptation 
Maturity Scale
Measure A11: Non-Emergency Operational Activities that support flood preparedness
The municipality maintains non-emergency operation (e.g., on overland drainage systems, catch 
basin cleaning programs, etc.) for relevant types of flood risk, including measures to ensure 
communications continuity.
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
Appendix B: Key Sources Used to Develop Check-Up Questions
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
53
!
Section III: Flood Preparedness – Reducing Risks
Key Source(s)
B: Intense Rainfall/Sewer Flood Preparedness
Measure B1: Stormwater Management System 
The municipality has upgraded the stormwater drainage system to provide sufficient capacity to 
address the impacts of climate change, including grey and natural infrastructure measures where 
appropriate.
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
Measure B2: Sanitary Sewer System
The municipality has upgraded the sanitary sewer system to provide sufficient capacity to address 
the impacts of climate change.
Measure B3: Basement Flood Protection
The municipality works actively to encourage uptake of basement flood protection measures.  
Measure B4: Backwater Valves – New Homes
The municipality mandates the installation of backwater valves for newly constructed homes.
Measure B5: Backwater Valves – Existing Homes
The municipality subsidises the installation of backwater values in existing homes.
C: River Flood Preparedness
Measure C1: River Floodplain Regulation
The municipality has up-to-date regulatory floodplain mapping, prohibits development, and 
re-development in the floodplain, and ensures development does not make flood risk worse (e.g., 
downstream).
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
Measure C2: River Flood Management
The municipality, or organizations upstream, have implemented appropriate flood mitigation 
measures, including grey and natural infrastructure solutions, their maintenance, and non-
structural solutions, to reduce river flooding of buildings and critical infrastructure or serious 
threat to public safety.
Managing Flooding and 
Erosion at the Watershed 
Scale
Measure C3: High-Risk River Floodplain Areas
The municipality has engaged with communities in high-risk river floodplain areas, and identified 
appropriate risk management solutions, including living with the risk and planned relocation.
Appendix B: Key Sources Used to Develop Check-Up Questions
54
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
!
Section III: Flood Preparedness – Reducing Risks
Key Source(s)
D: Coastal or Lake Shoreline Flood Preparedness
Measure D1: Coastal/Lake Shoreline Floodplain Regulation
The municipality has up-to-date regulatory floodplain mapping AND prohibits development, and 
re-development in the floodplain, AND development that makes existing flood risk worse.
Climate Change and the 
Preparedness of 16 Major 
Canadian Cities to Limit 
Flood Risk
Measure D2: Coastal/Shoreline Flood Management
The municipality, or organizations adjacent, have implemented appropriate flood mitigation 
measures, including grey and natural infrastructure solutions, their maintenance, and non-
structural solutions, to avoid coastal/lake flooding of buildings and critical infrastructure or 
serious threat to public safety.  
Rising Seas and Shifting 
Sands
Measure D3: High-Risk Coastal/Shoreline Floodplain Areas
The municipality has engaged with communities in high-risk coastal/shoreline floodplain areas 
(e.g., in the current 1 in 20-year floodplain) and identified appropriate risk management solutions, 
including living with the risk and planned relocation.
Appendix B: Key Sources Used to Develop Check-Up Questions
55
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
References
1. The Urgent Need for Municipal Action to Reduce Flood Risk
1	 Public Safety Canada. 2023. “The First Public Report of the National Risk Profile.” Government of Canada. 
Accessed at: https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/2023-nrp-pnr/index-en.aspx
2	 Public Health Agency of Canada. 2021. “Climate Change and Public Health Factsheets: Climate Change, 
floods and your health.” Government of Canada. Accessed at:  https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/
services/health-promotion/environmental-public-health-climate-change/climate-change-public-health-factsheets-
floods.html
3	 Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G., 
Kharin, V.V. 2019. “Changes in Temperature and Precipitation Across Canada.” Chapter 4 in Bush, E. and 
Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) Canada’s Changing Climate Report. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, pp 112-193. 
Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019
4	 Public Safety Canada. 2022. “Adapting to Rising Flood Risk: An Analysis of Insurance Solutions for Canada 
- A Report by Canada’s Task Force on Flood Insurance and Relocation.” Government of Canada. Accessed at: 
https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/dptng-rsng-fld-rsk-2022/index-en.aspx#s8.1
5	 Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2024. “Severe Weather in 2023 Caused Over $3.1 Billion in Insured Damage.” 
Accessed at: https://www.ibc.ca/news-insights/news/severe-weather-in-2023-caused-over-3-1-billion-in-insured-
damage
6	 Bakos, K. Feltmate, B., Chopik, C., C. Evans. 2022. “Treading Water: Impact of Catastrophic Flooding on 
Canada’s Housing Market.” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://
www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/UoW_ICCA_2022_02-Treading-Water_
Flooding-and-Housing-Market.pdf
7	 Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2023. “2023 Facts of the Property and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada.” 
Accessed at: https://a-us.storyblok.com/f/1003207/x/487fb75d80/2023-ibc-fact-book.pdf
8	 Bakos, K. Feltmate, B., Chopik, C., C. Evans. 2022. “Treading Water: Impact of Catastrophic Flooding 
on Canada’s Housing Market.” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/UoW_ICCA_2022_02-Treading-Water_
Flooding-and-Housing-Market.pdf
56
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
9	 Feltmate, B., Moudrak, N., Bakos, K. and B. Schofield. 2020. “Factoring Climate Risk into Financial 
Valuation.” Prepared for the Global Risk Institute and Scotiabank. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, 
University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2020/03/Factoring-Climate-Risk-into-Financial-Valuation.pdf
10	Bakos, K. and Feltmate, B. 2023. “Transitioning From Rhetoric to Action: Integrating Physical Climate 
Change and Extreme Weather Risk Into Institutional Investing.” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation. University 
of Waterloo. Accessed at:  https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/integrating-physical-climate-change-
risk-into-institutional-investing/
11	Public Safety Canada. 2023. “The First Public Report of the National Risk Profile.” Government of Canada. 
Accessed at: https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/2023-nrp-pnr/index-en.aspx
12	Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G., 
Kharin, V.V. 2019. “Changes in Temperature and Precipitation Across Canada.” Chapter 4 in Bush, E. and 
Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) “Canada’s Changing Climate Report.” Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, pp 112-
193. Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019
13	Public Safety Canada. 2023. “The First Public Report of the National Risk Profile.” Government of Canada. 
Accessed at: https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/2023-nrp-pnr/index-en.aspx
14	Ziolecki, A. et al. 2020. “Canadian voices on flood risk 2020: Findings from a national survey about how we 
should manage an increasingly costly and common peril.” Partners for Action. Accessed at:  https://uwaterloo.ca/
partners-for-action/sites/default/files/uploads/files/finalreport_nationalsurvey_sept20.pdf
15	Federation of Canadian Municipalities. 2022.  “Building a Legacy of Local Climate Action - The 
Municipalities for Climate Innovation Program (2016–2022).” Accessed at:  https://fcm.ca/sites/default/files/
documents/programs/mcip/building-a-legacy-of-local-climate-action.pdf
16	Commonwealth Governance. (n.d.). “Local government of Canada.” Accessed at: https://www.
commonwealthgovernance.org/countries/americas/canada/local-government/
17	Federation of Canadian Municipalities. 2022. “Building a Legacy of Local Climate Action - The 
Municipalities for Climate Innovation Program (2016–2022).” Accessed at: https://fcm.ca/sites/default/files/
documents/programs/mcip/building-a-legacy-of-local-climate-action.pdf
18	Feltmate, B and Moudrak, M. 2021. “Climate Change and the Preparedness of 16 Major Canadian Cities 
to Limit Flood Risk.” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/16-Cities-Flood-Preparedness-1.pdf
19	Infrastructure Canada. 2023. “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund: Overview.” Government of Canada. 
Accessed at: https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/dmaf-faac/index-eng.html
57
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
20	Government of Canada. Updated 2023. “Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan.”  Accessed at: 
https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/climatechange/climate-plan/national-adaptation-
strategy/action-plan.html
3. Review of Existing Standards, Guidance and Tools
21	CSA Group. 2022. “The Municipal How-to Guide for CSA Community Water Standards.” Accessed at: 
https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/CSAGroup-Municipal-WaterStandards-How-To-Guide.pdf
22	Stewardship Council of BC. 2023. “Green Shores | Programs, Green Shores for Local Government.” 
Accessed at: https://stewardshipcentrebc.ca/green-shores-home/gs-programs/gs-local-government/
23	International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 2023. “ISO 31000:2018 Risk Management Guidelines.” 
Accessed at: https://www.iso.org/standard/65694.html
24	Eyquem, J.L. 2023. “Managing Flooding and Erosion at the Watershed Scale: Guidance to Support 
Governments Using Nature-Based Solutions.” CSA Group. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/article/
research/managing-flooding-and-erosion-at-the-watershed-scale/
25	Government of Canada. 2023. “Standards and guidance: Hazards.” Accessed at: https://www.infrastructure.
gc.ca/climate-resilience-climatique/hazards-dangers-eng.html#flood
26	Standards Council of Canada (SCC). 2021. “Projects under the Standards to Support Resilience in 
Infrastructure Program (2016–2021).” Accessed at: https://www.scc.ca/en/projects-under-standards-support-
resilience-infrastructure-program-2016-2021
27	Government of Canada. 2023. “Codes, standards and guidance for climate resilience.” Accessed at: https://
www.infrastructure.gc.ca/climate-resilience-climatique/codes-standards-normes-guidances-eng.html
28	Government of Canada. 2022. “Climate-Resilient Buildings and Core Public Infrastructure Initiative.”  
Accessed at: https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/plan/crbcpi-irccipb-eng.html
29	Government of Canada. 2023. “Our research on climate resilient buildings and infrastructure.” Accessed at: 
https://nrc.canada.ca/en/research-development/research-collaboration/our-research-climate-resilient-buildings-
infrastructure
30	Eyquem, J. 2022. “Chapitre 18 - Mesures concrètes pour réduire les vulnérabilités face aux inondations et 
leur mise en oeuvre au Québec.” In “Les inondations au Québec: Risques, aménagement du territoire, impacts 
socioéconomiques et transformation des vulnérabilités.” Sous la direction de Thomas Buffin-Bélanger, Danielle 
Maltais et Mario Gauthier. Presses de l’Université de Québec. Accessed at: https://www.puq.ca/catalogue/livres/
les-inondations-quebec-4082.html
58
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
31	Evans, C., Feltmate B. 2019. “Water on the Rise: Protecting Canadian Homes from the Growing Threat 
of Flooding.” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at:  https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Home-Flood-Protection-Program-Report-1.pdf
32	CSA Group. 2018. “ CSA Z800-18 Guideline on basement flood protection and risk reduction.” Accessed at: 
https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/Z800-18/
33	Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B. 2019. “Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for 
Canada’s Commercial Real Estate.” Prepared for REALPAC and BOMA Canada. Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/10/Ahead-of-the-Storm-1.pdf
34	Moudrak, N.; Feltmate, B. 2019. “Weathering the Storm: Developing a Canadian Standard for Flood-
Resilient Existing Communities.” Prepared for Standards Council of Canada and National Research Council 
of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Weathering-the-Storm.pdf
35	CSA Group. 2021. “CSA W210:21 Prioritization of flood risk in existing communities.” National Standard of 
Canada. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/2705176/
36	Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B. 2017. Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes: Developing a Canadian Standard for 
New Flood-Resilient Residential Communities. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. 
Accessed at: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/recent-reports/preventing-disaster-before-it-strikes-
developing-a-canadian-standard-for-flood-resilient-residential-communities/
37	CSA Group. 2019. “CSA W204:19 Flood resilient design of new residential communities.” National Standard 
of Canada. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/CSA%20W204:19/
38	CSA Group. 2021. “CSA W211:21 Management standard for stormwater systems.” National Standard of 
Canada. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/2705167/
39	Vouk, I., Pilechi, V., Provan, M., and Murphy, E. 2021. “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine 
Flood and Erosion Risk Management.” CSA Group. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/
uploads/CSA-Group-Research-Nature-Based-Solutions-for-Coastal-and-Riverine-Flood-and-Erosion-Risk-
Management.pdf
40	Eyquem, J.L. 2023. “Managing Flooding and Erosion at the Watershed Scale: Guidance to Support 
Governments Using Nature-Based Solutions.” CSA Group. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/article/
research/managing-flooding-and-erosion-at-the-watershed-scale/
59
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
41	Eyquem, J. L. 2021. “Rising Tides and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect 
Canada’s Coastal Communities.” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: 
https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/UoW_ICCA_2021_12_Coastal_
Protection_Grey_NbS.pdf
42	Eyquem, J. L, Church, B. Brooke, R and Molnar, M. 2022. “Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing 
the Financial Value of Natural Assets in a Changing Climate.” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University 
of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/UoW_
ICCA_2022_10_Nature-on-the-Balance-Sheet.pdf
43	CSA Group. 2023. “CSA W218:23 Specifications for natural asset inventories.” National Standard of 
Canada.” Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/2705376/
44	CSA Group. 2021. “CSA W210:21 Prioritization of flood risk in existing communities.” National Standard of 
Canada. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/2705176/
45	Feltmate, B. and M. Moudrak. 2021. Climate Change and the Preparedness of 16 Major Canadian Cities 
to Limit Flood Risk. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/recent-reports/climate-change-and-the-preparedness-of-16-major-canadian-
cities-to-limit-flood-risk/
46	CSA Group. 2022. “The Municipal How-to Guide for CSA Community Water Standards.” Accessed at: 
https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/CSAGroup-Municipal-WaterStandards-How-To-Guide.pdf
47	Federal Emergency Management Association (FEMA). 2023. “Community Rating System.” Accessed at: 
https://www.fema.gov/floodplain-management/community-rating-system
48	ICLEI Canada. 2021. “Building Adaptive and Resilient Communities (BARC) Online Tool - Introduction.” 
Accessed at: https://barctool.icleicanada.org/en/introduction
49	ICLEI Canada. 2022. “The Cost of Doing Nothing.” Accessed at:  https://icleicanada.org/project/codn/
50	Federation of Canadian Municipalities. 2022. “Municipalities for Climate Innovation Program: Climate 
Adaptation Maturity Scale.” Accessed at:  https://fcm.ca/sites/default/files/documents/tools/MCIP/mcip-
climate-adaptation-maturity-scale.pdf
51	Climate Risk Institute. 2023. “Risk and Return on Investment Tool.” Accessed at: https://climateriskinstitute.
ca/rroit/
52	CLIMAtlantic. 2022. “Coastal Adaptation toolkit.” Accessed at: https://climatlantic.ca/coastal-adaptation/
60
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
53	Centre d’expertise et de recherche en infrastructures urbaines (CERIU). 2023. “Outil d’auto-évaluation 
en résilience des actifs en eau en contexte de changements climatiques.” Accessed at: https://ceriu.qc.ca/
bibliotheque/outil-auto-evaluation-resilience-actifs-eau-contexte-changements-climatiques
54	Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction and Climate Risk Institute. (n.d.). “PIEVC Program.” Accessed at: 
https://pievc.ca/
55	The Water Research Foundation (WRF). 2023. “Holistic Approaches to Flood Mitigation Planning and 
Modeling under Extreme Events and Climate Impacts.” WRF 5084. Accessed at: https://www.waterrf.org/
research/projects/holistic-approaches-flood-mitigation-planning-and-modeling-under-extreme-events
56	The Water Research Foundation (WRF).2023. “Enhancement of Resilience to Extreme Weather and Climate 
Events: Proactive Flood Management.” WRF 4842. Accessed at: https://www.waterrf.org/research/projects/
enhancement-resilience-extreme-weather-and-climate-events-proactive-flood
57	Natural Resources Canada. 2023. “Flood Hazard Identification and Mapping Program.” Accessed at: https://
natural-resources.canada.ca/science-and-data/science-and-research/natural-hazards/flood-hazard-identification-
and-mapping-program/24044
5. The Municipal Flood Risk Check-Up
58	CSA Group. 2021. “CSA W210:21 Prioritization of flood risk in existing communities.” National Standard of 
Canada. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/2705176/
59	Moudrak, N.; Feltmate, B. 2019. “Weathering the Storm: Developing a Canadian Standard for Flood-
Resilient Existing Communities.” Prepared for Standards Council of Canada and National Research Council 
of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Weathering-the-Storm.pdf
60	Feltmate, B and Moudrak, M. 2021. “Climate Change and the Preparedness of 16 Major Canadian Cities 
to Limit Flood Risk”, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/16-Cities-Flood-Preparedness-1.pdf
6. Moving Forward Together: Supporting Municipal Action
61	Feltmate, B and Moudrak, M. 2021. “Climate Change and the Preparedness of 16 Major Canadian Cities 
to Limit Flood Risk”, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/16-Cities-Flood-Preparedness-1.pdf
61
A Flood Risk Check-Up For Canadian Municipalities: Tackling Flooding Together
62	Federal Emergency Management Association (FEMA). 2023. “Community Rating System.” Accessed at: 
https://www.fema.gov/floodplain-management/community-rating-system#:~:text=The%20Community%20
Rating%20System%20(CRS,Over%201%2C500%20communities%20participate%20nationwide
63	Government of Canada. 2023. “Budget 2023 – A Made-in-Canada Plan. Strong Middle Class Affording 
Economy, Healthy Future.” Accessed at: https://budget.canada.ca/2023/pdf/budget-2023-en.pdf
64	Commonwealth Governance. (n.d.). “Local government of Canada.” Accessed at: https://www.
commonwealthgovernance.org/countries/americas/canada/local-government/
65	Federation of Canadian Municipalities. 2023. “About FCM - The national voice of local government, 
representing 90 percent of Canadians.“ Accessed at https://fcm.ca/en/about-fcm
!
!
!
To find out more:
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
Intact.Centre@uwaterloo.ca | www.intactcentre.ca
