Integrating Social and Behavior Change 
in Climate Change Adaptation:  
An Introductory Guide
MAY 2019
This document was produced for review by the United States Agency for International Development. It was 
prepared by Chemonics for the Climate Change Adaptation Thought Leadership and Assessments (ATLAS) 
Task Order No. AID-OAA-I-14-00013, under the Restoring the Environment through Prosperity, Livelihoods, 
and Conserving Ecosystems (REPLACE) IDIQ.
Chemonics contact: 
Chris Perine, Chief of Party (cperine@chemonics.com)
Chemonics International Inc.
1717 H Street NW 
Washington, DC 20006
ATLAS reports and other products are available on the ClimateLinks website: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/projects/atlas
Acknowledgments: 
The Integrating Social and Behavior Change in Climate Change Adaptation Introductory guide was developed 
by Veronique Lee with support from Tom Davis. The authors would like to thank colleagues from USAID/
Washington for their invaluable input and reviews: Nga Nguyen, Megan Hill, Clive Mutunga, Hope Hempstone, 
Stephanie Levy, Sarah Paige, and Colin Quinn.
Cover Photo: Georgina Smith / CIAT
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
1
OVERVIEW
[OVERVIEW] Integrating Social and Behavior 
Change in Climate Change Adaptation 
HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE
This guide is designed to serve as an introductory resource. The primary audience is USAID staff interested in 
integrating Social and Behavior Change (SBC) into climate change adaptation and resilience programming. The guide 
will also be useful to USAID implementing partners and development practitioners with similar objectives. The guide 
is divided into three interrelated modules that introduce key SBC concepts and provide direction for developing 
SBC initiatives. The modules are structured as follows:
MODULE 1: Understanding Behavioral Determinants of Climate Change Adaptation
Module 1 introduces a key concept of SBC – behavioral determinants – to help better consider how behaviors are 
entry points for affecting climate change adaptation. The module also provides guidance on how to use behavioral 
determinants to identify relevant behaviors to target in SBC programming.
MODULE 2: Defining SBC Objectives to Encourage Climate Change Adaptation
Module 2 presents an overview of how to use SBC as a tool to achieve climate change adaptation, and 
how USAID, and others, can reach potential audiences through SBC interventions.
MODULE 3: Planning and Implementing SBC for Climate Change Adaptation
Module 3 presents key considerations for developing an SBC strategy and SBC implementation plan. Each module 
include reference to a framework for SBC developed by psychologist Jonathan Haidt and called the elephant, the 
rider, and the path. This framework is further described in a textbox at the end of the overview section of the guide. 
INTRODUCTION 
Climate variability and change will affect the health and livelihoods of most populations in the coming 
years, putting the lives and well-being of millions of people at increased risk. Rising temperatures 
threaten many crop species, livestock health, and agricultural systems. Rainfed agriculture is particularly 
vulnerable to rising temperatures, a potential increase in extreme weather events, and changes in 
precipitation patterns. Sea level rise, more intense storm surge, and ocean warming and acidification all 
have potentially devastating impacts on human life and natural, social, and physical assets in coastal areas. 
Public health is directly impacted by threats such as heat waves, and indirectly impacted by changes in 
the distribution and transmission of diseases and heightened food insecurity.  The poorest countries and 
communities are often the most vulnerable to these impacts because they lack the ability to prepare 
for and recover from both long-term changes, such as rising temperatures and sea level, and short-term 
shocks, such as more intense storms and floods. Significant adverse social, economic, and environmental 
impacts of climate change will arise as climate risks challenge traditional livelihoods, exacerbate conflicts, 
and intensify humanitarian crises.
Most climate change adaptation and risk reduction measures require that humans modify existing 
behaviors or adopt new ones related to health, agriculture, natural resource management, infrastructure, 
and settlement patterns. SBC, which incorporates knowledge from across disciplines to change 
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
2
OVERVIEW
behaviors to address specific challenges, is a critical yet underutilized 
approach that can help individuals and communities cope with the 
current, and near- and long-term changes in climate.
The purpose of this guide is to strengthen USAID’s understanding 
of SBC concepts and how to put them into practice to address 
climate change risks through integrated programming. More broadly, 
this guide can be used by USAID’s implementing partners and 
development practitioners interested in learning more about the 
potential application of SBC in climate change adaptation efforts, 
and likewise using this knowledge in programming. The guide shares 
key resources for expanding knowledge of SBC and considerations 
for its use throughout the program cycle, from project design to 
monitoring and evaluation.
WHAT IS SBC AND HOW CAN IT BE USED FOR 
CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION?
Human behavior is complex — it often takes a combination 
of approaches to cause an individual to test, adopt, and sustain 
behaviors. SBC is the application of theory-based approaches 
to identify opportunities to change behaviors at the individual, 
community, and/or societal levels. SBC interventions can employ 
a range of strategies (e.g., interpersonal communication, advocacy, 
social mobilization, structural or environmental interventions) 
at different levels (e.g., individual, community) to empower, 
motivate, and strengthen the capability of target groups to 
improve their livelihoods, adapt to climate variability and change, 
and increase overall resilience. It is important to stress that while 
communications are an integral part of SBC, a successful SBC 
strategy must include other elements, including education and 
training, and access to finance and other resources that safeguard 
livelihood security, thereby making changes in behavior practical for 
individuals, households and communities.
KEY RESOURCES: SBC TOOLKITS AND GUIDES 
•	 Food Security and Nutrition Network Designing for Behavior Change Framework 
•	 Health Communication Capacity Collaborative (HC3) Integrated SBCC Programs Implementation Kit 
•	 The Health COMpass and Springboard
•	 Knowledge for Health (K4Health) Social and Behavior Change Technical Reference Materials 
•	 USAID Behavioral Integration Guidance
Understand the problem
Observe and assess current 
climate vulnerability of targeted 
group, and behaviors that may 
contribute to vulnerability.  
Define behaviors to change
Determine desired behaviors 
to change based on observed 
climate vulnerabilities and target 
audiences for SBC interventions.
Match approaches to 
modify behavior with climate 
vulnerability and adaptation 
challenges
Identify drivers of, called 
determinants, of targeted 
behaviors for SBC interventions.
Develop an SBC strategy
Design interventions and 
develop relevant messages and 
materials.
Pilot SBC interventions
Implement interventions and 
assess against the SBC strategy.
Evaluate SBC interventions
Measure changes in targeted 
adaptation behaviors and 
determinants of those 
behaviors.
Process for using Social 
and Behavior Change 
(SBC) in climate change 
adaptation:
1
2
3
4
5
6
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
3
OVERVIEW
While climate adaptation can bring substantial 
economic benefits and well-being to people, 
increasing the adoption of adaptation measures 
is often challenging, slow to show results, and 
ultimately having modest success. In sectors where 
SBC has been applied extensively in international 
development projects, including health and nutrition, 
and biodiversity conservation, it has demonstrated 
that behavior change can occur quickly and be 
effective (CORE Group SBC Working Group 2010). 
When deployed in conjunction with approaches 
used to inform climate resilience-building efforts, 
such as climate change vulnerability assessments, 
SBC approaches can strengthen and sustain 
adaptation interventions. 
WHAT IS UNIQUE ABOUT SBC FOR 
CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION?
The impacts of climate change are difficult to 
predict and vary greatly by geography and how far 
into the future projections go. Sea level rise, changes 
in precipitation patterns, increased temperatures, 
and potential increase in intensity and frequency 
of extreme weather events will impact local 
communities and countries differently depending on 
their geographic characteristics and their ability to 
prepare for and recover from climate events. 
The use of SBC for climate change adaptation is 
new. To apply SBC to climate change adaptation 
efforts, USAID staff should consider the following 
factors:
•	 Seeing is believing: When people individually 
or collectively consider climate science and 
projections of future change impacts, there 
can be “psychological distance” related to 
climate information that can make it seem 
unreal, intangible, and therefore not urgent. The 
uncertainty and perceived intangibility regarding 
when, where, and how the impacts of increasing 
climate variability and change might manifest 
and the lack of social norms governing how 
to address climate change challenge people’s 
natural way of processing information (Jones et 
al., 2014). Past experience is often a stronger 
driver of risk perception than objective, analytical 
information about future projections. Rewards 
associated with adaptation behavior likewise may 
be discounted because they will accrue in the 
future. Unfortunately, people’s perceived value of 
a reward (or avoidance of a loss) decreases when 
the reward or loss it would occur in the future 
or is uncertain to occur at all (Weber, 2010). 
Therefore, when climate change is viewed as a 
distant, future threat, the incentive for action that 
might a) reduce the threat and b) reward the 
adaptive action decreases. This can be combatted 
by giving people knowledge of direct, adverse 
impacts in nearby communities to which they can 
relate — even when those impacts are infrequent 
— as that can motivate people to adopt changes 
they perceive to be relevant to their own 
circumstances. 
•	 New knowledge is needed: Given increasing 
variability in weather and climate conditions, 
individual and collective frames of reference 
for temperature and rainfall patterns are less 
useful than in the past. Long-held traditional local 
knowledge, while important, is not sufficient 
for accurately determining weather and climate 
trends. Rural communities that have strong 
ties to the land and its natural resources are 
experiencing climate variability and change and 
adjusting their behavior and practices. Their local, 
anecdotal knowledge combined with improved 
understanding about the science of climate 
variability and change, including quantitative 
historical weather data and local climate 
projection data, will help communities continue 
to adjust their behavior to adapt to a changing 
climate.
•	 Must be relatable: Trust in climate information 
can be damaged when that information is 
communicated unclearly or without emphasizing 
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
4
OVERVIEW
that it comes with uncertainty. If the risk is not framed as uncertain or is framed as a global concern 
rather than a specific local risk, climate information may be demotivating and diminish people’s belief 
in their ability to adapt (Frank et al., 2011; Gifford et al., 2011; Kuruppu & Liverman, 2011).
BROADENING OUR VIEW OF WHAT INFLUENCES ADAPTATION
Conventional approaches sometimes assume that providing more and better information to people 
about the science of climate change will lead to better decisions and behaviors to reduce climate risk. 
While good scientific data and technical information are important, they are often insufficient for people 
to take adaptive action. Numerous factors, including values, beliefs, attitudes, preferences, habits, costs 
and benefits assessments, social norms, policies, and institutions interact to influence a behavior.
Broadening our view of possible facilitating factors (called enablers) and barriers to SBC for climate 
change adaptation — and identifying them through field-based or formative research that tests our 
understanding of these enablers and barriers — can be helpful in designing successful programs that 
support climate change adaptation programming and contribute to its success. 
REFERENCES
Frank, E., Eakin, H., & Lopez-Carr, D. (2011). Social identity, perception and motivation in adaptation to climate risk in the coffee sector of 
Chiapas, Mexico. Global Environmental Change 21: 66-76.
Gifford, R., Kormos, C., & McIntyre, A. (2011). Behavioral dimensions of climate change: drivers, responses, barriers, and interventions. WIRE’s 
Climate Change. doi: 10.1002/wcc.143 
Jones, R.N., Patwardhan, A., Cohen, S.J., Dessai, S., Lammel, A., Lempert, R.J., Mirza, M.M.Q., & von Storch, H. (2014). Foundations for decision 
making. In climate change 2014: impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Part A: global and sectoral aspects (pp. 195–228). Contribution of 
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, US. 
Kuruppu, N., & Liverman, D. (2011). Mental preparation for climate adaptation: The role of cognition and culture in enhancing adaptive 
capacity of water management in Kiribati. Global Environmental Change 21(2): 657–669.
Weber, E.U. (2010). What shapes perceptions of climate change? Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 1(3): 332-342.
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
5
OVERVIEW
Psychologist Jonathan Haidt first coined the analogy of the elephant, the rider, and the path1.  Each 
character represents critical aspects of human behavior that affect whether an individual is able and 
willing to change his or her behavior. The framework posits that within each individual, there is: 
•	 An elephant that represents the irrational side triggered by emotions, desires, perceived threats or 
opportunities; and 
•	 A rider that represents rational thoughts typically influenced by information and knowledge.
In addition, there is the external environment represented by: 
•	 The path that can support or prevent the rider and elephant from reaching their destination. 
All three aspects are critical to behavior change. SBC is the result of the alignment and coordination 
among the three factors. This framework demonstrates an evolution in holistic SBC thinking, moving 
the field beyond information, education, communication (IEC) focused on information provision and 
learning, behavior change communication (BCC) focused on individual factors, and social and behavioral 
change communication (SBCC) focused on communication to a discipline that recognizes that 
importance of each of these techniques, including all of them into an integrated practice.
The elephant, the rider, and the path framework will appear throughout the following modules to 
help readers think through situations in which SBC interventions may be applied to promote adaptive 
outcomes.
1  The elephant, rider, path conceptual framework was popularized by Chip and Dan Heath in the book Switch: How to Change 
Things When Change is Hard.	
A simple conceptual framework for SBC: 
THE ELEPHANT, THE RIDER, AND THE PATH
ELEPHANT
Represents our emotions; 
We need to be motivated 
to reach the destination
RIDER
Represents our rational thoughts; 
We need to know how to reach the 
destination
PATH
Represents external environment; It should be 
clear of barriers that could make reaching the 
goal harder
Source: Adapted from Heath 2010
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
6
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
Understanding, anticipating, and preparing for 
potential impacts of climate variability and change 
across different sectors are critical for creating 
a stable and resilient foundation for sustainable 
development. However, the uptake of actions that 
enhance adaptation and improve resilience hinges 
on the ability and willingness of individuals to 
change how they do things, which are determined 
by an array of cognitive, socioeconomic, political, 
and cultural factors. These dynamic factors shape or 
determine behavior, so recognizing them helps us 
understand the drivers of behavior, called behavioral 
determinants. Understanding the relevant behavioral 
determinants, in turn, allows us to identify the 
relevant behaviors that should be encouraged (or 
discouraged) and to develop SBC interventions that 
lead to desired adaptation behaviors. 
WHAT INFLUENCES BEHAVIOR 
CHANGE?
Multiple factors — often called “determinants” 
— contribute to the motivation, capability, and 
opportunity to change behavior. Behaviors may 
be motivated by predisposing factors (knowledge, 
beliefs, attitudes, skills, and values), enabling 
factors (social norms, access to information, 
distance to services, and government policies), or 
reinforcing factors (positive or negative effects of 
adopting a behavior that influence continuing the 
behavior) (Middlestadt et al., 2003). SBC helps 
development practitioners understand how these 
factors interact so that practitioners can design 
interventions that empower target groups, from 
individuals to organizations to communities, and 
create opportunities for these target beneficiaries 
to practice new or modified behaviors that can 
improve livelihoods and increase resilience. 
[MODULE I] Understanding Behavioral 
Determinants of Climate Change Adaptation
KEY TERMS
Formative Research: Formative research 
uses qualitative and quantitative methods 
to provide information for researchers 
to plan intervention programs. For SBC, 
formative research helps identify relevant 
behavioral determinants.
Behavioral Determinants: 
Perceptions, feelings, or beliefs shaped 
by socioeconomic, political, and cultural 
factors that can support or prevent 
the adoption of a specific behavior. 
Behavioral determinants are specific for 
each behavior, some common behavioral 
determinants relevant to influencing 
climate adaptation behavior include:
•	 Perceived risk/severity: an 
individual’s or community’s beliefs 
about 1) the existence and/or 
probability and 2) characteristics 
and/or severity of a given risk. 
Direct experience is generally 
more important to an individual’s 
risk perception than secondhand 
information. Recent personal 
experience with a risk strongly 
influences perception of the likelihood 
and danger of the risk (Clayton et al., 
2015; Roco et al., 2015).
•	 Perceived self-efficacy: an 
individual’s belief in his/her own 
ability to adapt. Individuals with a 
low estimation of their own ability 
or capacity to adapt are less likely to 
engage in adaptation behaviors.
•	 Perceived response efficacy: 
an individual’s belief about the 
effectiveness of a particular response 
to reduce a risk or achieve an 
outcome.
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
7
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
WHAT ARE KEY BEHAVIORAL 
DETERMINANTS OF ADAPTATION?
Using SBC to promote adaptation is not 
solely focused on adopting new techniques or 
technologies or discouraging harmful behaviors, 
but it involves instigating changes in psychological 
factors, interpersonal relationships, community life, 
and the broader enabling environment (Somda et 
al., 2017; Feng et al., 2017; Truelove et al., 2015). A 
successful SBC strategy focused on climate change 
adaptation is a three-step process. It should start by 
1) identifying the behaviors that need to change to 
encourage adaptation by individuals, households and 
communities; followed by 2) identifying the relevant 
behavioral determinants; and finally 3) identifying 
the societal dynamics (e.g., psychological factors, 
cultural factors) from which these behavioral 
determinants derive. Given the challenges of 
conveying climate risk (see Overview: Integrating 
Social and Behavior Change in Climate Change 
Adaptation), it is important to identify relevant 
behavioral determinants and understand how 
they influence the adaptation uptake. This analysis, 
in turn, informs the design of behavior change 
strategies and interventions aimed at encouraging 
behavioral intention, and ultimately, adoption of new 
behaviors. Behavioral determinants most relevant 
to a successful SBC strategy include: perceived 
risk, perceived social norms, perceived self-
efficacy and perceived response efficacy. These 
are described in the context of climate change 
adaptation.
Perceived risk plays an important role in 
adaptation behavior. People’s assessment of risk 
probability is often subjective and not directly 
aligned with actual risk probability. Instead, 
ELEPHANT
Recent experience impacts perception of 
climate risk and ability (or inability) to confront 
that risk. Perception of risk and response 
efficacy often tends to outweigh awareness or 
knowledge of risk.
Last month when a cyclone warning was 
issued, the storm’s trajectory shifted and 
did not reach Tatiana’s village. This recent 
experience may lead Tatiana to downplay her 
own exposure to potential risks associated 
with the imminent cyclone.
PATH
Perceived social norms and sense of identity can prevent or enable an 
adaptation behavior. These external environmental factors can also deter 
the rider and elephant from undertaking an adaptation behavior. 
If Tatiana seeks shelter now, it will keep her from doing business at 
her shop for three or four days. Business has already been slow, and 
she needs the income to provide basic needs and care for her children.
RIDER
Raising awareness of an identified climate 
risk and providing information about 
how to manage the risk can strongly 
influence how and whether the rider 
feels confident and capable of taking 
adaptive action.
Tatiana hears on the radio that a 
cyclone is expected to make landfall 
within the next 72 hours. The radio 
host advises listeners to seek shelter 
because homes may not withstand the 
strong winds.
WHO’S IN CHARGE – THE RIDER OR THE ELEPHANT?
What will Tatiana do in response to the cyclone alert?
Interventions that aim to encourage villagers like Tatiana to move out of harm’s way and seek shelter before a 
cyclone hits require appeals to all three aspects – the rider, the elephant, and the path.
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
8
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
experience with recent and/or severe local impacts 
of climate variability and change tends to have 
a greater influence on perceived risk. This is an 
important consideration for targeting effective 
ways to convey climate risks: when information is 
provided by a trusted source (e.g., person, agency, 
news outlet) and is relevant to people’s lives, it can 
positively influence risk perception and adaptation 
behavior.
Simply providing information about risk is not 
enough to prompt action, as such, perceived 
self-efficacy, perceived response efficacy, and 
perceived social norms are key determinants as 
well. Individuals need to feel capable of responding 
to climate variability and change (perceived self-
efficacy) and confident that their actions will be 
effective (perceived response efficacy). In addition, 
how society may perceive a particular action can 
strongly influence whether or not someone decides 
to follow through with it (perceived social norms).
For example, designers of a project promoting 
household rainwater collection may find that the 
following determinants are linked with collecting 
rainwater:
•	 Perceived risk: If heads of households believe 
that the risk of a drought is low, they may be 
less likely to install a rainwater collection system.
•	 Perceived social norms: If heads of 
households believe that people who are 
important to them (e.g., grandparents, 
neighbors) think that rainwater catchment 
systems are a bad idea, they may be less likely to 
install the system.
However, in a similar project in another country or 
area of the same country, we may find that different 
determinants are linked with collecting rainwater:
•	 Perceived self-efficacy: If heads of households 
feel confident in their ability to properly set up 
and maintain the rainwater collection system, they 
may be more likely to install one.
•	 Perceived response efficacy: If heads of 
households see neighbors collecting rainwater to 
increase household water supply and reduce time 
spent fetching water, they may be more likely to 
install a similar system.
Because behavioral determinants can be highly 
context-specific, designing a successful SBC 
intervention requires formative research to identify 
behavioral determinants and conduct an accurate 
analysis of those behavioral determinants. 
CONDUCTING FORMATIVE 
RESEARCH
In most cases, a literature review will not provide 
a complete picture of a community’s dynamics. A 
deeper analysis of the situation, and of the priority 
and influencing audiences, establishes a clear, detailed, 
and realistic picture of the opportunities, resources, 
challenges, and barriers to climate change adaptation. 
Qualitative and quantitative formative research 
is a practical and systematic approach that informs 
program planning and is a critical step in SBC strategy 
design. Formative research enables researchers to 
both 1) identify and understand the characteristics/
factors/ behavioral determinants of the priority 
audience and 2) shed light on the feasibility of the 
target behaviors an SBC strategy hopes to promote. 
SITUATION ANALYSIS
•	 The problem, its severity, its causes, and the broad 
context in which it exists
•	 The people affected by the problem (potential 
audiences)
•	 Factors inhibiting or facilitating behavior change (e.g., 
social norms, market conditions, regulations, policies)
AUDIENCE ANALYSIS
•	 Sociodemographic characteristics (e.g., sex, age, 
language, and religion)
•	 Geographic characteristics (e.g., where the audience 
lives and how that might impact behavior)
•	 Psychological characteristics (e.g., individual needs, 
hopes, concerns, and aspirations)
•	 Beliefs, knowledge, and current actions related to the 
adaptation or social issue
Table 1. Understanding Social Dynamics
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
9
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
The most appropriate way to identify determinants of key adaptation behaviors is to conduct formative 
research on a collection of possible behavioral determinants and determine which ones seem to influence 
people who have adopted the behaviors being promoted more than those who have not adopted the 
behaviors. Using quantitative data helps identify the determinants that are more likely to be truly linked to 
adoption, i.e., comparing adopters or “Doers” to non-adopters or “Non-doers”. 
Formative research involves two related objectives: (a) understanding the social dynamics of the priority 
audience and (b) determining the most appropriate analytical approach or approaches. One might 
imagine these two related analytical imperatives as intersecting priorities, with one on a horizontal axis 
and the other on a vertical axis. Both are critical to identifying the evidence needed to determine relevant 
behavioral determinants, target behaviors, and developing an SBC strategy and implementation plan. 
Table 2. Common Formative Research Analytical Approaches in SBC
FORMATIVE 
RESEARCH 
APPROACH
DESCRIPTION
Barrier Analysis
A rapid assessment tool that can help organizations explain low or no adoption of a promoted 
behavior, Barrier Analysis is primarily used at the beginning of a program to determine key messages, 
strategies, and activities for boosting behavior change. It has been used in food security, adaptation, 
child survival, and other community development programs. It can also be used in an ongoing 
program to evaluate ways to improve the promotion of specific behaviors that continue to show 
low adoption rates. At least 45 Doers and 45 Non-doers of the behavior are surveyed, so the 
sample size is relatively small. Barrier Analysis can be done rapidly by trained personnel after a five-
day training in the methodology. Using a team of 10 people to carry out Barrier Analysis, the data 
collection and analysis for each behavior studied can usually be completed in one or two days.
Risks, Attitudes, 
Norms, 
Abilities, and 
Self-regulation 
(RANAS)
Originally developed for the water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) sector in developing countries, 
the RANAS approach is applicable to a range of behaviors, settings, and populations. It includes four 
steps:
1.	
Identifying possible behavioral factors 
2.	
Measuring the behavioral factors and identifying the ones that are driving the behavior (by 
comparing Doers and Non-doers)
3.	
Selecting or developing corresponding behavior change techniques and strategies
4.	
Implementing and evaluating the behavior change techniques and strategies. 
Determinants are explored that deal with risk (perceived risk), attitudes, perceived social norms, 
ability (perceived self-efficacy/response efficacy), and self-regulation.  With RANAS, both behaviors 
and determinants are measured with a questionnaire and through observations both before and 
after implementation to control for intervention-independent changes in behavior. Behavior change 
strategies are judged to be effective when the before–after differences in behavior and the behavioral 
determinants are larger for the intervention group than for the control group. 
Identifying 
potential 
determinants 
within baseline 
Knowledge, 
Practice, and 
Coverage (KPC) 
survey data
Some programs include questions on a selection of behavioral determinants in their cross-sectional 
baseline surveys. This can require a large sample size when the number of Doers and Non-doers 
in a population is disproportionate (e.g., 15 percent Doers and 85 percent Non-doers). It can also 
lengthen the baseline questionnaire and interview time (sometimes significantly if many behaviors 
are assessed), but it does allow for a comparison of Doers and Non-doers. An advantage is that it is 
integrated into the program’s baseline survey, so — if staff are trained in more advanced statistical 
methods — they can better control for confounders and interaction between data points, and do 
multivariate analysis. 
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
10
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
Understanding the priority audience requires examining two key elements of the social dynamics that guide 
a population’s behavior: situation analysis, which looks at the climate risk (problem) and social conditions 
in which a population operates and makes decisions; and audience analysis, which looks at the specific 
psychological, geographical, cultural, and demographic characteristics of the priority audience. Table 1 
summarizes situational and audience analysis factors for consideration. 
The analytical approach or approaches used to guide the formative research can be customized based 
on considerations including the resources and time available for analysis, the sector or sectors in which 
the program falls, and whether the analysis is standalone or part of a larger data collection and analytical 
exercise. These issues should be considered when deciding what analytical method to use. Table 2, while not 
an exhaustive list, describes common formative research approaches often used for behavior change related 
formative research.
TEMPORAL DIMENSIONS OF ADAPTATION BEHAVIORS
Interventions that aim to reduce risk and encourage climate change adaptation require an understanding of 
the temporal dimensions of adaptation behaviors. BJ Fogg’s Behavior Grid suggests that behavior can change 
based on whether the target behavior is:
•	New/unfamiliar or familiar
•	One that needs to be increased, decreased, or stopped
•	One-time, i.e., undertaken for a specific duration of time, or permanent
For example, changing a community’s behavior away from clearcutting mangrove forests is often a “tough 
sell” for many communities that depend on mangrove wood as a resource for fuelwood and construction. 
While behavior changes in managing mangrove forests can support critical ecosystem services that provide 
Table 3. Illustrative behavior changes associated with sustainable mangrove management
TARGET ADAPTATION OBJECTIVE:
Strengthen sustainable management of mangrove ecosystems
ONE-TIME 
BEHAVIOR
• Community members join to create a mangrove management committee
• Mangrove management committee devises a rotation schedule that designates areas of the 
mangrove forest requiring improved management
• Mangrove management committee establishes beekeeping as an income generating activity 
permitted within certain areas
TIME-
BOUND 
BEHAVIOR
• Mangrove management committee monitors areas of the mangrove forest where mangrove wood 
harvesting is allowed for a period of six months and where seedlings are under protection for 
regeneration
• Mangrove management committee issues 5 wood harvesting permits per quarter and 30 
beekeeping permits per year
PERMANENT 
BEHAVIOR
• Mangrove management committee continues to meet regularly to oversee management of 
protected mangrove areas and issue permits
• Some community members decrease harvesting wood and increase honey production to diversify 
their income
Source: Adapted from BJ Fogg’s Behavior Grid
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
11
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
ADAPTATION 
BEHAVIOR
POSSIBLE 
DETERMINANTS
Farmers adopt water-efficient 
irrigation practices 
• Perceived severity (of water scarcity)
• Perceived risk (of water scarcity)
• Perceived response efficacy (that the irrigation 
practices work)
• Perceived self-efficacy (that one can do the 
irrigation practices)
• Perceived consequences (cost/ benefit of 
response behavior)
• Community identity
• Perceived social norms (i.e., whether others 
support the practice)
INTERVENTIONS
TO ADDRESS 
DETERMINANTS
• To increase perceived severity/risk, and 
change perceived consequences: Develop 
interpersonal communication training guide for 
extension workers about discussing drought 
risk in the context of climate change and water- 
efficient irrigation practices. Show farmers 
photos of devastating crop loss from drought in 
nearby regions.
• To build perceived self-efficacy: Support 
community-based video production of new 
irrigation practice; share videos in mediated 
sessions with target farmers; teach motivational 
interviewing techniques to build perceived self- 
efficacy; hold demonstration sessions.
• To build perceived response efficacy: Use 
side-by-side fields with and without water- 
efficient irrigation practices to demonstrate 
effectiveness.
• To build community identity and perceived 
social norms: Give public recognition to 
farmers adopting new irrigation practice, and 
host demonstration days at adopting farmers’ 
fields.
Heads of households adopt flood-resistant 
construction practices
• Perceived severity (of flooding)
• Perceived risk (of flooding)
• Perceived consequences (cost/ benefit of 
response behavior) and perceived response 
(action) efficacy
• Perceived self-efficacy
• Community identity
• Perceived social norms
• Cues to action
• To increase perceived severity, risk 
and response efficacy/perceived 
consequences: Hold interactive 
community information sessions about 
climate change-induced changes in flood 
risk to homes and response options. 
Create flood maps to show which houses 
are at increased risk. Show heads of 
households photos of devastated houses 
from flooding in nearby regions.
• To increase perceived social norms 
and community identity, and cues 
to action:  Implement flood-resistant 
demonstration homes in cooperation 
with homeowners with homes in highly 
visible locations; use guided testimonials to 
promote them.
• To increase perceived self-efficacy: 
Include hands-on training sessions during 
demonstration home (re)construction.
• To increase perceived risk and cues to 
action: Work with local radio and print 
media outlets on stories about flood risk 
and flood-resistant construction practices.
Table 4. Designing SBC for adaptation: An illustrative case
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
12
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
REFERENCES
Clayton, S., Devine-Wright, P., Stern, P., Whitmarsh, L., Carrico, A., Steg, L., Swim, J., & Bonnes, M. (2015). Psychological research and global climate 
change. Nature Climate Change 5: 640–646.
Feng, X., Liu, M., Huo, X., & Ma, W. (2017). What motivates farmers’ adaptation to climate change? The case of apple farmers of Shaanxi in China. 
Sustainability 9:519.
Fogg, B.J. (2012). Fogg behavior grid. Retrieved from 
http://www.behaviorgrid.org.
Middlestadt, S.E., Pareja, R., Hernandez, O., Maguire, S., Jimerson, A., & Randell, J. (2003). The CATALYST approach to behavior change: Using the 
CATALYST behavior change diagnostic framework. Washington, D.C.: Academy for Educational Development.
Roco, L., Engler, A., Bravo-Ureta, B. E., & Jara-Rojas, R. (2015). Farmers’ perception of climate change in Mediterranean Chile. Regional 
Environmental Change 15(5): 867–879.
Somda, J., Zougmore, R., Sawadogo, I., Bationo, B., Buah, S., & Abasse, T. (2017). Adaptation processes in agriculture and food security: insights 
from evaluating behavioral changes in West Africa. In Uitto J., Puri J., & van den Berg R. (Eds.), Evaluating climate change action for sustainable 
development (pp. 252–269). Springer, Cham. 
Truelove, H., Carrico, A., & Thabrew, L. (2015). A socio-psychological model for analyzing climate change adaptation: A case study of Sri Lankan 
paddy farmers. Global Environmental Change 31:85–97.
economic benefits to individuals and communities over time, such as protection against coastal flooding 
and improved fisheries health, progress toward adaptation is often challenging. Its benefits are not always 
tangible or immediate, and its costs to livelihood security or other important dynamics may be very clear, 
immediate and significant, i.e., reduced income.
Table 3 provides a tool for assessing the nature of behavior change as it relates to a specific adaptation 
objective. Specifically, it identifies relationships between specific behaviors associated with that adaptation 
objective, and the context in which these behaviors might occur.	
MATCHING ADAPTATION CONTEXTS WITH SBC APPROACHES
Often interventions begin with 1) an assumption that information is missing and therefore needed, and 2) 
an assumption that a set of key benefits of a given behavior are the same benefits or motivators that will 
drive behavior change. Even a relatively focused change in individual behavior — for example, properly 
using a mosquito net — may involve changing and coordinating the behaviors of multiple actors at multiple 
levels to enable the behavior. Because various actors may be motivated or discouraged by different factors, 
assessing determinants provides essential insight that may shape how to target and influence behaviors. 
Table 4 provides a framework for linking target end behaviors in adaptation, determinants of behavior 
change, and interventions that encourage behavior change.
SBC TIP:
SBC programs apply behavior change models and theories based on specific behavioral determinants. When designing SBC 
programs, there is not one correct theory to use for a given situation, but some theories may fit better than others. Each 
SBC project should develop its own theory of change drawing on concepts from the most relevant models and theories to 
achieve behavioral objectives (See Module 2: Defining SBC Objectives to Encourage Climate Change Adaptation). 
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
13
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
Performance indicators for adaptation interventions are often 
stated as general objectives that may be challenging to measure 
(e.g., integration of climate change into local-level planning 
increased; adoption of local solutions to climate variability and 
change increased). When developing an SBC strategy to encourage 
climate change adaptation, USAID should first base adaptation 
objectives on recommended practices (e.g., incorporating weather 
and climate information into water resource management, river 
basin management, and/or disaster risk management plans), and 
then analyze each one by its social and behavioral determinants 
to develop a set of SBC objectives for each. Effective SBC aligns 
overarching objectives with specific behaviors that are directly 
linked to improved outcomes.
WHICH BEHAVIORS SHOULD BE TARGETED 
FOR ADAPTATION?
Adaptation can involve adopting or modifying a range of 
behaviors depending on the target group or priority audience. 
Situation analysis and formative research help practitioners 1) 
assess which behaviors are feasible and effective behaviors to 
promote, 2) understand priority audiences and groups that 
may influence them (influencing audiences), and 3) unpack 
behavioral determinants from the perspective of target groups 
to focus interventions and identify entry points (see Module 1: 
Understanding Behavioral Determinants of Climate Change 
Adaptation). 
However, adaptation measures are often highly context specific 
because the impacts of climate variability and change are 
experienced differently by different groups. Consider the following 
groups:
•	
Coastal fishing communities
•	
Nomadic pastoralists
•	
Urban slum-dwellers
While the overarching adaptation objective may be similar across these groups, each represents a potential 
priority audience with different attitudes and ways of coping with climate variability and adapting to 
climate change. For this reason, it is more effective to refocus the adaptation objective in SBC terms. 
[MODULE 2] Defining SBC Objectives to 
Encourage Climate Change Adaptation
KEY TERMS
SBC Audiences
Priority audience: a group 
whose behavior must change 
in order to improve the 
adaptation outcome.
Influencing audience: 
individuals who have the most 
significant and direct influence 
(positive or negative) over 
the priority audience. The 
influencing audience can 
exist at different levels: at 
the family level, community 
level (e.g., peers, relatives, 
teachers, community or faith-
based leaders) or national 
or regional level (e.g., policy 
makers, media personnel, 
government leaders).
Segmentation: A key 
component of audience 
analysis, segmentation is 
the process of dividing a 
large audience into smaller, 
more homogenous groups 
(segments) with similar needs, 
values, or characteristics.
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
14
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
WHOM TO REACH, AND HOW? 
Just as different groups have distinctive views 
and ways of responding to climate variability and 
change, so too do they respond differently to SBC 
interventions. Recognizing this, SBC looks to market 
or audience segmentation – the process of dividing 
a large audience into smaller groups (segments) 
that have similar needs, values, or characteristics 
to determine how to effectively reach target, or 
priority, audiences (Health Compass, 2017). For 
example:
•	 Certain segments are more heavily 
impacted by the problem: For example, 
women tend to be more vulnerable than men 
to the impacts of climate change because they 
face everyday forms of social, economic, and 
political inequality.
•	 Certain population segments have 
significantly different worldviews, needs, 
or concerns:  For example, men who herd 
livestock may proudly view pastoralism as 
a traditional way of life, while youth who 
participate in pastoralism increasingly view it as 
nonviable livelihood.
•	 Certain segments are more difficult to 
reach: For example, coastal fisher folk may not 
have access to television or radio and need to 
be reached through community workers. 
These factors interact to influence behavioral 
determinants. For example:
•	Women prefer not to implement upgrades 
to their homes because men are traditionally 
responsible for constructing shelters 
(determinant: perceived social norms).
•	Youth may not see the advantages of mapping 
livestock corridors because the past migration 
season was particularly difficult due to drought 
(determinant: perceived response efficacy).
•	Fisher folk may have a low estimation of their 
ability to rehabilitate mangroves because they 
lack skills and authority necessary to plant 
and sustainably manage mangrove stands 
(determinant: perceived self-efficacy).
While SBC strategies to encourage the adoption of 
adaptation behaviors will depend on the behavioral 
determinants identified through formative research, 
most effective SBC interventions target people at 
multiple levels of social organization and in multiple 
roles (e.g., individuals, households, communities, 
leaders) simultaneously, focusing on the behavioral 
determinants that are most closely related to 
priority behaviors. 
ADAPTATION OBJECTIVE
 Increase adoption of local solutions to decrease impacts of climate variability and change
Coastal fishing communities
•	 Designate fishing zones 
to prevent overfishing 
and improve fisheries 
management
•	 Plant new mangroves in a 
degraded forest as a flood 
protection measure
Nomadic pastoralists
•	 Establish community pasture 
and water management 
committees
•	 Map livestock grazing 
corridors to integrate into 
local land use plans and 
identify contingencies
Urban slum-dwellers
•	 Implement low-cost upgrades 
or strengthen housing 
infrastructure to be more 
resistant to extreme events
•	 Learn about evacuation 
procedures and where to 
seek shelter
Refocused in SBC terms:
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
15
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
For example, a project may want to help urban slum-
dwellers identify ways to implement upgrades to 
their homes as a medium-term solution to increasing 
climate variability, framing upgrades as a way to 
avoid loss. The project could choose to achieve that 
objective by:
•	Holding training sessions with mothers in areas 
that have experienced a recent severe storm on 
their options for more weather-resistant materials, 
and how to use them, targeting the individual 
(self) and interpersonal levels to address 
determinants like perceived risk and perceived 
self-efficacy;
•	Engaging men and community opinion leaders 
about simple upgrades that can be undertaken by 
women as an adaptation measure, targeting the 
interpersonal and community levels to address 
determinants like perceived social norms; and/or
•	Constructing model weather-resistant public 
buildings around marketplaces, churches, and 
mosques, and working with local vendors 
to ensure that materials are available for 
construction (e.g., used plastic jugs), targeting the 
community and enabling environment levels and 
addressing determinants like perceived response 
efficacy.
As program development moves from formative 
research to identification of behavioral determinants 
and target behaviors, and into thinking about specific 
behavior change-focused activities through which 
to promote target behaviors, SBC can be put into 
practice by defining and matching an SBC objective 
with a behavior change technique through a specific 
intervention channel. Table 5 provides examples of 
different techniques and how they might be applied. 
MOTIVATE THE ELEPHANT TO 
SEEK SHELTER by boosting a sense 
of perceived risk and response efficacy. 
Showing villagers photos of homes in a 
nearby village that were damaged during the 
last cyclone encourages people like Tatiana to 
err on the side of caution and get her family 
to safety ahead of the imminent storm.
SHAPE THE PATH TOWARD SEEKING 
SHELTER by ensuring shelter locations are set up in familiar 
locations, easy to get to, and equipped to meet basic needs for 
villagers like Tatiana and her family. A shelter that is accessible, 
safe, and meets basic needs assuages Tatiana’s concerns about 
caring for her family, allowing her to maintain compliance with 
social norms.
DIRECT THE RIDER TO 
SEEK SHELTER by shaping 
perceptions of self-efficacy. Engaging 
local radio stations to share shelter 
locations and the safest means of 
traveling to the site will help listeners 
like Tatiana understand their options 
and take action.
GETTING THE ELEPHANT AND THE RIDER ON THE RIGHT (AND SAME) PATH
To elicit a change in villagers’ behavior to take shelter during a cyclone, and instill risk-reducing practices, the 
village council issuing the cyclone warning might:
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
16
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
Table 5. Types of SBC techniques
SBC 
TECHNIQUE
DESCRIPTION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
ADAPTATION 
INTERVENTION 
LEVEL
Reward and 
threat
Makes the adoption of behaviors seem attractive or makes the failure to 
adopt practices seem threatening. This is linked to the concept of “value 
exchange” (i.e., what desirable outcome would the audience receive for 
its compliance, or what undesirable outcome would it avoid).
Introduce incentives 
for fisher folk to plant 
mangrove seedlings 
Shaping 
knowledge
Helps people to understand what adaptation behaviors are, how to 
perform them, and where to acquire the technologies and materials 
needed.
Support district to 
launch a campaign 
of demonstration 
communities within 
mangrove ecosystems
Changing 
the physical 
environment 
Involves structural changes to the surrounding environment. Also refers 
to resetting environmental defaults so that a new behavior is easier to 
sustain due to sympathetic cues and triggers.
Support local pasture 
management committee 
to demarcate 
community pasture to 
allow for regeneration 
Social support
Involves providing resources and facilitating influence. “Seeding” a new 
behavior with a trusted person or group helps ensure the new behavior 
appears desirable and starts to become the norm, leading people to 
want to emulate and model it.
Train community 
workers to advise 
on shelter areas and 
disaster risk reduction 
procedures
Goals, planning, 
and monitoring
Working with an audience’s goals involves unearthing its aspirations, 
ambitions, and intentions, reframing the new behavior as a way of 
achieving the goals, and helping the audience realize its goals through the 
medium of the new behavior.
Help families to create 
purchasing plans for 
weather-resistant home 
upgrades and linking to 
their aspirations
Comparisons
Provides a choice of options and the opportunity for people to 
compare what is available with the options chosen by their peers, 
neighbors, friends, and family members.
Demonstrate the 
availability of various 
construction materials in 
the local market
Identity and self-
belief
Targets audiences according to their actual or aspirational roles. Gender 
and other roles determine how we perceive ourselves, how we are 
perceived, and how we are expected to think and act. Linked to this 
is the process of increasing people’s sense of self-efficacy and building 
momentum behind a desire to change their behavior.
Empower youth to 
apply their interest in 
modern technology 
to improve pastoral 
livelihoods
Regulation
Regulatory mechanisms include bans and restrictions, or industry 
standards. They are a measure of enforcement as opposed to 
persuasion, and can amplify “softer” behavior change techniques.
Encourage local fisheries 
management committee 
to impose restrictions 
on quantity and/or size 
of fish harvested
REFERENCES
The Health Compass. (2017). How to do Audience Segmentation. Retrieved from 
https://www.thehealthcompass.org/how-to-guides/how-do-audience-segmentation. 
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
17
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
To  create an SBC strategy and implementation 
plan that encourage climate change adaptation 
and improves resilience outcomes, USAID and 
implementing partners can use the elements 
described thus far in this guide, including SBC 
concepts, planning tools and methods, taking 
into consideration the unique characteristics and 
challenges of climate change adaptation (see 
Overview: Integrating Social and Behavior Change 
in Climate Change Adaptation). 
In the design of an SBC strategy and 
implementation plan, USAID and implementing 
partners should follow the process described in this 
guide:
1.	Conduct formative research to understand 
the societal dynamics (e.g., socioeconomic 
factors, cultural factors) of the target population 
(See Module 1: Understanding Behavioral 
Determinants of Climate Change Adaptation).
2.	Use formative research to identify relevant 
behavioral determinants (e.g., perceived 
risk, perceived self-efficacy). (See Module 1: 
Understanding Behavioral Determinants of 
Climate Change Adaptation).
3.	Use identified behavioral determinants in 
combination with relevant climate variability and 
change impacts to the population to articulate 
the relevant behaviors targeted for change 
(See Module 2: Defining SBC Objectives to 
Encourage Climate Change Adaptation).
4.	Develop an SBC strategy and implementation 
plan that incorporate the target behaviors, as 
well as specific interventions that will influence 
these target behaviors.
DEVELOPING AN SBC STRATEGY
A climate change adaptation-focused SBC strategy 
and implementation plan should provide the 
rationale for undertaking specific activities that 
encourage adaptive behavior and a roadmap 
for how to obtain the targeted results. These 
documents should capture the relevant behavioral 
determinants and target behaviors necessary 
to obtain adaptation outcomes in response to 
projected climate variability and change while 
providing direction to inform programmatic actions, 
including development of communications products, 
training materials, and other activities. 
An SBC strategy does not have to follow a 
particular structure; however, to be effective and 
obtain buy in from beneficiaries, implementers and 
other stakeholders, it should be constructed taking 
into consideration the following:
•	Targeted formative research findings
•	Key adaptation behaviors to be promoted 
identified
•	SBC objectives clearly articulated
•	Priority audience clearly identified
•	SBC implementation plan developed with 
indicators related to implementation of 
communication/non- communication activities, 
including changes in reach, recall, acceptability, 
behavioral determinants, behaviors, and 
outcomes
•	Well-defined communication activities, messages 
(and messaging channels), and supporting 
materials
•	Well -defined non-communication activities and 
services to reach priority audience (e.g., nudges, 
incentives, subsidies)
Several approaches to developing an SBC strategy 
exist, including the Designing for Behavior Change, 
Communication for Change (C-Change), Health 
Communication Capacity Collaborative (HC3), 
and RANAS approaches.
[MODULE 3] Developing an SBC Strategy and 
Implementation Plan for Climate Change Adaptation
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
18
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
CREATING AN SBC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
A completed SBC strategy should be accompanied by an implementation plan, which serves as the 
management document guiding SBC strategy implementation, articulating the specific SBC strategy activities, 
how they are linked to the behaviors targeted for change (and to the behavioral determinants for the 
relevant behaviors), who is responsible for implementing the activities, the activity implementation schedule, 
and indicators to measure activity implementation progress. The SBC implementation plan is similar in some 
respects to a monitoring and evaluation plan.
Table 6 presents an illustrative SBC strategy implementation plan for a project seeking to encourage the 
uptake of postharvest practices with maize producers. 
This strategy: 1) demonstrates an understanding of the problem and situation; 2) identifies the key 
behavior to be promoted, the priority group (maize producers), the influencing groups (elders, fathers, 
and grandfathers) and characteristics of each group; and 3) matches SBC interventions with the identified 
determinants of the behavior.
Target groups and 
characteristics
Matching SBC 
interventions with 
determinants
Activities
Timeframe
Activity 
monitoring 
and evaluation 
indicators
Skills / 
resources 
/ training 
required
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Target behavior: Producers store their maize in silos before consuming it
Priority group:
• Men and women who 
are farmers from 17 
to 80 years of age, 
average 44 years old
• All speak Q’eqchi’ 
language
• Maize harvest and 
postharvest practices 
have been established 
through generations
• Low economic status
• Most are subsistence 
production farmers
Influencing groups
• Community elders
• Fathers and 
grandfathers
• Elders do not approve 
of new practices and 
instead favor traditional 
methods established 
through generations
• Perceived self-
efficacy: Strengthen 
the perception that 
producers can store 
their corn in solos 
with their current 
resources and skills.
• Perceived social 
norms: Strengthen 
the perception that 
families can support 
the use of silos for 
storing corn before 
consuming it.
• Provide training on 
what silos are, the range 
of options available on 
the local market, and 
ways to obtain one.
• Engage community 
elders, fathers, and 
other family members 
in training sessions and 
facilitate opportunities 
to store corn in silos. 
• Monitor behavior 
indicators through 
Knowledge, Practice, 
and Coverage (KPC) 
survey
»» If target and 
influencing groups are 
being reached and 
activities are being 
implemented but 
there is no observed 
change in target 
behavior, reassess 
1) appropriateness 
of activity and 2) 
compatibility of 
interventions and 
determinants.
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
• Number of 
training sessions 
with priority 
group
• Number of 
community 
events organized 
with influencing 
groups
Resource materials:
• Example silos for 
demonstration 
and training 
activities
• One-page 
illustrated handout 
with key messages, 
information about 
local silo suppliers
Source: Adapted from Designing for Behavior Change: For Agriculture, Natural Resource Management, and Gender.
Table 6: Illustrative SBC strategy implementation plan
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
19
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 4: EXAMPLE
OVERVIEW
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
OVERVIEW
MODULE 2: DEFINE
MODULE 3: IMPLEMENT
MODULE 1: UNDERSTAND
REFERENCES
Food Security and Nutrition Network. (2013). Designing for Behavior Change: For Agriculture, Natural Resource Management, 
Health and Nutrition. Retrieved from https://www.fsnnetwork.org/designing-behavior-change-agriculture-natural-resource-
management-health-and-nutrition. 
Health Communication Capacity Collaborative (HC3). (2017). How to Develop SBCC Creative Materials. Retrieved from https://
www.thehealthcompass.org/how-to-guides/how-develop-sbcc-creative-materials. 
 HC3. (2017). Integrated SBCC Programs Implementation Kit: Formative Research. Retrieved from https://sbccimplementationkits.
org/integrated-sbcc-programs/design/research/. 
Knowledge for Health (K4Health). (2014). Social and Behavior Change Technical Reference Materials. Retrieved from https://www.
k4health.org/toolkits/sbc-trm. 
Risks, Attitudes, Norms, Abilities, and Self-regulation (RANAS) Mosler. (2017). The RANAS approach to systematic behavior change. 
Retrieved from https://www.ranasmosler.com/ranas. 
