PAPERS
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101	
1	
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101
Climate change and healthy ageing: An 
assessment of the impact of climate 
hazards on older people
Electronic supplementary material:
The online version of this article contains supplementary material.
Cite as: Prina M, Khan N, Akhter Khan S, Caicedo JC, Peycheva A, Seo V, Xue S, Sadana R. 
Climate change and healthy ageing: An assessment of the impact of climate hazards on older 
people. J Glob Health 2024;14:04101.
Matthew Prina1
, Nusrat 
Khan1
, Samia Akhter 
Khan2,3
, Jorge Castro 
Caicedo4
, Anna Peycheva5
,
Veri Seo6
, Siqi Xue7
, Ritu 
Sadana8
1Population Health Sciences Institute, 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, England, UK
2Department of Global Health & Social 
Medicine, King’s College London, 
London, England, UK
3Department of Health Service & 
Population Health, King’s College 
London, London, England, UK
4East London NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, England, UK
5Department of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, King’s College London, 
London, England, UK
6Department of Psychiatry, Cambridge 
Health Alliance, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA
7Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
8World Health Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland
Correspondence to:
Dr Ritu Sadana
Head, Ageing and Health
Division of Universal Health Coverage – Life 
Course, World Health Organization, Geneva
Switzerland
sadanar@who.int
Background Climate change not only directly impacts older people’s longevity 
but also healthy ageing, which is the process of maintaining physical and men­
tal capacities while optimising functional abilities. The urgency to address both 
population ageing and climate change necessitates a rethink and assessment of 
the impact of climate change on older people. This includes identifying what 
can be done to anticipate, mitigate and adapt to climate change and engage old­
er persons.
Methods A review of climate change and healthy ageing forms the basis of evi­
dence in this report. We developed a comprehensive search to assess current lit­
erature, combining terms related to ageing and climate change across four major 
data sets and assessing articles published up to the end of 2021.
Results We summarised the current and future impact of climate change on old­
er people and developed a framework identifying climate change impacts on old­
er persons, recognising social and environmental determinants of healthy ageing. 
Major hazards and some key exposure pathways include extreme temperatures, 
wildfire, drought, flooding, storm and sea level rise, air quality, climate-sensi­
tive infectious diseases, food and water insecurities, health and social care system 
displacement, migration, and relocation. Strategies to address climate change re­
quire interventions to improve systems and infrastructure to reduce vulnerabili­
ty and increase resilience. As a heterogeneous group, older people’s perceptions 
of climate change should be integrated into climate activism. Increasing climate 
change literacy among older people and enabling them to promote intergener­
ational dialogue will drive the development and implementation of equitable 
solutions. Pathways may operate via direct or indirect exposures, requiring lon­
gitudinal studies that enable assessment of exposures and outcomes at multiple 
time points, and analyses of cumulative impacts of hazards across the life course.
Conclusions The lack of systematic reviews and primary research on the impact 
of most climate hazards, except for heat, on older people is apparent. Future re­
search should include outcomes beyond mortality and morbidity and assess how 
older people interact with their environment by focusing on their capacities and 
optimising abilities for being and doing what they value.
© 2024 The Author(s)
Extreme heat, natural disasters (including floods, typhoons, and hurricanes) and 
changing patterns of infection due to climate change are predicted to lead to an 
additional 250 000 deaths a year worldwide from 2030 to 2050 [1]. Defined as the 
‘greatest threat to societies and global health of the 21st century’, climate change is 
characterised by a long-term shift in weather patterns at a global level [2]. Climate 
Prina et al. 
PAPERS
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101	
2	
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101
change is the result of human activities, such as the burning of coal, gas, and oil, which produce carbon and 
nitrous oxide that linger in the atmosphere, or changes in land use as well as agricultural practices, such as 
deforestation, and increased livestock farming [1]. Those drivers are not only modifying the environments 
in which we live but also have direct repercussions on our lives and health.
Climate change is an existential threat to humans, necessitating urgent and comprehensive action [3]. The 
combined global challenges of climate change and population ageing exemplify the paramount issues of this 
century, requiring simultaneous consideration and action, with both having significant impacts on health 
[4,5]. Climate change impacts every life, but older people are disproportionally affected by these changes 
[6]. This is due to a heightened vulnerability of older individuals, which stems from physiological, social, 
and contextual factors raising their risk of adverse health effects due to climate change [7] (Figure 1). For 
example, during Hurricane Katrina, 71% of the fatalities were older people, despite them only being 15% of 
the population [8]. A recent study assessing floods across 761 communities worldwide also found stronger 
associations between floods and mortality risk in sites with larger proportions of older people, combined 
to those that had a smaller older population [9]. Higher mortality risk among older people, compared to 
younger, have also been identified in the case of heat [10], with a 45-year study in Scotland reporting the 
oldest age group (85+) as the most affected by extreme cold and heat exposure, particularly for cardiovascu­
lar mortality [11]. As reported later in this paper, increased mortality is not the only outcome that highlights 
the increased vulnerability of older people. Despite this, as a group, older persons have often been neglected 
in studies on the impact of climate change. This is a major oversight for older persons living in all regions 
and countries, not only in high-income countries: already two-thirds of older people live in middle-income 
countries. Moreover, the proportion of older persons globally is increasing; by 2030, one in six people will be 
60 years of age or older globally, and by 2050, one in five will represent over two billion older people [1,12].
Global policies are taking note and can be used as a platform to address the needs and rights of all older 
people. In December 2020, the United Nations (UN) launched the Decade of Healthy Ageing for 2021–
2030, uniting various stakeholders to enhance the well-being of older people in line with the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) – with healthy ageing defined as ‘the process of developing and maintain the 
functional ability that enables well-being in older age’ [12]. This is an opportunity to rethink and assess the 
impact of climate change on older people, as all UN Member States have endorsed that the environment 
plays a crucial role in promoting healthy ageing [13,14]. Climate change impacts older individuals and the 
process to optimise healthy ageing affects not only longevity but people’s abilities to be and do what they 
value [10,11]. This includes people’s ‘intrinsic capacities’ and a person’s interaction with their local environ­
ment including the natural environment. The interaction between the person and their environment enables 
or hinders people to function in families, communities or society with supportive environments optimising 
a person’s ‘functional ability’ at any level of ‘intrinsic capacity [7,12]. Together, these shape how individual 
older people experience well-being.
The overall aim of this paper is to assess the state of the evidence on the impact of climate change on older 
people. By constructing this conceptual framework, we aim to create a foundation for discerning adaptation 
Figure 1. Framework of the impact of climate change on older people.
The impact of climate hazards on older people
PAPERS
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101	
3	
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101
strategies, policies, and actions that can mitigate the present and future consequences of climate change on 
older people and healthy ageing. Specifically, we aim to: 1) assess the impact of different climate hazards 
on older people and identify the exposure pathways; 2) develop a conceptual framework to summarise the 
impact of climate change on older people; 3) identify vulnerabilities at an individual and societal level that 
put older people at a higher risk of being impacted by climate change.
METHODS
The evidence discussed in this report was identified by using a combination of search strategies (Box 1), 
which helped us in developing a theoretical framework.
Box 1. Methodology of screening and identifying relevant articles
The searches were carried out up to December 2021 and by screening the first 50 records on Google Scholar. 
After deduplication, 2577 articles underwent title and abstract screening (this includes the articles from Google 
and Google Scholar) for the primary paper screening. For the screening of reviews, a total of 3242 articles were 
initially screened after deduplication. Reference lists of these papers were also reviewed, and relevant articles were 
selected. Given the lack of evidence specific to older people, we did not limit those searches to older people.
Step 1: Rapid review
Data sets: Medline, EMBASE, PSYCINFO, GLOBAL HEALTH (up to 2021), Google Scholar (first 50 records), 
Google (first 50 records)**
Search terms:Climate change and (older OR older adults OR agein* OR agin* OR aged)
Step 2: Reviews of reviews
Data sets: Medline (filter: 2011-2022) and Google Scholar (first 50 records)* & **
Search terms:
1 - climate AND review AND wildfire* (n = 100 results in medline)
2 - climate AND review AND drought* (n = 810 results in medline)
3 - (climate change* OR global warming) AND (infectious disease* OR communicable OR tropical disease* 
OR zoonotic OR vector?born* OR water?born* OR food?born*) AND (review) (n = 950 in medline)
4 - (climate change* OR global warming) AND (review) AND (flood* OR sea?level OR typhoon* OR 
hurricane*) (n = 519 in medline)
5 - (Heat OR heat wave* OR warm*) AND (health OR health risk*) AND (climate chang* OR global 
warming) AND (review) (n = 763 in medline)
Step 3: Screening of other grey literature sources.
On top of searching Google, we also screened for potentially relevant reports from key organisations including 
IPCC, WHO, United Nations, Help Age International, etc.
* Separate searches conducted for heat, droughts, wildfires, flooding, sea-level rises, and climate-sensitive 
infectious diseases
** Not limited to only older people as there would be few reviews that focused specifically on the impact of 
hazards in later life. However, we were primarily only interested in papers that focused on older people or 
where the evidence was transferrable to later life, defined as:
1. Studies/articles referring to older people using a pre-defined cut-off age.
2. Studies that reported a mean age of 60 years or above
3. Studies reporting specific estimates stratified by age groups, including an older age group.
RESULTS
Below, we introduce the main hazards and some key exposure pathways identified from the search.
Impact of climate change on older people: Conceptual framework
Climate change impacts older people’s capacities and abilities in diverse ways through a complex network 
of interconnected pathways. We have conceptualised a framework – a theory of change – on the impact of 
climate change on older people (Figure 1). This is a further development of the initial framework for healthy 
ageing that was created by Sadana et al. [15] integrating a social and environmental determinants of health 
model and the International Classification of Functional, Disability and Health (ICF). This approach empha­
sises the broader environmental context, encompassing climate dynamics, and involving systematic organ­
Prina et al. 
PAPERS
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101	
4	
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101
isation and evaluation to promote healthy ageing. Rooted in the biopsychosocial model, the ICF facilitates 
the precise assessment of interventions at individual and societal levels, considering the influence of climate 
and environmental determinants on health outcomes [16]. Terms that are used throughout are based on the 
definitions of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [17], the World Health Organization 
(WHO) Baseline Report for the Decade of Healthy Ageing [18] and WHO’s strategy on health, environment 
and climate change [19] (Box 2).
Box 2. Key terminologies
Healthy ageing is defined as ‘the process of developing and maintaining the functional ability that enables well-
being in older age.’ There are three main components of healthy ageing: functional ability, intrinsic capacity, and 
environment [18].
Intrinsic capacity represents every mental and physical capacity that a person can resort to. It includes several 
domains, including cognition, locomotor capacity (physical movement), psychological capacity, sensory capacity 
(hearing and vision), and vitality (energy and equilibrium) [18].
Environments are where people live and conduct their lives. They include natural and built environments, but also 
communities and broader societies and all factors within them [18].
Functional ability is the combination of the intrinsic capacity of a person, the environment they live and their 
interaction with the environment. It ‘enables people to be and to do what they have a reason to value’ [18]. It includes 
several domains: a) meeting basic needs to ensure an adequate standard of living; b) learning, growing, and making 
decisions; c) being mobile; d) building and maintaining relationships; and e) contributing to societies.
Healthy life expectancy is an indicator reflecting the years spent in good health, which combines morbidity 
(disease, illness or injury) and mortality (death) [20]. It is an important outcome indicator that has been endorsed 
in the Decade of Healthy Ageing, and is also WHO’s overall indicator to measure impact of its work on population 
health [18].
Hazard has been defined as ‘the potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event or trend that may 
cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure, livelihoods, 
service provisions, ecosystems and environmental resources’ [20].
Exposure is defined as ‘the presence of people, livelihoods, species or ecosystems, environmental functions, services 
and resources, infrastructure, or economic, social or cultural assets in places that could be adversely affected.’ In this 
section we mainly talk about exposure pathways to highlight factors that coexist with each other and with hazards 
and that can positively or negatively influence outcomes [20].
Impact has been defined as ‘adverse outcomes on natural and human systems, where risks result from the 
interactions of climate-related hazards, exposure, and vulnerability.’ Impacts can affect humans, natural, social and 
built environments [21].
Vulnerability is defined as ‘the propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected. Vulnerability encompasses 
a variety of concepts and elements including sensitivity or susceptibility to harm and lack of capacity to cope and 
adapt’ [20].
Certain hazards can compound each other, while others result from preceding hazards, for instance, 
droughts arising from extreme temperature and rainfall patterns. For simplicity, we have categorised all 
hazards together and have concentrated solely on primary hazards with the potential to impact older indi­
viduals, acknowledging the existence of other hazards. The ramifications of climate change on healthy age­
ing can manifest through intricate, either direct or indirect, exposure pathways. These hazards exert their 
influence on older individuals by directly shaping their healthy life expectancy and by affecting fundamen­
tal aspects of healthy ageing, including intrinsic capacity, functional ability, and the environment.
Certain hazards can compound each other, while others result from preceding hazards, for instance, 
droughts arising from extreme temperature and rainfall patterns. For simplicity, we have categorised all 
hazards together and have concentrated solely on primary hazards with the potential to impact older indi­
viduals, acknowledging the existence of other hazards. The ramifications of climate change on healthy age­
ing can manifest through intricate, either direct or indirect, exposure pathways. These hazards exert their 
influence on older individuals by directly shaping their healthy life expectancy and by affecting fundamen­
tal aspects of healthy ageing, including intrinsic capacity, functional ability, and the environment.
It is also imperative to underscore that the older population is heterogeneous, displaying substantial diver­
sity within it. Consequently, not all older adults are equally vulnerable and characteristics (e.g. place of 
residence, social position, national and political environment, etc.) across subgroups should be considered 
when developing policies.
The impact of climate hazards on older people
PAPERS
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101	
5	
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101
Major hazards
Extreme temperatures
Globally, ambient temperatures have risen by more than 1°C compared to pre-industrial levels, a change 
primarily driven by human activities, deteriorating air quality, and the accumulation of greenhouse gases 
that enhance the greenhouse effect [19,22]. These temperature shifts have profound implications for 
human health, especially among older individuals (Figure S1 in the Online Supplementary Document). 
Thermoregulatory abilities diminish with age, making older adults more susceptible to extreme temperatures 
[23]. Additionally, the ability to perceive temperature changes decreases with age, compounding the risk 
of hypo- or hyperthermia with continued exposure to extreme temperatures [24]. Consequently, there has 
been a rise in morbidity and mortality linked to extreme heat, a trend expected to continue in the coming 
years. High temperatures can lead to increased overall morbidity and mortality in several ways. For instance, 
heart failure can result from heatstroke [25,26]. Dehydration, often exacerbated by inadequate access to 
clean water, has been linked to increased incidence of acute kidney injury and renal failure. Heatwaves 
also worsen respiratory health, as evidenced by reports of increased respiratory-related hospital admissions 
during heatwaves in Europe and North America [27]. Many older people have pre-existing medical con­
ditions such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and asthma, which put them at high risk for heat-related 
morbidity and mortality. Moreover, heat waves limit mobility and outdoor activities for older individuals, 
exacerbating sedentary lifestyles and chronic conditions [28]. Furthermore, coping with extreme heat often 
necessitates adjusting indoor temperatures, including the use of air conditioning if available. This can result 
in increased electricity bills and contribute to higher CO2 emissions, accelerating climate change. For many 
older individuals without family support, these expenses can be financially burdensome, heightening their 
vulnerability to the adverse effects of extreme temperatures.
Wildfires
Wildfires pose a high threat to humans and are increasing in frequency (Figure S2 in the Online 
Supplementary Document) [29]. Wildfires disproportionately impact older people in several ways. Wildfires 
can affect the environments where older people reside, bringing several respiratory complications for older 
people. A meta-analysis using data from 19 European and North American countries by Huang and col­
leagues reported that several particulate matter (PM), some of which are associated with wildfires, were sig­
nificantly related to lung cancer [30]. Children, older people, and those with underlying conditions seem to 
be at a higher risk compared to other adult populations. A study from Brazil reported that short-term expo­
sure to wildfire related PM2.5 is associated with increased risks of all-cause, respiratory, and cardiovascu­
lar hospital admissions. Children (zero to four years), and older people (≥80 years) had the highest relative 
risks of hospitalisation per 10 µg per cubic meter (μg/m3) increase in wildfire-related PM2.5, 4.88% (95% 
confidence interval (CI) = 4.47–5.28), and 3.70% (95% CI = 3.20–4.20) respectively, with adults aged between 
30 and 39 only having 0.83% (95% CI = 0.44–1.23) [31]. It has been suggested that this could be the result 
of weaker immune systems and pre-existing health conditions, such as asthma, which could increase the 
susceptibility to the respiratory impact of wildfires [32]. Due to air pollution, wildfires have effects on older 
people’s cardiovascular health. Evidence from Australia shows that cardiovascular mortality rates increased 
during days when wildfires appeared [29]. Older people are also more likely to use emergency services due 
to cardiac arrest and become hospitalised due to ischaemic heart disease shortly after wildfires, compared 
to younger people [33]. Wildfires can also have a negative psychological impact on older people. Wildfires 
usually destroy houses, lifestyles, the former living environment and communities of older people, prevent­
ing ageing in place [34]. Older people may require more time or special support in case of evacuations, and 
power shortages and increased risk of electrocution from fallen lines may also affect health care facilities 
and older people’s households located in rural areas [29].
Drought
Droughts have been defined as extreme climate events in which the reduction of water, precipitation and an 
increase in air temperature are observed [35]. The increased duration of droughts will have various negative 
implications for the global population, especially for older people (Figure S3 in the Online Supplementary 
Document). Droughts particularly affect the environment of older people living in rural areas. In north­
ern Ghana, for example, droughts were reported to reduce the fertility of the soil, reduce harvest quanti­
ties, and destroy property and livestock [36]. These effects of droughts can devastate older farmers from 
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) due to their economic effects and can also increase the risks 
of malnutrition [37]. Charnley and colleagues also found that droughts in the African continent may cre­
Prina et al. 
PAPERS
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101	
6	
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101
ate ideal environments for the proliferation of Vibrio cholerae, the bacteria responsible for cholera disease, 
which can be highly detrimental to the health of older people, who have a higher risk of developing water-
borne diseases [38].
Flooding, storms, and sea level rise
Hydro-meteorological disasters affect the ageing population in a multitude of ways (Figure S4 in the Online 
Supplementary Document). A recent assessment of the needs of older people after the 2022 Pakistan floods 
highlighted a stark picture, with many older people left in need of cash, food, housing, medicines, and 
hygiene items [39]. Similarly, a case study from the USA reported a disproportional increase in emergency 
department visits and hospitalisations among older people in the week following Hurricane Sandy [40]. 
Hydro-meteorological disasters contribute to morbidity and mortality in older people through both direct 
and indirect means. Directly, reasons for death may include drowning, serious blunt trauma, and electro­
cution [41]. In addition to being vulnerable to direct impacts from water and flooding, older people are fur­
ther at risk for other indirect health consequences. Floods have been linked to increased rates of fatal and 
non-fatal acute cardiovascular events, including myocardial infarction, Takotsubo syndrome (acute stress-in­
duced cardiomyopathy), and cerebrovascular accidents, to which older people are particularly susceptible 
[41,42]. Hydro-meteorological disasters can also lead to an increased risk of numerous infectious diseases 
[43], and disasters can also impact mental health among the older population [44].
Air quality
Air pollutants, such as ozone, black carbon, and sulphates, can lead to a change in climate. At the same 
time, increasingly warmer days, precipitation, and wind pattern changes can lead to the entrapment of air 
pollutants, such as ozone and particulate matter (e.g. soot, dust, dirt) in the lower atmosphere [45]. Older 
people are highly susceptible to the effects of poor-quality air (Figure S5 in the Online Supplementary 
Document). Studies have shown that small PM clearance reduces with increasing age, which is particu­
larly problematic given that PM has been associated with both acute and chronic health effects, including 
asthma incidence and aggravation, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cancer, cardiovascular 
disease, and pneumonia [46]. A meta-analysis of the health risks associated with short-term exposure to PM 
showed that older people have a higher risk of death (0.64%) compared to younger populations per 10 μg/
m3 increase of PM. This included data from different European countries, North America (Canada, Mexico, 
and the USA), South America (Brazil and Chile) and Asia (China, India, and South Korea) [47].
Climate-sensitive infectious diseases
While the global burden of disease has shifted from communicable to non-communicable causes in the last 
century, infectious diseases remain an important source of morbidity and mortality in older people, account­
ing for 5–6% of disability-adjusted life years (DALY) in 2019 and underlined by the COVID-19 pandemic 
[48]. Older people are both more prone to certain infections and likely to be diagnosed late due to age-re­
lated immunosuppression, being malnourished, or having other health conditions [37,49]. The WHO esti­
mates that climate change will be responsible for over 60 000 additional deaths from malaria and dengue 
in 2030, as well as 48 000 additional deaths from diarrhoeal illnesses globally [14].
Climate-sensitive infectious diseases (CSIDs) are infections that are vulnerable to changing climatic factors 
such as increased temperatures and precipitation (Figure S6 in the Online Supplementary). One meta-anal­
ysis found that a 1°C increase in global temperatures was associated with overall infectious morbidity among 
older people, but more evidence is needed to establish the magnitude of the effect [25]. Vector and water­
borne diseases are the most likely to be impacted by climate change [50]. Malaria, for example, is a major 
vector-borne disease. Malaria in older people is associated with a higher risk of neurological damage and 
death in older adults. Dengue, another vector-borne disease on the rise with climate change, is associated 
with haemorrhagic fever and end-organ damage. Older people could, therefore, be at proportionately greater 
risk as climate change increases their overall incidence [51,52]. Waterborne gastrointestinal infections are 
a particularly important cause of illness in older people due to age-related immunosuppression, decreased 
thermoregulatory ability, and sensitivity to dehydration [53]. In terms of foodborne CSIDs, salmonella and 
campylobacter have peak incidences in older people, who are also more likely to be hospitalised and die after 
illness compared to younger populations [54]. Norovirus is a key illness for older people who are more likely 
to have prolonged hospitalisation and death caused by norovirus, with a fatality rate higher than >200% 
that of young children [55].
The impact of climate hazards on older people
PAPERS
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101	
7	
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101
Food and water insecurities
Food insecurities are driven by a multitude of factors: warmer weather can lead to poorer crops and greater 
food spoilage. This is problematic as many older people living in LMICs continue working until later in 
life and often work as farmers or rely on subsistence agriculture [56]. It has been estimated that up to 28% 
of smallholder farmers globally are aged over 55. Many older people live on fixed incomes and will not be 
able to afford rapid price increases. It has also been reported that when food is scarce, households are more 
likely to allocate limited food supplies to younger members of the family compared to older members [57,58]. 
All these issues could lead to malnutrition disproportionately affecting older women. High temperatures 
are also associated with reduced food safety and can increase pathogens in food and seafood, once again 
disproportionally affecting older people due to pre-existing co-morbidities and reduced immune systems 
[59]. A recent review of the literature has linked water insecurity with diarrhoeal incidence, chronic kidney 
disease, increased blood pressure, reduced cognitive performance and dehydration [60]. Older people are 
increasingly vulnerable to these changes, as they are already underserved by existing facilities and services 
[61]. Dehydration in later life is burdensome, and several studies have shown that there is a strong associ­
ation between being dehydrated and having negative health outcomes, including mortality, frailty, cardio­
vascular disease, cognitive problems, oral health and poorer hospital outcomes [60].
Health and social care systems
Climate change is having and will have a large impact on health and social care systems. Many of the haz­
ards described above will result in acutely increased hospitalisations after extreme events and the use of 
already stretched and overburdened health systems. Low- and middle-income countries will be dispropor­
tionally affected by this increase in burden due to poverty, malnutrition, lack of resources to address health 
needs, and poor underlying infrastructure. Displacement from home will also disrupt access to health and 
social care systems, with a report from the UK highlighting a substantial impact of evacuation efforts on 
well-being and health [62]. Social care for older people often relies on both formal and informal caregiving. 
Both are being affected by climate change. Urban migration of younger generations in areas impacted by cli­
mate change could result in reduced support ratios and informal caregiving for those older people who are 
left behind and in need of informal care support [63]. This lack of intergenerational support structures may 
lead to increasing loneliness among older people, further exacerbating the threats to healthy ageing [64].
Displacement, migration, and relocation
Climate change-related displacement and migration refers to the movement of individuals and communities 
due to changing climate conditions that threaten life, livelihood, or well-being [61,65,66]. Migration is often 
a last resort adaptation to climate change. However, a person’s ability to migrate is limited by mobility and 
resources. Older people, who are more likely to have socioeconomic vulnerabilities, locomotor limitations, 
underlying health conditions, and greater social care needs, are often the least able to relocate in approach­
ing climate threats [65,67]. Case studies in Bangladesh, Nepal, and Pakistan have shown that older people 
are among the vulnerable subgroups often left behind in climate migration [68]. In cases of successful relo­
cation, older people may be more vulnerable to other exposure pathways and risks of climate change, such 
as food insecurity or loss of access to critical services. Migrant groups generally have worse health outcomes 
due to dangers in transit and disrupted health and social care [69,70]. Evacuations pose special risks to 
older people who are frail, medically complex, or live in group care settings, as needed medications, medi­
cal equipment, and medical records may not be accessible [63].
Vulnerabilities and resilience
While climate change affects all older individuals to some extent, it has a more pronounced impact on spe­
cific subpopulations of older people, attributable to their characteristics and broader determinants of health. 
When these factors are anticipated to result in deleterious consequences, they are designated as ‘vulner­
abilities’ and, when positive or building up reserve, as ‘resilience’. These vulnerabilities often overlap and 
coexist, working together dynamically and synergistically to perpetuate unequal health outcomes related 
to climate change.
Older people comprise a diverse population with varying experiences of risk factors on individual, social, 
and contextual levels. Vulnerabilities among older people can be seen as the result of how risk factors, sensi­
tivity, and coping capacity interact when confronting climate threats [71]. There is evidence highlighting that 
factors affecting healthy ageing, such as social determinants of health, are evolving and older persons’ vul­
Prina et al. 
PAPERS
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101	
8	
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101
nerabilities have increased due to climate change impacts [19]. For example, several studies have identified 
a key role in socio-economic markers of position, such as education and wealth, as key drivers of inequali­
ties in healthy ageing [72,73]. At the same time, climate change is amplifying existing inequalities by exac­
erbating vulnerabilities in people with lower incomes. This group of people often have lower awareness of 
climate change, with more limited resources to access knowledge on and implement adaptation strategies. 
Older people with low socio-economic positioning often live in poorer housing conditions and have less 
access to health services which include preventive, promotion, treatment, rehabilitation, and palliative care 
[74,75]. In the event of a climate crisis, this can lead to greater relative losses compared to younger or more 
affluent segments of the population. Thus, a vicious cycle occurs, whereby poverty increases older adults’ 
vulnerability to climate hazards, which in turn exacerbates economic inequalities [76,77]. In this paper, one 
objective is to explore specific vulnerabilities and offer relevant examples when possible. In essence, the cli­
mate crisis exacerbates pre-existing health disparities, as identified in some examples in Table 1.
Table 1. Vulnerabilities of older people and interactions
Major factors
Interaction factors Examples
Sociodemographic 
characteristics
Gender
Women are at increased vulnerability to climate events with age if they outlive their male peers [77–79]
Education
Lower education status is closely linked to lower socio-economic status, which is further related to poorer 
health outcomes in older people [80,81]
Occupation
Occupational heat stress in construction work, mining, factory work, etc., can pose a serious health threat, 
leading to higher mortality and morbidity [82,83]
Ethnicity
Barriers to access health care, health inequalities and discrimination for minority ethnic groups can further 
exacerbate vulnerabilities to the effects of climate change, particularly in older people from ethnic minori­
ties [84,85]
Poverty
Poverty limits people’s access to adequate health care services and access to knowledge, which can be detri­
mental to older adults’ functional ability and healthy longevity [5,86]
Health factors
COVID-19
In England, an excess of ( ~ 88%) of total cumulative all cause excess mortality from the COVID-19 pandemic 
occurred among individuals the 65+ age group [87,88]
General health and 
comorbidities
With climate change, older people with pre-existing health conditions and with lower intrinsic capacity lev­
els are at much higher risk of negative consequences than the general population [87,89]
Cognition and 
mental health
During heatwaves, people living with dementia are at an increased risk of hospitalisation, and those with 
pre-existing mental health conditions, such as psychoses and substance misuse, may also be at an increased 
risk of heat-related mortality [90,91]
Social and 
contextual factors
Social links/ 
connectedness
A review from Nepal has demonstrated that the migration of active and educated individuals to urban areas 
has left older people with fewer adaptive resources and social support, increasing their susceptibility to the 
adverse impact of climate change [81,92]
Built environment 
and housing
In Portugal, larger wildfire-burned areas tend to be more inland and associated with where ageing commu­
nities live and poorer housing infrastructure [93,94]
Geographical 
location
Many climate-sensitive infectious diseases are likely to spread in Central and South America, South Asia, 
and Africa, imposing a burden on the already fragmented health care infrastructure in low HDI regions [95]
Political situation, 
economic factors, 
armed conflicts
Political and demographic changes alongside socio-political instability, which lead to migration and displace­
ment, disproportionately impact the lives of older people [63,96]
COVID-19 – coronavirus disease 2019, HDI – human development index
DISCUSSION
Implication for mitigation and adaptation
Despite increasing global awareness of the interplay between climate change and public health, current 
efforts fall short of achieving a sustainable recovery and safeguarding people from the mounting health risks 
associated with climate change [97]. As the majority of mitigation approaches focus on reducing the drivers 
of climate change (i.e. greenhouse gases) and are therefore not specific to older people, in this section, we 
will primarily discuss potential adaptation strategies.
WHO conducted a consultation with older adults to identify research questions addressing healthy ageing 
involving more than 1500 people in 77 countries [1] and documented many related to climate, extreme 
environmental events, pollution hazards, and the impact on housing, indoor and outdoor infrastructure, 
as well as the increased need for information and new technologies [98]. Several documents on this topic, 
The impact of climate hazards on older people
PAPERS
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101	
9	
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101
including some guidelines from different organisations, already exist. Although these are not specific rec­
ommendations for older people, their integration could still be important to lessen the impact of climate 
change on this group. These include the WHO Global Strategy on Health, Environment, and Climate Change 
[19], WHO’s Housing and Health Guidelines [99], the Compendium on Health and Environment [100], the 
Lancet’s Countdown on Health and Climate Change series [101], the Sustainable Development Goals [102], 
the UNFCC reports [103] and the Paris Agreement itself [103].
Mitigating vulnerabilities, especially those to which older individuals are more predisposed, and enhanc­
ing resilience, constitute pivotal strategies to bolster preparedness and curtail the adverse effects of climate 
change on healthy ageing. Some important strategies suggested by different international bodies and scien­
tists across the globe are listed in Table 2.
Table 2. Strategies for mitigation and adaptation
Key areas
Recommended strategies
Building intrinsic capacity and 
functional ability
Intrinsic capacity and functional ability can be built and optimised throughout the life course, with policy actions 
developed to shape those determinants of healthy ageing [102]
Developing interventions following the WHO Integrated Care for Older People (ICOPE) guidelines adapted to con­
texts which are more prone to climate change [103,104]
Increase accessibility to health services to older populations and increase the budget allocated to tackle health dete­
riorations in climate events [105]
Improving systems, communities, 
and infrastructures
Housing
To protect older residents, houses and living facilities should ensure adequate ventilation and insulation [106]
In heat-prone areas, buildings should utilise reflective surfaces and avoid heat-trapping materials like concrete to 
minimise heat absorption [107]
Age-friendly housing codes with wider doorways and large staircases or stairlifts to support everyday mobility and 
facilitate quick evacuation during disasters [63]
Cities and surrounding 
infrastructure
Increased greenspaces to protect against extreme temperatures, mitigate pollution, provide shade, and offer aes­
thetic spaces for multiple types of activities for older people [108,109]
Ensure walking paths are smooth surfaced, and well-lit to mitigate falls and safety concerns [109]
In areas prone to heatwaves, heat shelters around the community should offer both physical safety and areas for 
social connection [56]
Transport and mobility
Ensure strong transport networks for timely evacuation and aid delivery, particularly for older people [56]
In flood-prone areas, roads could be fitted on either side with bioswales, which are mulched and vegetated chan­
nels that facilitate water runoffs [110]
Energy and resource poverty
Local governments/municipalities to introduce new technologies like solar panels to provide low-emission, 
clean-energy power to homes [111]
Provide information, technological training, or finances to older people to access renewable energy, which may 
help mitigate climate change and secure energy sources [56]
Agriculture, food, and water security Utilise and support older people’s knowledge on how to deal with agricultural losses during extreme climatic events, 
such as planting different crops and changing farming techniques [56]
Provide information and economic aid to more vulnerable older people to ensure food security [112]
Provide information and training on recycling water, practicing adequate water storage techniques, and restricting 
excessive water use within the community [113]
Health and social systems
Adaption and contextualising of WHO ‘Operational framework for building climate resilient health systems’ for 
older people [114]
Develop institutional policies and enhance the knowledge of health practitioners to facilitate the discussion of cli­
mate change with patients [115]
Introduction of new technology, telehealth, remote monitoring, precision health, and artificial intelligence [116]
Pathogen control
Execute wider municipal programmes to control pathogen proliferation and improve sanitation to mediate the risk 
of CSID in older people [56]
Public health programmes should be implemented in areas vulnerable to climate-sensitive vectors, educate older 
people and providers, and encourage behavioural changes
Maintaining the quality and supply of community water sources is important for older people who are vulnerable 
to gastrointestinal illnesses.
Early warning systems and disaster 
mitigation
Early warning systems should be able to identify and send targeted messages to older people, particularly those 
with other vulnerabilities, including older persons with declines in hearing and vision
Ensure availability and accessibility of communication technologies especially targeted to socially isolated older 
people [107,111]
Early warning systems should use diverse and accessible communication avenues (e.g. public radio) to maximise 
reach to older people
Prina et al. 
PAPERS
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101	
10	
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101
Potential initial action
To create effective and pertinent strategies for climate change prevention and mitigation, all affected commu­
nities need to participate, regardless of age, as emphasised by the UN Human Rights Council in 2021 [63]. 
Understanding the perception of climate change among older individuals is a crucial area to investigate for 
effective action. In 2010, the Stockholm Environment Institute reported that the baby boomer generation, 
currently aged 58–76, had the highest carbon footprint in the UK standing at 13.5 CO2 tonnes per capita 
[117], with this footprint driven to meet basic needs rather than having luxury lifestyles [118]. It has been 
argued that older people in the USA have various objections to climate change action, such as the idea that it 
is too late to reverse climate change [119], although other studies found no major differences in perceptions 
between younger and older cohorts [120]. One of the first initial actions is to change the perception of older 
individuals so that they recognise their role as significant drivers and contributors to climate change action.
A recent survey involving 1.4 million participants from 50 countries underscored that the individual’s level of 
education was the most significant influencer of public opinion regarding climate change [121]. To compre­
hend why older generations are not as actively involved in climate action as younger ones, it is imperative to 
consider additional barriers (including individual, structural, and societal barriers) beyond lower education 
levels and a lack of personal exposure to the adverse effects of climate change, which may limit the scope for 
older individuals’ engagement in environmental initiatives.
Engaging in climate action not only fosters healthy ageing but also positively impacts community well-being 
and environmental preservation. Older people are inherently motivated to contribute to society. The inclina­
tion of older populations to assist during crises with substantial environmental consequences or other emer­
gencies, even at the risk of their well-being, is a remarkable characteristic. Scholars have proposed that fos­
tering a sense of generativity and emphasising the importance of leaving a positive legacy when discussing 
climate change can effectively encourage policies and practices that reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
promote behaviour change across all age groups [97,122,123]. The active involvement of older individuals 
in climate change activism can also yield community benefits, including a reduction in ageism, enhanced 
intergenerational connections, and the transfer of valuable knowledge. Furthermore, cultural wisdom and 
steadfast beliefs of older people have proven instrumental in enabling effective coping mechanisms during 
challenging situations, including disasters [124,125].
Investing in training for older adults in areas like political advocacy (such as letter writing, meeting with 
legislators, and personal storytelling) may hold significant potential for generating a multiplier effect within 
their local communities [126,127]. Climate change education, digital literacy programmes, and daily practices 
aimed at reducing carbon emissions could be integrated into older people’s associations (OPAs) throughout 
East and Southeast Asia, following the model proposed by HelpAge International [97], and possibly expanded 
to other continents. Empowerment of older people will also lead to more advocacy at a governmental level to 
create adaptation plans that consider the needs of older people, and that hopefully will translate into increased 
research funding to address the existing evidence gaps.
Various policies aimed at mitigating climate change, such as those addressing fuel poverty e.g. inability to 
adequately meet household energy needs [128], renewable technologies, and insulation, prove advantageous 
for the well-being of older individuals [128,129]. The involvement of older adults in environmental volun­
teerism is a growing initiative. For instance, in Italy, an environmental volunteering programme involving 
park restoration showed increased life satisfaction, physical activity, and positive feelings among older peo­
ple after they joined the activities [130].
The political situation of a given country influences the priority given to health, which is crucial for older 
people. The governmental allocation of funds to health – both addressing its determinants and to the health 
care system – determines how much health services can focus on the prevention and treatment of chronic 
illnesses among older people. National governments may not even recognise the need for the development 
of such strategies in low-income countries; however, international funding allocation and implementation of 
targeted programmes are timely needs.
Research gaps
We have presented compelling evidence highlighting the substantial impact of climate change on older people 
worldwide. However, it is essential to recognise that much of this evidence is indirect, revealing gaps in our 
understanding of this issue. Notably, individuals who were actively engaged in the environmental movement, 
including the inaugural Earth Day in 1970, have now transitioned into the older population demographic. 
The impact of climate hazards on older people
PAPERS
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101	
11	
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101
As global leaders age, there is an opportunity for them to leverage their leadership skills and social influence 
to foster intergenerational solidarity within the climate change movement, amplifying the voices of younger 
adults, as suggested by the UN Human Rights Council in 2021 [63].
Nevertheless, there is a noticeable lack of research exploring the opinions of older individuals regarding cli­
mate change and their motivations and contributions to climate change activism. Although many system­
atic reviews have been published on the impact of climate hazards on health, only a few focused specifically 
on older people, with evidence predominantly being systematically assessed for heat and air pollution. For 
example, Bunker and colleagues and Yu et al. assessed the impact of air temperature on older adults [131,132]. 
Most epidemiological studies on climate change impacts, with few exceptions, primarily target younger pop­
ulations, and general adults, or even exclude older individuals entirely. This omission is concerning, given 
that older individuals likely bear a disproportionate burden of climate-related hazards and as the world pop­
ulation becomes increasingly older. Comprehensive evidence from large-scale longitudinal studies to imply 
causal inference and explore the cumulative effect of various hazard exposures is absent globally. The estab­
lishment of a universally accepted definition of climate hazards would facilitate cross-study comparisons.
Furthermore, studies involving older individuals often have a narrower scope, primarily focusing on morbid­
ity and mortality rather than the enabling processes to optimise healthy ageing, including people’s functional 
ability and intrinsic capacity, which older individuals themselves often consider more critical than morbid­
ities. It is imperative to integrate research on topics of interest to older individuals [92] and environmental 
sustainability to ensure the protection of the rights of older people, especially as the effects of the climate 
change crisis intensify. Additionally, research from low- and middle-income countries and vulnerable com­
munities is lacking, such as from the Small Island States, with most of the evidence originating from North 
America, Australia, and Western Europe, even though the impact of climate change will disproportionately 
affect the Global South [133].
We have presented evidence highlighting the substantial impact of climate change on older people worldwide. 
However, it is essential to recognise that much of this evidence is indirect, revealing gaps in our understand­
ing of this issue. One of the major limitations of this narrative review was the compressed timeframe for lit­
erature screening and report production. Although this study covers a broad scope encompassing multiple 
exposures, outcomes, and adaptation strategies relating to older adults, the short time frame affected our abil­
ity to present evidence systematically, including an assessment of its strength, risk of bias, and dose-response 
relationships. Furthermore, it is essential to acknowledge that although we tried to identify as many studies 
as possible, our systematic searches could have been further expanded by focusing on primary papers and 
not only systematic reviews when assessing the literature for each hazard identified.
We are hopeful for a shift towards greater inclusivity in climate change research. We advocate for prioritis­
ing research in the following areas:
•  Studies that explicitly assess the impact of climate change on older people.
•  Studies that focus on outcomes beyond mortality and morbidity, including functional ability and 
intrinsic capacity.
•  Studies that assess impact across diverse regions of the world, including a focus on vulnerable groups 
within those areas.
•  Studies that assess exposures and outcomes at multiple time points and the cumulative impacts of 
being exposed to different hazards.
•  Studies that assess the inter-relationships between different hazards and quantify combined impacts 
on older people.
•  Studies that focus on quantifying interactions and risks among groups with multiple vulnerabilities.
•  Studies that value and quantify older people’s contributions to climate action that are not accounted 
for in standard economic indices, such as caregiving and volunteering, supporting people and sustain­
ing the environment, as highlighted by the WHO Council on the Economics of Health for All [134].
•  Studies that address ways to improve housing to enable older persons to age in place.
•  Evaluations of how non-governmental climate action organisations empower and engage older peo­
ple and promote intergenerational dialogue.
•  Studies that identify effective ways to increase climate change literacy of older people.
There is a crucial need to harmonise the concerns of older individuals and environmental sustainability to 
safeguard the rights of older people, particularly given the escalating impacts of the climate change crisis 
Prina et al. 
PAPERS
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101	
12	
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101
Disclaimer: This article is a short version of a longer report commissioned by WHO. The views expressed in this arti­
cle are of the authors and not necessarily of WHO.
Ethics statement: This article reflects an evidence synthesis and does not require ethics approval per WHO policy.
Funding: The authors gratefully acknowledge funding support received from the World Health Organization Department 
of Climate Change and Health, the Government of Spain and Velux Stiftung to conduct research and evidence synthesis.
Authorship contributions: RS and MP conceived the article and developed the narrative; MP led the review; all authors 
(MP, NK, SAK, JCC, AP, CS, SX, and RS) contributed to the searches, writing and final review.
Disclosure of interest: The authors completed the ICMJE Disclosure of Interest Form (available upon request from the 
corresponding author) and disclose no relevant interests.
Additional material
Online Supplementary Document
[91]. Additionally, we must persist in developing climate change adaptation and mitigation solutions that 
are both equitable and culturally appropriate, with a specific focus on older people.
CONCLUSIONS
If the increase in temperature is not kept within the levels decided in the Paris Agreement, the implications for 
our world will be devastating, with effects affecting all spheres of society, every living creature, and the eco­
system. Climate change is already having a large impact on older people’s lives, and with a projected increase 
in the number and proportion of older people worldwide, the scale of those impacts will increase even further.
The potential redirection of financial investments by local government and international organisations toward 
climate-friendly initiatives, along with the adjustment of food and energy consumption patterns that older 
people can endorse, represents a potent tool for positive impact investing in climate change initiatives for older 
individuals. For example, energy-efficient technologies provide dual advantages – cost savings to older people 
and positive environmental impact. [122,135]. Investment in training older people to be effective environmen­
tal activists can maximise their abilities to contribute to society and the value of their actions [56]. For example, 
in China, there are over half a million older people’s associations (OPAs) that let older people take the lead on 
environmental projects and climate education in both urban and rural communities [97]. Policymakers need 
to prioritise the most vulnerable, aligning local and global development and climate actions while dissemi­
nating public information on risks and solutions. Equitable adaptation strategies that reach all people are also 
crucial, ensuring that all individuals, regardless of socioeconomic status, have the resources and support to 
cope with climate-related challenges. For instance, targeted outreach and education programmes can bridge 
the gap, fostering resilience in communities facing diverse socioeconomic circumstances.
This review highlights specific entry points for policies and actions, emphasising potential leadership roles 
by either the health sector or other relevant domains globally. The objective is to systematically address deter­
minants and diminish inequities, supporting individuals in achieving and maintaining optimal well-being as 
they age. Furthermore, the framework delineates essential features that health systems can integrate to amplify 
equity in the context of healthy ageing and alleviate the enduring repercussions of disparities. Essentially, the 
framework serves as a compass guide for formulating and executing effective strategies to advance healthy 
ageing and reduce health disparities.
Although older people are overwhelmingly affected by climate change, existing evidence on this group is 
limited, and more is needed to understand the multifaceted impacts and the complex network of exposure 
pathways underlying these effects. What is clear is that older people are not a homogenous group and that 
specific individual, and contextual characteristics put certain people at a heightened risk. More research, 
however, is needed to understand the relationship between different vulnerabilities and the implications of 
having multiple vulnerabilities.
Older people play a crucial role in driving these changes, and there is a growing momentum to increase cli­
mate change activism among this demographic, as well as their awareness and understanding of climate 
change issues. By actively involving older individuals in conversations about climate change and creating 
age-friendly environments, we not only have the opportunity to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change 
on healthy ageing but also to transform population ageing into a valuable resource for addressing the most 
pressing challenge of our time.
The impact of climate hazards on older people
PAPERS
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101	
13	
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101
  1 World Health Organization. COP24 special report: health and climate change 2018. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2018.
  2 World Health Assembly 61. Climate change and health: report by the Secretariat;2008.
  3 Steffen W, Richardson K, Rockström J, Cornell SE, Fetzer I, Bennett EM, et al. Sustainability. Planetary boundaries: guiding 
human development on a changing planet. Science. 2015;347:1259855. Medline:25592418 doi:10.1126/science.1259855
  4 Harper S. The Convergence of Population Ageing with Climate Change. J Popul Ageing. 2019;12:401–3. doi:10.1007/
s12062-019-09255-5
  5 United Nations Economist Network. Report of the UN Economist Network for the UN 75th anniversary: Shaping the 
trends of our time. United Nations; 2020.
  6 Zimmer Z, Knodel J. Climate Change, Vulnerability, and Older People. Encycl Gerontol Popul Aging. 2021;1022–8.
  7 Sarkar SM, Dhar BK, Fahlevi M, Ahmed S, Hossain MDJ, Rahman MM, et al. Climate Change and Aging Health in 
Developing Countries. Glob Chall. 2023;7:2200246. Medline:37635700 doi:10.1002/gch2.202200246
  8 Kriebel-Gasparro A. Climate Change: Effects on the Older Adult. J Nurse Pract. 2022;18:372–6. doi:10.1016/j.nur­
pra.2022.01.007
  9 Yang Z, Huang W, McKenzie JE, Xu R, Yu P, Ye T, et al. Mortality risks associated with floods in 761 communities world­
wide: time series study. BMJ. 2023;383:e075081. Medline:37793693 doi:10.1136/bmj-2023-075081
10 Son JY, Liu JC, Bell ML. Temperature-related mortality: a systematic review and investigation of effect modifiers. Environ 
Res Lett. 2019;7:073004. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/ab1cdb
11 Wan K, Feng Z, Hajat S, Doherty RM. Temperature-related mortality and associated vulnerabilities: evidence from Scotland 
using extended time-series datasets. Environ Health. 2022;21:99. Medline:36284320 doi:10.1186/s12940-022-00912-5
12 United Nations. Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030): resolution/adopted by the General Assembly. United Nations; 2020.
13 United Nations. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development | Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs. United Nations; 2015.
14 World Health Organization. Quantitative risk assessment of the effects of climate change on selected causes of death, 2030s 
and 2050s. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014.
15 Sadana R, Blas E, Budhwani S, Koller T, Paraje G. Healthy Ageing: Raising Awareness of Inequalities, Determinants, and 
What Could Be Done to Improve Health Equity. Gerontologist. 2016;56 Suppl 2:S178–93. Medline:26994259 doi:10.1093/
geront/gnw034
16 Ustün TB, Chatterji S, Kostansjek N, Bickenbach J. WHO’s ICF and Functional Status Information in Health Records. 
Health Care Financ Rev. 2003;24:77–88. Medline:12894636
17 Chen Y, Moufouma-Okia W, Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pirani A. Recent Progress and Emerging Topics on Weather and 
Climate Extremes Since the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Annu Rev Environ 
Resour. 2018;43:35–59. doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-102017-030052
18 World Health Organization. Decade of healthy ageing: Baseline report. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020.
19 World Health Organization. WHO global strategy on health, environment and climate change: the transformation needed 
to improve lives and well- being sustainably through healthy environment.Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020.
20 Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pörtner OH, Roberts D, Skea J, Shukla PR, et al. Global warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special 
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission 
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change. World Meteorol Organ. 2018.
21 Semanza JC, Paz S. Climate change and infectious disease in Europe: Impact, projection and adaptation. Lancet Reg Health 
Eur. 2021;9:100230. Medline:34664039 doi:10.1016/j.lanepe.2021.100230
22 Brennan M, O’Shea PM, Mulkerrin EC. Preventative strategies and interventions to improve outcomes during heatwaves. 
Age Ageing. 2020;49:729–32. Medline:32638997 doi:10.1093/ageing/afaa125
23 Schneider A, Rückerl R, Breitner S, Wolf K, Peters A. Thermal Control, Weather, and Aging. Curr Environ Health Rep. 
2017;4:21–9. Medline:28110470 doi:10.1007/s40572-017-0129-0
24 Johnston FH, Bailie RS, Pilotto LS, Hanigan IC. Ambient biomass smoke and cardio-respiratory hospital admissions in 
Darwin, Australia. BMC Public Health. 2007;7:240. Medline:17854481 doi:10.1186/1471-2458-7-240
25 Bunker A, Wildenhain J, Vandenbergh A, Henschke N, Rocklöv J, Hajat S, et al. Effects of Air Temperature on Climate-
Sensitive Mortality and Morbidity Outcomes in the Elderly; a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Epidemiological 
Evidence. EBioMedicine. 2016;6:258–68. Medline:27211569 doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.02.034
26 Vardoulakis S, Dear K, Hajat S, Heaviside C, Eggen B, McMichael AJ. Comparative Assessment of the Effects of Climate 
Change on Heat- and Cold-Related Mortality in the United Kingdom and Australia. Environ Health Perspect. 2014;122:A320. 
Medline:25222967 doi:10.1289/ehp.1307524
27 Oudin Åström D, Schifano P, Asta F, Lallo A, Michelozzi P, Rocklöv J, et al. The effect of heat waves on mortality in susceptible 
groups: a cohort study of a mediterranean and a northern European City. Environ Health. 2015;14:30. Medline:25889290 
doi:10.1186/s12940-015-0012-0
28 Gildner TE, Levy SB. Intersecting vulnerabilities in human biology: Synergistic interactions between climate change and 
increasing obesity rates. Am J Hum Biol. 2021;33:e23460. Medline:32618027 doi:10.1002/ajhb.23460
29 Finlay SE, Moffat A, Gazzard R, Baker D, Murray V. Health Impacts of Wildfires. PLOS Curr Disasters. 2012.
30 Huang F, Pan B, Wu J, Chen E, Chen L. Relationship between exposure to PM2.5 and lung cancer incidence and mortal­
ity: A meta-analysis. Oncotarget. 2017;8:43322. Medline:28487493 doi:10.18632/oncotarget.17313
31 Ye T, Guo Y, Chen G, Yue X, Xu R, Coêlho MSZS, et al. Risk and burden of hospital admissions associated with wildfire-re­
lated PM2·5 in Brazil, 2000–15: a nationwide time-series study. Lancet Planet Health. 2021;5:e599–607. Medline:34508681 
doi:10.1016/S2542-5196(21)00173-X
REFERENCES
Prina et al. 
PAPERS
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101	
14	
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101
32 Liu JC, Wilson A, Mickley LJ, Ebisu K, Sulprizio MP, Wang Y, et al. Who Among the Elderly Is Most Vulnerable to Exposure 
to and Health Risks of Fine Particulate Matter From Wildfire Smoke? Am J Epidemiol. 2017;186:730. Medline:28525551 
doi:10.1093/aje/kwx141
33 Haikerwal A, Akram M, Del Monaco A, Smith K, Sim MR, Meyer M, et al. Impact of Fine Particulate Matter (PM2.5) 
Exposure During Wildfires on Cardiovascular Health Outcomes. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4:e001653. Medline:26178402 
doi:10.1161/JAHA.114.001653
34 Shih RA, Acosta JD, Chen EK, Carbone EG, Xenakis L, Adamson DM, et al. Improving Disaster Resilience Among Older 
Adults: Insights from Public Health Departments and Aging-in-Place Efforts. Rand Health Q. 2018;8:3. Medline:30083424 
doi:10.7249/RR2313
35 Sena A, Freitas C, Souza PF, Carneiro F, Alpino T, Pedroso M, et al. Drought in the Semiarid Region of Brazil: Exposure, 
Vulnerabilities and Health Impacts from the Perspectives of Local Actors. PLoS Curr. 2018;10:ecurrents.dis.c226851eb­
d64290e619a4d1ed79c8639. Medline:30555749 doi:10.1371/currents.dis.c226851ebd64290e619a4d1ed79c8639
36 Acharibasam JW, Anuga SW. Psychological distance of climate change and mental health risks assessment of smallholder 
farmers in Northern Ghana: Is habituation a threat to climate change? Clim Risk Manage. 2018;21:16–25. doi:10.1016/j.
crm.2018.04.002
37 Lieber M, Chin-Hong P, Kelly K, Dandu M, Weiser SD. A systematic review and meta-analysis assessing the impact of 
droughts, flooding, and climate variability on malnutrition. Glob Public Health. 2022;17:68–82. Medline:33332222 doi:
10.1080/17441692.2020.1860247
38 Charnley GEC, Kelman I, Murray KA. Drought-related cholera outbreaks in Africa and the implications for climate change: 
a narrative review. Pathog Glob Health. 2022;116:3. Medline:34602024 doi:10.1080/20477724.2021.1981716
39 HelpAge International. Pakistan: Older people facing health catastrophe but are being ignored.2022.
40 Gotanda H, Fogel J, Husk G, Levine JM, Peterson M, Baumlin K, et al. Hurricane Sandy: Impact on Emergency Department 
and Hospital Utilization by Older Adults in Lower Manhattan, New York (USA). Prehosp Disaster Med. 2015;30:496–502. 
Medline:26369433 doi:10.1017/S1049023X15005087
41 Veenema TG, Thornton CP, Lavin RP, Bender AK, Seal S, Corley A. Climate Change-Related Water Disasters’ Impact on 
Population Health. J Nurs Scholarsh. 2017;49:625–34. Medline:28834176 doi:10.1111/jnu.12328
42 Vinet F, Lumbroso D, Defossez S, Boissier L. A comparative analysis of the loss of life during two recent floods in France: 
the sea surge caused by the storm Xynthia and the flash flood in Var. Nat Hazards J Int Soc Prev Mitig Nat Hazards. 
2012;61:1179–201. doi:10.1007/s11069-011-9975-5
43 Lee J, Perera D, Glickman T, Taing L. Water-related disasters and their health impacts: A global review. Prog Disaster Sci. 
2020;8:100123. doi:10.1016/j.pdisas.2020.100123
44 Mimura N. Sea-level rise caused by climate change and its implications for society. Proc Jpn Acad, Ser B, Phys Biol Sci. 
2013;89:281. Medline:23883609 doi:10.2183/pjab.89.281
45 Archer CL, Brodie JF, Rauscher SA. Global warming will aggravate ozone pollution in the U.S. mid-atlantic. J Appl Meteorol 
Climatol. 2019;58:1267–78. doi:10.1175/JAMC-D-18-0263.1
46 Dominski FH, Lorenzetti Branco JH, Buonanno G, Stabile L, Gameiro da Silva M, Andrade A. Effects of air pollution on 
health: A mapping review of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Environ Res. 2021;201:111487. Medline:34116013 
doi:10.1016/j.envres.2021.111487
47 Bell ML, Zanobetti A, Dominici F. Evidence on Vulnerability and Susceptibility to Health Risks Associated With Short-Term 
Exposure to Particulate Matter: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am J Epidemiol. 2013;178:865. Medline:23887042 
doi:10.1093/aje/kwt090
48 GBD 2019 Diseases and Injuries Collaborators. Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and ter­
ritories, 1990-2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet 2020;396:1204–22. 
Medline:33069326 doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30925-9
49 Gavazzi G, Krause KH. Ageing and infection. Lancet Infect Dis. 2002;2:659–66. Medline:12409046 doi:10.1016/S1473-
3099(02)00437-1
50 Paddock CD, Lane RS, Staples JE, Labruna M. Global Health Impacts of Vector-Borne Diseases. Global Health Impacts of 
Vector-Borne Diseases. National Academies Press; 2016.
51 Del Prete V, Mateo-Urdiales A, Bueno-Cavanillas A, Ferrara P. Malaria prevention in the older traveller: a systematic review. 
J Travel Med. 2019;26:taz067. Medline:31509199 doi:10.1093/jtm/taz067
52 Lin RJ, Lee TH, Leo YS. Dengue in the elderly: a review. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2017;15:729–35. Medline:28730853 
doi:10.1080/14787210.2017.1358610
53 Mouton CP, Bazaldua OV, Pierce B, Espino DV. Common infections in older adults. Am Fam Physician. 2001;63:257-68. 
Medline:11201692
54 Scallan E, Crim SM, Runkle A, Henao OL, Mahon BE, Hoekstra RM, et al. Bacterial Enteric Infections Among Older Adults 
in the United States: Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network, 1996-2012. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2015;12:492–9. 
Medline:26067228 doi:10.1089/fpd.2014.1915
55 Lindsay L, Wolter J, De Coster I, Van Damme P, Verstraeten T. A decade of norovirus disease risk among older adults in 
upper-middle and high income countries: a systematic review. BMC Infect Dis. 2015;15:425. Medline:26467099 doi:10.1186/
s12879-015-1168-5
56 HelpAge International. Climate change in an ageing world. Help Position Paper. 2015.
57 HelpAge International. The ageing of rural populations: evidence on older farmers in low-and middle-income countries. 
2014.
REFERENCES
The impact of climate hazards on older people
PAPERS
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101	
15	
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101
58 Hines D. Food and nutrition. In: Marks SP, Rajagopal B. Critical issues in human rights and development. Edward Elgar 
Publishing; 2011;239–60.
59 Lake IR, Gillespie IA, Bentham G, Nichols GL, Lane C, Adak GK, et al. A re-evaluation of the impact of temperature and climate 
change on foodborne illness. Epidemiol Infect. 2009;137:1538–47. Medline:19371450 doi:10.1017/S0950268809002477
60 Edmonds CJ, Foglia E, Booth P, Fu CHY, Gardner M. Dehydration in older people: A systematic review of the effects of 
dehydration on health outcomes, healthcare costs and cognitive performance. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2021;95:104380. 
Medline:33636649 doi:10.1016/j.archger.2021.104380
61 Rosinger AY, Young SL. The toll of household water insecurity on health and human biology: Current understandings and 
future directions. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Water. 2020;7:e1468. doi:10.1002/wat2.1468
62 Government of the UK. The National Flood Emergency Framework for England. Contin Cent. 2014.
63 United Nations. Analytical study on the promotion and protection of the rights of persons with disabilities in the context 
of climate change. Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights | OHCHR. United 
Nations; 2020.
64 Thapa DK, Visentin D, Kornhaber R, Cleary M. Migration of adult children and mental health of older parents ‘left behind’: 
An integrative review. PLoS One. 2018;13:e0205665. Medline:30346972 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0205665
65 The White House. Report on the Impact of climate change on Migration. 2021.
66 International Organization for Migration. Migration Research Series No. 31. Migration and Climate Change. Geneva: 
International Organization for Migration; 2008.
67 Wells J. The neglected generation: The impact of displacement on older people. 2012.
68 Rigaud K, De Sherbinin A, Jones B, Bergmann J, Clement V, Ober K, et al. Groundswell - Preparing for internal climate 
migration. World Bank Group. 2018.
69 Borg FH, Greibe Andersen J, Karekezi C, Yonga G, Furu P, Kallestrup P, et al. Climate change and health in urban infor­
mal settlements in low- and middle-income countries – a scoping review of health impacts and adaptation strategies. Glob 
Health Action. 2021;14:1908064. Medline:33847256 doi:10.1080/16549716.2021.1908064
70 Severoni S, Machado RS, Alderslade R. Migration and Health. In: Raviglione MCB, Tediosi F, Villa S, Casamitjana N, 
Plasència A, editors. Global Health Essentials. Springer: 2023;239–44.
71 Schröder-Butterfill E, Marianti R. A framework for understanding old-age vulnerabilities. Ageing Soc. 2006;26:9. 
Medline:23750062 doi:10.1017/S0144686X05004423
72 Skoufias E, Rabassa M, Olivieri S, Brahmbhatt M. The Poverty Impacts of Climate Change: A Review of Evidence. 2011.
73 O’Neill BC, Jiang L, Kc S, Fuchs R, Pachauri S, Laidlaw EK, et al. The effect of education on determinants of climate change 
risks. Nat Sustain. 2020;3:520–8. doi:10.1038/s41893-020-0512-y
74 Wu YT, Daskalopoulou C, Muniz Terrera G, Sanchez Niubo A, Rodríguez-Artalejo F, Ayuso-Mateos JL, et al. Education and 
wealth inequalities in healthy ageing in eight harmonised cohorts in the ATHLOS consortium: a population-based study. 
Lancet Public Health. 2020;5:e386–e394. Medline:32619540 doi:10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30077-3
75 Sadana R, Budhwani S, Blas E, Posarac A, Koller T, Paraje G. Healthy Ageing and Health Equity: Broader Determinants of 
Health with a Spotlight on Climate Change. In: Michel JP, editor. Prevention of Chronic Diseases and Age-Related Disability. 
Springer; 2019. pp.169-183.
76 Hallegatte S, Vogt-Schilb A, Rozenberg J, Bangalore M, Beaudet C. From Poverty to Disaster and Back: a Review of the 
Literature. Econ Disasters Clim Change. 2020;4:223–47. doi:10.1007/s41885-020-00060-5
77 Guralnik JM, Balfour JL, Volpato S. The ratio of older women to men: historical perspectives and cross-national compari­
sons. Aging (Milano). 2000;12:65–76. Medline:10902048 doi:10.1007/BF03339893
78 Lane K, Charles-Guzman K, Wheeler K, Abid Z, Graber N, Matte T. Health effects of coastal storms and flooding in 
urban areas: a review and vulnerability assessment. J Environ Public Health. 2013:2013:913064. Medline:23818911 
doi:10.1155/2013/913064
79 van Steen Y, Ntarladima AM, Grobbee R, Karssenberg D, Vaartjes I. Sex differences in mortality after heat waves: are elderly 
women at higher risk? Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2019;92:37–48. Medline:30293089 doi:10.1007/s00420-018-1360-1
80 Muttarak R, Lutz W. Is education a key to reducing vulnerability to natural disasters and hence unavoidable climate change?. 
Ecology and Society. 2014;19:42. doi:10.5751/ES-06476-190142
81 Howard A, Agllias K, Bevis M, Blakemore T. How Social Isolation Affects Disaster Preparedness and Response in Australia: 
Implications for Social Work. Aust Soc Work. 2018;71:392–404. doi:10.1080/0312407X.2018.1487461
82 Nerbass FB, Pecoits-Filho R, Clark WF, Sontrop JM, McIntyre CW, Moist L. Occupational Heat Stress and Kidney Health: 
From Farms to Factories. Kidney Int Rep. 2017;2:998. Medline:29270511 doi:10.1016/j.ekir.2017.08.012
83 Nunfam VF, Adusei-Asante K, Frimpong K, Van Etten EJ, Oosthuizen J. Barriers to occupational heat stress risk adaptation 
of mining workers in Ghana. Int J Biometeorol. 2020;64:1085–101. Medline:32130507 doi:10.1007/s00484-020-01882-4
84 Nikolakis W, Grafton Q, Nygaard A. Indigenous communities and climate change: a Recognition, Empowerment and 
Devolution (RED) framework in the Murray-Darling Basin, Australia. J Water Clim Chang. 2016;7:169–83. doi:10.2166/
wcc.2015.058
85 Hartman C, Squires GD, editors. There is no such thing as a natural disaster: Race, class, and hurricane Katrina. New York: 
Routledge Taylor & Francis Group; 2013.
86 The World Bank. Poverty and Health Report. 2014. Available: https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/pover­
ty-health. Accessed: 17 May 2024.
87 Bose-O’Reilly S, Daanen H, Deering K, Gerrett N, Huynen MMTE, Lee J, et al. COVID-19 and heat waves: New challenges 
for healthcare systems. Environ Res. 2021;198:111153. Medline:33857461 doi:10.1016/j.envres.2021.111153
REFERENCES
Prina et al. 
PAPERS
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101	
16	
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101
  88 Thompson R, Landeg O, Kar-Purkayastha I, Hajat S, Kovats S, O’connell E. Heatwave Mortality in Summer 2020 in England: 
An Observational Study. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022;19:6123. Medline:35627660 doi:10.3390/ijerph19106123
  89 Semenza JC. Lateral public health: Advancing systemic resilience to climate change. Lancet Reg Health Eur. 2021;9:100231. 
Medline:34642677 doi:10.1016/j.lanepe.2021.100231
  90 Gładka A, Rymaszewska J, Zatoński T. Impact of air pollution on depression and suicide. Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 
2018;31:711–21. Medline:30281038
  91 Ayalon L, De Mendonça Lima CA, Banerjee D, Rabheru K, Fitzgerald K. Older persons in climate change-induced haz­
ards and building forward better: International Psychogeriatric Association, World Psychiatric Association-Section of 
Old Age Psychiatry, and NGO Committee on Ageing in Geneva Position Statement. Int Psychogeriatr. 2023:35:589–91. 
Medline:37655740 doi:10.1017/S1041610223000765
  92 Tome J, Richmond HL, Rahman M, Karmacharya D, Schwind JS. Climate change and health vulnerability in Nepal: A 
systematic review of the literature since 2010. Glob Public Health. 2022;17:1406–19. Medline:34061709 doi:10.1080/1
7441692.2021.1924824
  93 Nicholas PK, Breakey S, Blank P. Roles of Nurse Practitioners: Health Consequences of Climate Change in Vulnerable 
Older Adults. J Nurse Pract. 2020;16:433–7. doi:10.1016/j.nurpra.2020.03.011
  94 Alcasena F, Ager A, Le Page Y, Bessa P, Loureiro C, Oliveira T. Assessing Wildfire Exposure to Communities and Protected 
Areas in Portugal. Fire (Basel). 2021;4:82. doi:10.3390/fire4040082
  95 Romanello M, McGushin A, Di Napoli C, Drummond P, Hughes N, Jamart L, et al. The 2021 report of the Lancet 
Countdown on health and climate change: code red for a healthy future. Lancet. 2021;398:1619–62. Medline:34687662 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01787-6
  96 Levy BS, Patz JA. Climate Change, Human Rights, and Social Justice. Ann Glob Health. 2015;81:310–22. Medline:26615065 
doi:10.1016/j.aogh.2015.08.008
  97 Pillemer K, Tillema Cope M, Nolte J. Older People and Action on Climate Change: A Powerful But Underutilized Resource.
  98 Beard JR, Officer A, De Carvalho IA, Sadana R, Pot AM, Michel JP, et al. The World report on ageing and health: A pol­
icy framework for healthy ageing. Lancet. 2016;387:2145–54. Medline:26520231 doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00516-4
  99 World Health Organization. WHO Housing and Health Guidelines - Executive Summary. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2018.
100 World Health Organization. Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2021.
101 Watts N, Adger WN, Ayeb-Karlsson S, Bai Y, Byass P, Campbell-Lendrum D, et al. The Lancet Countdown: tracking prog­
ress on health and climate change. Lancet. 2017;389:1151–64. Medline:27856085 doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32124-9
102 United Nations. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing 2021-2030. United 
Nations; 2020.
103 United Nations. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The Paris Agreement | UNFCCC. United 
Nations;2018.
104 World Health Organization. Integrated care for older people (ICOPE): guidelines on community-level interventions to 
manage declines in intrinsic capacity: evidence profile: malnutrition. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017.
105 Nikora RD, McFarlane DR. Closing the Gap in a Generation: Health Equity Through Action on the Social Determinants 
of Health. J Health Polit Policy Law. 2010;35:438–42. doi:10.1215/03616878-2010-010
106 Nunes AR. The contribution of assets to adaptation to extreme temperatures among older adults. PloS One. 2018;13:e0208121. 
Medline:30496245 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0208121
107 Brennan M, O’Shea PM, Mulkerrin EC. Preventative strategies and interventions to improve outcomes during heatwaves. 
Age Ageing. 2020;49:729–32. Medline:32638997 doi:10.1093/ageing/afaa125
108 Qiu C, Ji JS, Bell ML. Effect modification of greenness on temperature-mortality relationship among older adults: A 
case-crossover study in China. Environ Res. 2021;197:111112. Medline:33838131 doi:10.1016/j.envres.2021.111112
109 See L, Rasiah RL, Laing R, Thompson SC. Considerations in Planning Physical Activity for Older Adults in Hot Climates: 
A Narrative Review. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18:1–18. Medline:33540584 doi:10.3390/ijerph18031331
110 Dvorak AC, Solo-Gabriele HM, Galletti A, Benzecry B, Malone H, Boguszewski V, et al. Possible impacts of sea level rise on 
disease transmission and potential adaptation strategies, a review. J Environ Manage. 2018;217:951–68. Medline:29679917 
doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.03.102
111 Gutierrez KS, LePrevost CE. Climate Justice in Rural Southeastern United States: A Review of Climate Change Impacts and 
Effects on Human Health. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2016;13:189. Medline:26848673 doi:10.3390/ijerph13020189
112 Di Falco S, Veronesi M, Yesuf M. Does Adaptation to Climate Change Provide Food Security? A Micro-Perspective from 
Ethiopia. Am J Agric Econ. 2011;93:829–46. doi:10.1093/ajae/aar006
113 Rankoana SA. Climate change impacts on water resources in a rural community in Limpopo province, South Africa: 
a community-based adaptation to water insecurity. Int J Clim Chang Strateg Manag. 2020;12:587–98. doi:10.1108/
IJCCSM-04-2020-0033
114 World Health Organization. Operational framework for building climate resilient health systems. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2015.
115 Nicholas PK, Breakey S, Blank P. Roles of Nurse Practitioners: Health Consequences of Climate Change in Vulnerable 
Older Adults. J Nurse Pract. 2020;16:433–7. doi:10.1016/j.nurpra.2020.03.011
116 Loveys K, Prina M, Axford C, Domènec ÒR, Weng W, Broadbent E, et al. Artificial intelligence for older people receiving 
long-term care: a systematic review of acceptability and effectiveness studies. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2022;3:e286–97. 
Medline:35515814 doi:10.1016/S2666-7568(22)00034-4
REFERENCES
The impact of climate hazards on older people
PAPERS
www.jogh.org • doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04101	
17	
2024  •  Vol. 14  •  04101
117 Haq G, Brown D, Hards S. Older People and Climate Change: the Case for Better Engagement. 2010.
118 Zheng H, Wood R, Moran D, Feng K, Tisserant A, Jiang M, et al. Rising carbon inequality and its driving factors from 
2005 to 2015. Glob Environ Change. 2023;82:102704. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2023.102704
119 Moody HR. Overcoming objections by elders to action on climate change. Int J Aging Hum Dev. 2014;80:64–75. 
Medline:26215299 doi:10.1177/0091415015591110
120 Gray SG, Raimi KT, Wilson R, Árvai J. Will Millennials save the world? The effect of age and generational differences on 
environmental concern. J Environ Manage. 2019;242:394–402. Medline:31059952 doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.04.071
121 Fylnn C, Yamasumi E, Fisher S, Snow D, Grant Z, Kirby M. Peoples’ Climate Vote. United Nations Development Programme 
and University of Oxford; 2021.
122 Frumkin H, Fried L, Moody R. Aging, climate change, and legacy thinking. Am J Public Health. 2012;102:1434–8. 
Medline:22698047 doi:10.2105/AJPH.2012.300663
123 Wickersham RH, Zaval L, Pachana NA, Smyer MA. The impact of place and legacy framing on climate action: A lifespan 
approach. PLoS One. 2020;15:e0228963. Medline:32097411 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0228963
124 Timalsina R, Songwathana P. Factors enhancing resilience among older adults experiencing disaster: A systematic review. 
Australas Emerg Care. 2020;23:11–22. Medline:31928971 doi:10.1016/j.auec.2019.12.007
125 Kok AAL, van Nes F, Deeg DJH, Widdershoven G, Huisman M. “Tough Times Have Become Good Times”: Resilience 
in Older Adults With a Low Socioeconomic Position. Gerontologist. 2018;58:843–52. Medline:29490029 doi:10.1093/
geront/gny007
126 King AC, King DK, Banchoff A, Solomonov S, Ben Natan O, Hua J, et al. Employing Participatory Citizen Science Methods 
to Promote Age-Friendly Environments Worldwide. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17:1541. Medline:32121001 
doi:10.3390/ijerph17051541
127 Rhoades J, Gruber J, Horton B. Promoting the Resilience of Older Adults Through Participatory Climate Change Adaptation 
Planning. J Homel Secur Emerg Manag. 2019;16:1–14. doi:10.1515/jhsem-2017-0057
128 New Philanthrophy Capital, Disability Rights UK and Re-engage. How will the climate and nature crises impact older 
people and Disabled people? 2022.
129 Jessel S, Sawyer S, Hernández D. Energy, Poverty, and Health in Climate Change: A Comprehensive Review of an Emerging 
Literature. Front Public Health. 2019;7:357. Medline:31921733 doi:10.3389/fpubh.2019.00357
130 Gagliardi C, Pillemer K, Gambella E, Piccinini F, Fabbietti P. Benefits for Older People Engaged in Environmental 
Volunteering and Socializing Activities in City Parks: Preliminary Results of a Program in Italy. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health. 2020;17:3772. Medline:32466501 doi:10.3390/ijerph17113772
131 Bunker A, Wildenhain J, Vandenbergh A, Henschke N, Rocklöv J, Hajat S, et al. Effects of Air Temperature on Climate-
Sensitive Mortality and Morbidity Outcomes in the Elderly; a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Epidemiological 
Evidence. EBioMedicine. 2016;6:258–68. Medline:27211569 doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.02.034
132 Yu W, Mengersen K, Wang X, Ye X, Guo Y, Pan X, et al. Daily average temperature and mortality among the elderly: a 
meta-analysis and systematic review of epidemiological evidence. Int J Biometeorol. 2012;56:569–81. Medline:21975970 
doi:10.1007/s00484-011-0497-3
133 Ayalon L, Keating N, Pillemer K, Rabheru K. Climate Change and Mental Health of Older Persons: A Human Rights 
Imperative. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2021;29:1038–40. Medline:34294541 doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2021.06.015
134 World Health Organization. Health for All: Transforming economies to deliver what matters The WHO Council on the 
Economics of Health for All. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023.
135 Pelling M, Garschagen M. Put equity first in climate adaptation. Nature. 2019;569:327–9. Medline:31089230 doi:10.1038/
d41586-019-01497-9
REFERENCES
