Editorial
Solar radiation modification is risky, but so is rejecting
it: a call for balanced research
Introduction
As highlighted again by the most recent International Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) report [1, 2], climate change is an unprece-
dented threat. With every day of continued emissions and with ev-
ery 10th of a degree of additional warming, more harm is done to
people and ecosystems, and the risk of hitting tipping points is
growing. Climate change affects people in all regions of the world
and is impeding progress towards all UN sustainable development
goals, including the eradication of poverty, inequality and injustice.
Eliminating emissions and removing carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere (together ‘mitigation’), and reducing damage through
adaptation to climate risks and impacts, are currently accepted
tools for addressing global warming and its consequences. But de-
spite significant efforts and progress, there is no guarantee that
these strategies will be sufficiently effective to keep global warm-
ing below 1.5 or even 2C (see below). This realization has led to in-
creasing interest in additional tools to reduce global warming and
its impacts, such as solar radiation modification (SRM).
SRM aims to limit warming by reflecting a fraction of the in-
coming solar radiation, for example, by introducing a thin aerosol
layer in the higher atmosphere or by brightening clouds [3, 4].
Modelling studies available to date suggest that SRM could de-
liver rapid cooling to help limit peak global warming to 1.5C until
emission reductions and carbon dioxide removal reduce green-
house gas concentrations to tolerable levels. Models also indicate
that using SRM to partially offset the assumed future warming
could limit change across relevant climate variables, not just
temperature, in most world regions [5].
SRM might provide an auxiliary tool to help reduce climate
risk, limit suffering, lessen ecosystem degradation and improve
the chances of sustainable development, but SRM is far from
perfect. It does not address the root cause of global warming,
does not precisely reverse all greenhouse gas-induced climate
change even if the global mean temperature were restored to
pre-industrial values, and is expected to come with its own set of
societal and environmental risks and problems [4]. Because of
this, SRM is highly controversial. Here we argue that nonetheless,
thorough and critical research on SRM is a safer path than wil-
fully neglecting it, as was recently demanded by a group of scien-
tists proposing a ‘Non-Use Agreement’ that amounts to a de facto
inhibition on SRM research [6].
Three concerns about climate mitigation call
for investigating SRM
Mitigation is humanity’s safest and most powerful means of
fighting global warming and the only way to address its root
cause. SRM can at best complement mitigation and adaptation.
However, even if humanity implements ambitious efforts in miti-
gation and adaptation, this may not suffice to prevent severe cli-
mate impacts and suffering. We have the following three
concerns:
•
Removal of CO2 from the atmosphere may not be achieved
at sufﬁcient scale and speed. Recent IPCC scenarios [1]
compatible with the Paris Agreement goal of limiting
warming to 1.5C rely on future technologies to remove
CO2 from the atmosphere, achieving global net-negative
emissions by 2060. As the necessary techniques are still
under development, it is uncertain whether they can be
deployed in time and with sufﬁcient intensity [7].
•
The climate may react more strongly to greenhouse
gases than expected. There is persisting uncertainty
about the amount of warming resulting from greenhouse
gases (climate sensitivity). According to the recent IPCC
report [1], doubling CO2 would warm the Earth by 2–5
(90% likelihood). Even the most ambitious IPCC sce-
nario mentioned above, SSP1-19, will lead to more than
1.5C warming if climate sensitivity is on the high end of
current estimates.
•
Limiting global warming to 1.5C may not be enough to
prevent serious damage. There is no certainty that severe
impacts can be avoided even at this moderate warming
level [2]. Adaptation may not sufﬁce to prevent losses and
suffering [8], especially if ecosystems or parts of the cli-
mate system cross tipping points [9]. But every 10th of a
degree of warming we prevent reduces the probability of
disastrous outcomes.
All three concerns have considerable probability; hence, the
world must be prepared for the possibility that one or more of
them prove true. If so, even ambitious decarbonization cannot
prevent devastating climate impacts, which would disproportion-
ately affect developing countries, induce injustice and instigate
unprecedented governance challenges. And if the implementa-
tion of mitigation strategies lags behind the ambitious IPCC sce-
narios, climate risks will increase even more.
Hence, while SRM is risky, so is rejecting it. Ignoring either
type of risk would distort judgement. We therefore recommend a
‘Golden Rule’ of assessing SRM: ‘The risks of researching, devel-
oping and possibly implementing SRM must be balanced against
the climate risks SRM would attenuate’ [10, 11]. Given the severe
risks of climate change, disregarding SRM may have strong reper-
cussions for future generations. Rejecting SRM is therefore not
Received: February 20, 2023. Accepted: February 20, 2023
V
C The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, 3(1), kgad002
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgad002
Advance Access Publication Date: 20 March 2023
Editorial
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad002/7081048 by guest on 26 August 2024
the obvious default option, but a choice that needs to be scruti-
nized both scientifically and ethically, in the same way as pursu-
ing SRM needs scrutiny.
Research and transparent assessment is
needed to lay the groundwork for future
decision making
If one or more of the aforementioned concerns materializes,
there is a significant chance that a decision on the use of SRM
has to be made in the future, especially if the (perceived) pressure
from climate impacts calls for fast and drastic action. Should
such a situation arise, ignorance would add to the risk of mis-
guided decisions and compromise the legitimacy of the decision-
making process.
Pursuing SRM in spite of lack of knowledge bears a risk of inef-
fective or harmful implementation strategies. Rejecting SRM a
priori would deprive humanity of a potential auxiliary tool against
climate change impacts. Rejecting SRM is the correct decision if
no beneficial SRM implementation strategy exists, but it might be
difficult to uphold this decision under pressure without sufficient
evidence for the harmfulness of SRM. Hence, regardless of
whether SRM is beneficial or detrimental, ignorance jeopardizes
rational, balanced, justifiable decision making.
Currently, humanity is not well prepared for a possible deci-
sion on SRM. From 2008 to 2018, only about 52 million dollars
have been spent on SRM research [4] compared to over 30 billion
for climate research in general [12]. Knowledge gaps remain re-
garding SRM’s technical implementation, effectiveness, climate
and environmental effects, best implementation scenarios, and
governance. Our generation has the chance and capability to per-
form responsible and critical SRM research in time to gain the
knowledge needed for sound decision making. These research
efforts should include thorough, impartial, interdisciplinary and
internationally legitimized assessment by international bodies
such as the IPCC.
SRM research and ethics
Besides the environmental risks associated with SRM deploy-
ment, SRM research is also not without risks, especially on an
ethical, societal and political level. Three main fears are raised
against SRM.
•
Delayed decarbonization: The fear that the development
of SRM, or even simply knowing that SRM is being consid-
ered, will lead to less ambitious mitigation efforts.
•
Sleepwalking
into
implementation:
The
fear
that
researching and discussing SRM will almost inevitably
lead to the development and eventually implementation,
for example, by shifting value judgement or establishing
interest groups.
•
Undemocratic decision making and governance: The fear
that powerful actors, such as rich and inﬂuential nations,
might impose decisions on SRM in the rest of the world.
This would violate procedural justice and, given the global
effects of SRM, raise concerns that groups excluded from
the decision-making process would be subject to unfav-
ourable outcomes.
These are important concerns, but they may not be inevitable.
Behavioural experiments found that respondents confronted
with information on SRM might actually be more willing to miti-
gate [13, 14] although these studies are not uncontested [15] and
may not be representative of the behaviour of decision makers
[16]. Also, if research exposes that SRM is infeasible or grossly un-
desirable, it might actually debunk unfounded hopes of a techno-
fix. Lock-in dynamics, while possible, is far from inevitable: Many
budding technology developments never make it to the imple-
mentation stage [17], so research does not automatically lead to
implementation. Also, the most difficult part in SRM implemen-
tation is not technical feasibility but finding an implementation
strategy that optimizes benefits and minimizes risks (which
might amount to abstaining from implementation altogether).
Timely SRM research, even if it increases the likelihood of imple-
mentation, may well reduce the risk of ‘inappropriate’ implemen-
tation. Rejecting SRM research does not necessarily prevent
future undemocratic or unilateral decision making on SRM. In
fact, given the current unequal distribution of SRM knowledge,
rejecting further research now might mostly be a decision of priv-
ileged actors who currently have the capacity to engage in (or op-
pose) SRM research [18] and would thus be an undemocratic act
in itself. Transparent research, outreach and capacity building,
especially in vulnerable developing countries [19], can empower
citizens and underrepresented regions to take part in the debate
and pre-empt rogue actors from monopolizing SRM knowledge
[20].
The three risks are thus not necessarily made inevitable by en-
gaging in SRM research, nor avoided by rejecting SRM research
and, in our view, do not justify ignoring the potential of SRM.
Instead, SRM research should be conducted in a way that mini-
mizes risks induced by the research itself.
Following a number of scholars who have worked on moral
frameworks for SRM [4, 21], we propose the following broad prin-
ciples:
•
Mitigation (including removals) and adaptation need to be
the primary focus of climate policy. SRM should at most
serve as an addition to reducing greenhouse gas concen-
trations.
•
Knowledge and implementation of SRM must be adminis-
tered in the public interest. This entails that the provision
of SRM is organized by a globally legitimized body, and not
based on private interests.
•
Legitimate governance processes must be adhered to, and
societal values such as justice and equality must be cen-
tral when considering the role SRM research can play in
lessening the threat of climate change.
•
Any decision about deployment should be taken on the
basis of broad public participation. Special emphasis
should be placed on underrepresented and vulnerable
communities, such as the Global South and Indigenous
Peoples.
•
The research process should be transparent, reﬂective and
cooperative (also on the international level), and provide
ample space for off-ramps, in case certain ﬁndings point
towards undesirable outcomes of SRM deployment.
•
SRM research must aim to create a comprehensive body
of knowledge covering environmental, technical, political,
societal and ethical sciences and properly linking and
combining these domains.
•
A solid framework for the governance of SRM should be in
place before implementation is seriously considered. This
entails
engaging
in
research
and
consultations
on
2
|
Editorial
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad002/7081048 by guest on 26 August 2024
governance parallel to studying the environmental and
technological aspects of SRM.
While there exists no complete framework yet to ensure ad-
herence to these principles, the US National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering and Medicine have recently published a
collection of recommendations for scientists, states and the in-
ternational community to promote fair and balanced SRM re-
search [4]. These include: self-governance by the scientific
community, for example, by establishing a code of conduct;
transparency and commitment to open access; public engage-
ment, outreach and inclusive international consultation; interna-
tional collaboration and capacity building; regulating (large-
scale) outdoor experiments; and non-commerciality.
The above principles are not intended to be the last word on the
ethics of SRM research and deployment. Any ongoing ethical delib-
eration requires an open mind for criticism, debate and amend-
ment. This is particularly important since the discussion around
SRM research has thus far not been sufficiently representative nor
global. However, this lack of representation only underscores the
need for more inclusive thorough and systematic research into SRM
and its impacts. By calling for ethical SRM research, we recognize
that ethics has to be a central part of the research process itself.
Conclusions
Given the most recent projections of the IPCC, immediate and de-
cisive action is necessary to reduce the threats of climate change.
Rapid emission reduction and carbon dioxide removal are essen-
tial to keep and stabilize the climate system in a liveable state,
and any further
delay will increase
climate-induced risks.
Meanwhile, SRM might help to meaningfully reduce climate-
induced risks, but it may also introduce new ones. When assess-
ing SRM, all these risks must be fairly balanced. However, knowl-
edge of SRM is as yet insufficient to achieve this.
Given the severity of the climate crisis, there is a significant
chance that humanity will eventually have to take a decision in
favour or against the use of SRM, and this possibility will not van-
ish if we now choose to ignore the issue or prohibit SRM research
and assessment. If a choice on the use of SRM has to be made, ig-
norance increases the risk of inadequate decisions. We believe
that society has a moral obligation to engage in SRM research—
and to set up this process in such a way as to minimize potential
risks stemming from the research itself. We therefore call for in-
ternational, inclusive, transparent, reflective and comprehensive
research efforts to enable a balanced assessment of SRM.
Supplementary material
A version of this paper with additional footnotes and an updated
list of all signatories can be found on the website: https://www.
call-for-balance.com.
Funding
This work has received no dedicated funding.
Competing interests
No competing interest is declared, other than that the authors
are climate and governance scientists who also work on SRM and
therefore have an interest in SRM research funding.
Authors’ Contributions
Claudia Elisabeth Wieners (Conceptualization, Writing—original
draft [equal]), Ben Paul Hofbauer (Conceptualization, Writing—
original
draft
[equal]),
Iris
E.
de
Vries
(Conceptualization,
Writing—original
draft
[equal]),
Matthias
Honegger
(Conceptualization,
Writing—original
draft
[equal]),
Daniele
Visioni
(Conceptualization,
Writing—original
draft
[equal]),
Herman W.J. Russchenberg (Conceptualization [equal]), and
Tyler Felgenhauer (Conceptualization [equal]). All authors con-
tributed to initial discussions and outline of manuscript. Claudia
Elisabeth Wieners, Ben Paul Hofbauer, Iris E. de Vries, Matthias
Honegger, and Daniele Visioni wrote manuscript.
Claudia E. Wieners
1,2*, Ben P. Hofbauer3,
Iris E. de Vries4, Matthias Honegger5, Daniele Visioni6,
Hermann W.J. Russchenberg7, Tyler Felgenhauer8
1Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Research, Utrecht
University, Utrecht 3584 CC, The Netherlands
2Centre for Complex Systems Studies, Utrecht University,
Utrecht 3584 CE, The Netherlands
3Faculty of Technology, Policy and Management, Delft
University of Technology, Delft 2628 BX, The Netherlands
4Institute for Atmospheric and Climate Science, ETH Zu¨ rich,
Zu¨ rich 8092, Switzerland
5Perspectives Climate Research gGmbH, Freiburg i.B. 79106,
Germany
6Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering,
Cornell University, Freiburg i.B. 79106, Germany
7Department of Geoscience and Remote Sensing, Delft
University of Technology, Delft 2628CN, The Netherlands
8Pratt School of Engineering, The Duke Center on Risk, Duke
University, Durham NC 27705, USA
*Correspondence address. Institute for Marine and Atmospheric
research, Utrecht, Utrecht University, Princetonplein 5, Utrecht
3584 CC, The Netherlands. E-mail:c.e.wieners@uu.nl
References
1.
IPCC WG1 Summary for Policymakers. Climate change 2021:
the physical science basis. In: V Masson-Delmotte, P Zhai, A
Pirani et al. (eds), Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press & Policy, 2021, 3–32.
2.
IPCC WG2 Summary for Policymakers. Climate change 2022:
impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. In: H-O Po¨ rtner, DC
Roberts, M Tignor et al. (eds), Contribution of Working Group II to
the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. Cambridge University Press & Policy, 2022,
3–33.
3.
Baum CM, Low S, Sovacool BK. Between the sun and us: Expert
perceptions on the innovation, policy, and deep uncertainties of
space-based solar geoengineering. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2022;
158:112179.
4.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
Reﬂecting
Sunlight:
Recommendations
for
Solar
Geoengineering
Research and Research Governance. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press, 2021.
5.
Irvine P, Emanuel K, He J et al. Gabriel Vecchi and David Keith
Halving warming with idealized solar geoengineering moder-
ates key climate hazards. Nat Climate Change 2019;9:295–9.
6.
Non-Use Agreement on SRM. https://www.solargeoeng.org (18
February 18 2023, date last accessed).
Editorial
|
3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad002/7081048 by guest on 26 August 2024
7.
Lawrence MG, Scha¨fer S, Muri H et al. Evaluating climate geoen-
gineering proposals in the context of the Paris Agreement tem-
perature goals. Nat Commun 2018;9:3734.
8.
Felgenhauer T. Addressing the limits to adaptation across
four damage–response systems. Environ Sci Policy 2015;50:214–24.
9.
McKay DIA, Staal A, Abrams JF et al. Lenton exceeding 1.5C
global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points
Science 2022;377:6611.
10.
Felgenhauer T, Bala G, Borsuk ME et al. Solar radiation modiﬁca-
tion: a risk-risk analysis. Carnegie Climate Governance Initiative
(C2G), 2022. https://www.c2g2.net/wp-content/uploads/202203-
C2G-RR-Full.pdf (18 February, 2023, date last accessed).
11.
Sovacool BK, Baum CM, Low S. Risk-risk governance in a low-
carbon
future:
Exploring
institutional,
technological,
and
behavioural trade-offs in climate geoegineering pathways. Risk
Analysis 2022;1–12.
12.
Overland I, Sovacool BK. The misallocation of climate research
funding. Energy Res Soc Sci 2020;62:101349.
13.
Cherry TL, Kallbekken S, Kroll S et al. Does solar geoengineering
crowd out climate change mitigation efforts? Evidence from a
stated preference referendum on a carbon tax. Climatic Change
2021;165:6.
14.
Merk C, Po¨nitzsch G, Rehdanz K. Knowledge about aerosol injec-
tion does not reduce individual mitigation efforts. Environ Res
Lett 2016;11:054009.
15.
Burns ET, Flegal JA, Keith DW et al. What do people think when
they think about solar geoengineering? A review of empirical
social science literature, and prospects for future research.
Earth’s Future 2016;4:536–42.
16.
Reynolds JL. Is solar geoengineering ungovernable? A critical
assessment
of
governance
challenges
identiﬁed
by
the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. WIREs 2020;12:
2e690.
17.
Daniel EC. The slippery slope argument against geoengineering
research. J Appl Philos 2019;36: 675–87.
18.
Ta´ıwo` OO, Talati S. Who are the engineers? Solar geoengineer-
ing research and justice. Glob Environ Polit 2022;22:12–18.
19.
The DEGREES Initiative. https://www.degrees.ngo/about/ (18
February, 2023, date last accessed).
20.
Smith W, Henly C. Updated and outdated reservations about re-
search into stratospheric aerosol injection. Climatic Change 2021;
164:39.
21.
Rayner S, Heyward C, Kruger T et al. The Oxford principles.
Climatic Change 2013;121:499–512.
4
|
Editorial
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad002/7081048 by guest on 26 August 2024
