Social media messaging by climate action NGOs: a case 
study of the 2019–2020 Australian Black 
Summer bushfires
Joshua Ettinger 
1,, Mary Sanford 
2, Peter Walton 
3, David Holmes 
4, James Painter 
5 
1School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QY, UK 
2Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3JS, UK 
3School of Earth and the Environment, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK 
4Monash University Climate Change Communication Research Hub, Monash University, 3145, Australia 
5Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, Department of Politics and International Relations, University of Oxford, Oxford OX2 6PY, UK
Correspondence address. School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford, S Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QY, UK. E-mail: joshua.ettinger@ouce.ox.ac.uk
Abstract 
Researchers are increasingly examining discourses associated with climate change and extreme weather events across different 
communication channels. However, further research is needed to examine how environmental non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) frame extreme weather events and their relationship to climate change on social media platforms. This is an important topic 
as these groups play a significant role communicating science and driving environmental action. Here, we examine how Australian 
climate action NGOs framed the relationship of the 2019–2020 Black Summer bushfires to climate change on Twitter/X. Analyzing 
2,077 bushfire-related tweets from a sample of 102 climate group accounts through manual content analysis, we found that these 
groups frequently linked bushfires with climate change, representing 59% of their bushfire-related tweets during the period of the 
fires. Forty-two percent of tweets mentioned climate change without describing how it relates to bushfires; 16% described specifically 
how climate change influences the frequency and intensity of bushfires; and only 1% suggested inaccurately that climate change 
causes bushfires to occur. Fifteen percent of tweets discussed risk factors beyond climate change that influence bushfire impacts, 
such as firefighting, emergency responses, hazard reduction, and community vulnerabilities. Only seven accounts mentioned an 
extreme event attribution study of the Black Summer fires. Based on these findings, we discuss opportunities and challenges of 
climate science communication in the extreme weather context, and describe promising directions for future research.
Lay Summary 
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) play a significant role communicating climate change and mobilizing climate action. This study 
explores how Australian climate action NGOs communicated about climate change on Twitter during the 2019–2020 Australian Black 
Summer bushfires. This is an important topic for research as there are nuances around how climate change relates to extreme weather 
events. Climate change makes bushfires more frequent and intense, but it does not directly cause bushfires to occur. Additionally, risks 
from bushfires do not only result from climate change—firefighting, landscape dynamics, emergency communications, evacuation proce­
dures, and other types of responses shape the impacts of these events. The NGOs we examined overall did not inaccurately claim that cli­
mate change causes bushfires (only 1% of total tweets). However, only 15% of the tweets mentioned non-climate change factors (such as 
firefighting) that shape bushfire risks. Fourty-two percent of tweets mentioned climate change but did not explain how it relates to bush­
fires. Based on these findings, we discuss opportunities, challenges, and ongoing questions around climate science communication in the 
extreme weather context.
Keywords: extreme weather; bushfire; Black Summer; Twitter; NGOs; climate change; communication
Background
Climate change is altering the frequency, duration, and intensity 
of many kinds of extreme weather events around the world [1]. 
Higher concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere 
lead to more frequent and more intense heatwaves, heavy rain­
fall events, and fire weather conditions, among impacts on other 
types of weather. Extreme event attribution (EEA) techniques al­
low climate scientists to go beyond describing how climate 
change affects types of extreme weather to assess how climate 
change affects the frequency and/or intensity of specific extreme 
weather events [2]. For example, researchers found that climate 
change increased the likelihood of a heatwave like the 
November/December 2022 event in South America by about 
60 times [3]. At the same time, not every extreme weather event 
is necessarily affected by climate change. For example, research­
ers found that the potential influence of climate change on the 
2021 drought in Madagascar was negligible compared to natural 
variability—poverty and strong reliance on rainfall were the key 
Received: July 10, 2023. Revised: October 4, 2023. Accepted: October 6, 2023 
# The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, 3(1), kgad011  
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgad011 
Advance Access Publication Date: 13 October 2023 
Research Article   
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
factors that caused food insecurity associated with the 
drought [4].
As scientists continue to assess how climate change alters ex­
treme weather, environmental communication scholars are in­
creasingly examining discourses associated with these events 
across different communication channels. A growing body of lit­
erature has assessed to what extent and how weather events are 
linked to climate change in news media. In general, journalists 
are increasingly connecting extreme weather events to climate 
change and offering more coverage to climate change in general 
[5, 6]. For instance, Hopke (2020) found a growing number of cli­
mate change mentions in articles about heatwaves and wildfires 
from 2013–2018 across several countries [7]. Media coverage of 
the 2022 summer heatwave in the United Kingdom included sig­
nificant discussion of climate change, which was often situated 
in the context of politics and climate policies [8].
There have also been analyses of climate change and extreme 
weather discourses on social media platforms. Examining social 
media is an important area for climate change communication 
research as these platforms (such as Facebook, Reddit, TikTok, 
and Twitter/X) are key spaces for climate change contestation, 
discussion, mobilization, and science communication [9, 10]. 
Social media discourse can differ significantly from news media 
coverage of the same topics [11]. Social media platforms are also 
a major news source, especially for young people [12]. 
Researchers have shown that the occurrence of extreme weather 
events is associated with an increase in social media posts that 
mention climate change [13, 14], with different kinds of weather 
events generating varying amounts of attention to climate 
change [15–17]. For instance, Olynk Widmar et al. (2022) found 
that posts about hurricanes mentioned climate change less often 
than wildfires [18]. Other analyses have examined the roles of so­
cial media for emergency communication, disaster response, and 
relief coordination during extreme events [19–23].
Framing climate change and extreme weather 
relationships
Amid increasing attention to the relationship between climate 
change and extreme weather events, some researchers have cau­
tioned that a sole focus on climate change could displace atten­
tion from the roles of vulnerability, adaptation, exposure, and 
disaster risk reduction strategies in shaping risks from hazards 
[24–26]. As described in the IPCC Special Report on Global 
Warming of 1.5C, ‘Risk results from the interaction of vulnerabil­
ity (of the affected system), its exposure over time (to the hazard), 
as well as the (climate-related) hazard and the likelihood of its 
occurrence’ [27, p. 557]. Put simply, while climate change can af­
fect meteorological aspects of extreme weather events, how well 
communities and governments prepare for these events ulti­
mately determines if hazards become disasters [28].
Likewise, the phrase ‘natural disaster’ is problematic as it 
implies that the impacts of extreme weather events are purely 
due to meteorological aspects [29]. Policymakers can exploit this 
idea to divert attention from local planning decisions and failures 
[26]. Understanding and communicating the connections of cli­
mate change to extreme weather events remains crucially impor­
tant; however, focusing entirely on climate change could sideline 
‘local ways of reducing vulnerability to extreme weather and … 
end up absolving policymakers of their own failures to climate- 
proof their citizens’ [30, p. 1]. A key point is the interconnected­
ness of risk dimensions [31]. Climate change, in combination 
with changing levels of exposure and vulnerability, has increased 
costs associated with many weather-related disasters around the 
world for several decades [32]. Perceptions of these risk factors 
can also differ among citizens in the Global North and Global 
South [33].
The concept of framing offers a helpful theoretical lens to ex­
plore different ways that communications about extreme 
weather events can focus on climate change, vulnerability, expo­
sure, disaster risk reduction strategies, or other risk aspects. 
Framing refers to the act of emphasizing certain salient charac­
teristics while neglecting others when describing any phenomena 
[34, 35]. Experimental studies have shown that contrasting cli­
mate change frames can generate different audience responses, 
including a range of climate attitudes, emotions, and behavioral 
intentions [36–38]. How communicators frame the risks of ex­
treme weather events, their underlying causality, and their 
impacts makes certain types of solutions more applicable (i.e. cli­
mate mitigation versus disaster risk reduction strategies) and 
assigns blame to different actors.
The framing of extreme weather events is particularly rele­
vant because when they occur, they are often described as focus­
ing events or teachable moments to reduce risks from such 
events in the future [39]. The motivation to conduct this study 
was partly informed by our prior research in which we presented 
non-climate scientists in the UK with results of an EEA study 
showing how climate change affected the 2019 United Kingdom 
summer heatwave [40]. We found that EEA was overall an atten­
tion grabbing and helpful climate change communication tool. 
However, when asked about actions to reduce future heatwave 
risks, participants only discussed climate mitigation, rather than 
a range of other adaptative strategies to reduce risks. Framing 
the event only in terms of climate change primed participants to 
only discuss climate change mitigation as the way to reduce 
risks. This is one example of how the ways in which communica­
tors frame extreme weather events may influence subsequent 
learning—in other words, what an event ‘teaches’ and to whom.
Environmental NGOs as climate change 
communicators
In analyzing discourse around extreme weather events and asso­
ciated disasters, it is important to distinguish between different 
kinds of actors and communication channels. Compared to news 
media analyses, there has been less examination of how environ­
mental non-governmental organizations (NGOs) engage with and 
communicate about extreme weather events. This topic merits 
further research as NGOs play a significant role in driving 
environmental action [41]. They also act as ‘alternative science 
communicators’, increasing societal awareness of scientific re­
search and utilizing this information to advocate for their causes 
[42–45]. In doing so, they broaden discourse around scientific 
evidence to connect knowledge with political action [46]. As 
described by Eden (2010, p. 224), NGOs ‘widen the circulation of 
information and ideas about policy, ethics and practical applica­
tion in order to mobilize other actors and publics, raise aware­
ness and encourage purposeful scientific input to key 
debates’ [47].
Researchers have previously examined how NGOs use social 
media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter as part of their 
campaign strategies [48–50]. Bazago et al. (2020) examined tweets 
from environmental NGOs during hurricanes Harvey, Irma and 
Maria that occurred in 2017 in the United States [51]. They found 
that climate change was frequently mentioned, often in associa­
tion with critiques of political figures. Vu et al. (2020) examined 
how environmental NGOs frame climate change in their commu­
nications on Facebook, finding that posts focused more on 
2 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
climate change problems than climate solutions [52]. To our 
knowledge, there have not been studies specifically examining 
how these groups frame the relationship between extreme 
weather events and climate change on social media platforms. In 
contrast to a growing number of studies examining EEA coverage 
in news media [53, 54], there is also yet to be research examining 
the prevalence of EEA studies being shared by these (and other) 
actors on social media.
Case study: the 2019–2020 Australian Black 
Summer bushfires
This study advances our understanding of extreme weather and 
climate change NGO discourses through an analysis of how 
Australian climate groups communicated on Twitter/X during 
the 2019–2020 Australian Black Summer bushfires. Although 
fires are an inherent feature of the Australian landscape, the 
2019–2020 bushfire season involved a series of unusually intense 
bushfires that severely affected all Australian states and territo­
ries, especially eastern Australia [55]. Over 30 people were killed 
as a direct result of the fires and an estimated 429 more people 
died due to smoke exposure, along with thousands of buildings 
destroyed and over 30 million hectares of land burnt [56–58]. The 
fires led to billions of dollars of damage and affected billions of 
animals [59–61]. They also disproportionately affected socio- 
economically disadvantaged communities [62]. The most signifi­
cant fires occurred from the beginning of September 2019 to the 
end of January 2020, which is part of a trend of longer bushfire 
seasons [63].
The fires received substantial global news coverage, especially 
at key moments during the season such as when smoke blan­
keted Sydney [64], when Victoria declared catastrophic levels of 
fire weather [65], and when citizens of Mallacoota, Victoria, evac­
uated to beaches on New Year’s Eve, generating dramatic photos 
and videos [66]. Burgess et al. (2020) analyzed Australian news 
coverage of the Black Summer and found that about 50% of 
articles mentioned climate change, compared to only 5% of 
articles about the 2009 Black Saturday fires; 29% of articles in­
cluded in-depth discussion of climate change; and 10% of articles 
described failures to adequately plan for the fires [67]. Different 
Australian news outlets pushed contesting narratives about the 
connection (or not) of climate change to the fires [67, 68].
The fires also received significant attention on social media. 
Weber et al. (2020) examined the spread of misinformation on 
Twitter that arson caused the Black Summer fires, revealing po­
larization of different online communities that sought to either 
propagate or debunk these claims [69]. Ogie et al. (2022) examined 
disaster recovery on Twitter during and after the Black Summer 
fires, finding that different types of Twitter users (e.g. citizens, 
governments, NGOs) discussed various aspects of bushfire recov­
ery at different periods, such as rebuilding infrastructure, sup­
porting mental health, and filing insurance claims [70]. Users 
also discussed the impacts of the fires on biodiversity [71].
Although climate change does not directly cause fires, it is 
making fire weather—the conditions in which fires begin and 
spread—more frequent and more intense in many regions across 
the world [63, 72]. Climate change amplified the Black Summer 
fires: they happened after three consecutive years of drought and 
dry winters [73], and occurred during Australia’s hottest and dri­
est year on record [55]. An EEA analysis found that climate 
change made the fire weather conditions like those that occurred 
during the Black Summer at least 30% more likely (initially pub­
lished on the World Weather Attribution on 10 January 2020 and 
later as a peer-reviewed study [74]).
Beyond climate change, the Black Summer exposed a variety 
of ways in which Australia could have more effectively averted 
the harmful impacts of the fires. As Chester (2020, p. 245) 
describes, ‘the scale and catastrophic impact of these bushfires 
were caused—and exacerbated—by a conjunction of cumulative 
events, (in)actions, and institutions’ [24]. This includes under- 
resourced firefighters, most of whom are volunteers [75]; a lack of 
preparation of the Australian healthcare system [76]; long-term 
land-management decisions, such as insufficient hazard reduc­
tion through planned and cultural burns (practiced by Indigenous 
Australian Peoples), although scientists debate the impact of fuel 
loads on the fires [77–79]; insufficient early warning and emer­
gency communication systems; ecological dynamics such as the 
dominance of highly flammable eucalyptus trees [80]; and, as 
some have argued, a failure to implement lessons from prior gov­
ernmental bushfire inquiries [81], among other factors. The 
Australian government’s 2020 Royal Commission into National 
Natural Disaster Arrangements offers an array of recommenda­
tions based on a review of the Black Summer fires, including im­
proving government emergency mobilization, enhancing air 
quality monitoring, increasing climate change adaptation and 
mitigation, providing additional firefighting resources and sup­
port, and improving emergency communication systems [59].
Research questions
The Black Summer demonstrates how a combination of climate 
change, along with planning decisions at federal, state, and local 
levels, can shape the impacts of bushfires. These dynamics, as well 
as the significant amount of attention the fires generated, make the 
Black Summer a highly topical case study to analyze how climate 
action NGOs framed the event in their social media communica­
tions. Three research questions structure our analysis.
First, we examined how these groups framed the bushfire- 
climate change relationship on Twitter during the Black 
Summer bushfires: 
RQ1. How did Australian climate action NGOs frame the relationship 
between bushfires and climate change in their tweets during the Black 
Summer bushfires?
Building on research tracking news media coverage of EEA stud­
ies, for our second research question, we measured how fre­
quently the groups shared results of the van Oldenborgh et al. 
(2021) Black Summer extreme event attribution study (described 
earlier [74]): 
RQ2. To what extent did Australian climate groups share on Twitter 
the results of the van Oldenborgh et al. (2021) extreme event attribu­
tion study of the Black Summer bushfires?
Third, we examined how these groups framed the Black Summer 
in terms of climate change versus other risk dynamics that affect 
bushfire impacts: 
RQ3. To what extent did Australian climate groups mention non- 
climate change factors, such as disaster risk reduction, emergency 
responses, firefighting, and vulnerability, in shaping bushfire risks in 
their tweets during the Black Summer bushfires?
Method
To answer our research questions, we first identified climate ac­
tion groups that met the following criteria: (i) is based in 
Australia; (ii) is a non-governmental organization that has 
addressing climate change as part of its core mission; and 
Ettinger et al. | 3  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
(iii) has a Twitter account. We used Climate Action Network 
Australia—the largest available online list of Australia-based cli­
mate advocacy groups—to create our initial sample [82]. The list 
contained 149 organizations in November 2022 when the sample 
was created. It included organizations of a large diversity of sizes 
located around the country; community, regional, national, and 
Australia-based offices of international groups; as well as groups 
representing diverse cultural backgrounds, such as First Nations 
Indigenous Australian Peoples and various religious affiliations. 
We then removed all groups that did not have a Twitter account, 
which narrowed the sample to 102 groups (see Supplementary 
Materials for list). For simplicity, we use the terms NGO and cli­
mate action groups interchangeably, although we acknowledge 
that there are a wide variety of different kinds of groups, includ­
ing significant differences between local, grassroots community 
associations versus international organizations, and that groups 
may have different aims, approaches, and methods (e.g. policy 
engagement, litigation, protests, etc.). A detailed overview of 
Australian climate action groups is beyond the scope of this pa­
per, but we refer readers to Gulliver et al. (2020) for further infor­
mation [83].
Using the Twitter API, we collected all posts from these 
accounts from 1 July 2019 to 31 March 2020, which are the dates 
used by the Australian government’s Royal Commission into 
National Natural Disaster Arrangements [59]. We analyzed 
tweets during the period of the fires as a reflection of how the oc­
currence of these events provides an opportunity window for cli­
mate change communication while they remain matters of 
public attention. The API returned 49,229 tweets, retweets, and 
comments. Only original tweets were kept (rather than retweets 
or comments) as we sought to uncover how organizations them­
selves framed the relationship between bushfires and climate 
change, rather than reposts of content written by others. The 
only exception to this was for RQ2, for which we included 
retweets given significant news coverage about the Black 
Summer EEA study and the possibility that groups might retweet 
these articles, rather than writing new tweets about the study.
All tweets that did not mention terms such as ‘fire’, ‘Black 
Summer’, ‘burn’, and other related phrases were removed (see 
Supplementary Materials for full query list). In total, 2,507 tweets 
from 59 of the 102 accounts remained. This list was then manu­
ally checked to remove false positives irrelevant to the topic of 
bushfires, such as those that mentioned fires happening else­
where in the world. This resulted in a final dataset of 2,077 
tweets. Two of the co-authors manually coded these tweets fol­
lowing deductive content analysis informed by the research 
questions [84]. Although we did not conduct a visual discourse 
analysis, we checked visual imagery associated with tweets for 
any images containing text or symbols associated with the coding 
criteria (e.g. protestors holding signs that said ‘climate action 
now’). This helped ensure we did not miss important context on 
tweets that relied more on visuals than text to express their mes­
sages. Please see the Supplementary Materials for the codebook 
and further methodological details.
We used a manual coding approach as it helped facilitate a 
fine-grained discourse analysis to assess subtle nuances in the 
framing of extreme weather events and climate change. We con­
ducted two rounds of intercoder reliability checks between the 
two coders on 25 random tweets from the dataset, with differen­
ces discussed between rounds. This ultimately resulted in reli­
ability scores of 0.920 for Cohen's kappa and 0.921 for 
Krippendorff’s alpha, which represent strong agreement. The full 
analysis then commenced. At a reflexive level, we acknowledge 
our own researcher subjectivity in interpreting frames, as well as 
inherent power dynamics assessing the communications of 
others who may not have benefitted from the same level of 
access to environmental education, resources, and training.
Findings
Framing the bushfire and climate change 
relationship
During the Black Summer bushfire season, our sample of 
Australian climate action group accounts tweeted a total of 2,077 
times about bushfires (excluding retweets and comments). 
Mentions of bushfires corresponded closely with the bushfire sea­
son as the fires ramp up over time, with peaks during significant 
fire events, and begin to taper off as the season ends (Fig. 1).
Of the total sample, 1,227 tweets (59%) mentioned climate 
change or related phrases such as global warming, climate emer­
gency, and climate crisis. In contrast, 872 tweets (42% of total 
sample, 71% of climate change-related tweets) mentioned cli­
mate change but did not specify the relationship between climate 
change and bushfires (Fig. 2). Tweets in this category often added 
hashtags such as #climatecrisis, #climateaction #climateemer­
gency; made vague statements such as ‘this is climate change’; 
mentioned fossil fuels/fossil fuel companies; or discussed politi­
cal inaction on climate change. Several examples are in­
cluded below: 
Catastrophic bushfires across South Australia as the state swelters 
through 40þ degrees—this is climate change. This is the impact of 
mining and burning fossil fuels.
This summer's devastating bushfires have made the #ClimateCrisis 
impossible to ignore for millions of people. Join us at the Climate 
Crisis National Day of Action event in Melbourne! See you there Sat 
Feb 22, 2pm State Library.
September: thousands of students strike for climate action. 
November: 600 NSW schools closed due to catastrophic fire risk. 
#ClimateChangeIsReal
There were 327 tweets (16% of total sample, 27% of tweets that 
mentioned climate change) that specified that climate change 
worsens bushfires by making them more likely and/or more in­
tense. These tweets often linked to news articles and included 
quotations from climate scientists and fire experts. Several 
tweets went into precise details of how climate change has these 
effects on bushfires (e.g. by drying out the landscape), but most 
stated more simply that climate change exacerbates bushfire fre­
quency and/or intensity: 
Thousands of people are watching their homes burn as dangerous 
bushfires race across NSW and QLD, and our government are still 
failing to acknowledge the direct link between the climate crisis and 
more extreme bushfires and drought.
Victoria’s climate has changed in recent decades, becoming hotter 
and drier.
• an overall increase in the frequency of unusually hot days 
• a decline in cool season rainfall over the last 30 years. 
• greater number of very high fire danger days in spring 
@BOM_au reports Australia has officially recorded its warmest, 
driest year on record, and the outlook points to increased catastrophic fire 
weather. #AustraliaFires #AustraliaisBurning #ActOnClimate
4 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
Only 28 tweets (1% of total sample, 2% of tweets that mentioned 
climate change) suggested that climate change directly causes 
bushfires to occur, used phrases suggesting climate change was 
solely to blame for their impacts (often specifically blaming for­
mer Prime Minister Scott Morrison for climate inaction), or im­
plied that the bushfires would not have occurred without 
climate change: 
This isn't normal. Bushfires rage from QLD to the NSW South Coast, 
again. Meanwhile, the Morrison Gov is gripped by denial. Their inabil­
ity to acknowledge the cause of fires subjects communities to more 
suffering. To save lives, we need climate action now. #bushfires
A lesson for @ScottMorrisonMP. Saying that Australia's action 
doesn't make a difference isn't leadership. Burning coal is setting 
Australian on fire and exporting climate damage to the world. 
#ThisIsNotNormal #NoNewCoal
A group of Bega Valley residents displaced due to the current fire 
threat have held a cricket match on the lawns of Parliament House. 
‘The PM needs to do something about the cause of fires—climate 
change, give more resources to the South Coast’
Black Summer extreme event attribution study
Only 15 tweets from seven accounts of our sample mentioned 
the van Oldenborgh et al. (2020) extreme event attribution study 
of the Black Summer fires [74]. Eleven of these tweets were 
posted directly by the groups and four were retweets. Most of 
these tweets quoted from, and linked to, news media articles 
reporting the study’s key findings: 
The devastating bushfires were at least 30% more likely because of 
climate change. Risks of a repeat will rise four-fold if global tempera­
tures exceed two-degrees. Call on @DanielAndrewsMP to set 
#VicTargets to limit warming to 1.5 degrees.
A report has found that Human-driven climate change increased the 
likelihood that Australia would experience extreme heat, setting the 
stage for this summer's fires. ‘It was at least 30%, but likely much 
higher as models underestimate extreme heat trends’
Framing bushfire risks beyond climate change
There were 312 tweets (15% of total sample) that mentioned fac­
tors that influence the risks and impacts of bushfires other than 
Figure 1. Timeline and frequency of NGO tweets about bushfires (n ¼ 2077), which correspond with significant fire events during the Black Summer 
season (1 July 2019–31 March 2020). Three examples of these events are indicated.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Climate change mentioned but
relationship not described
Climate change makes bushfires more
frequent and/or intense
Climate change causes bushfires to occur
Total number of tweets
Figure 2. Bar chart showing frequency of tweets (excluding retweets and comments) for three different frames describing how climate change relates 
to bushfires (n ¼ 1,227).
Ettinger et al. | 5  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
climate change. Frequent topics of discussion included firefight­
ing and emergency responses; disaster risk reduction and hazard 
reduction strategies (e.g. planned and cultural burns, personal 
bushfire evacuation plans, emergency communication systems); 
healthcare systems; climate change adaptation; and how certain 
populations were more vulnerable than others to bushfires, such 
as children and the elderly. For example: 
Elderly and vulnerable people should never feel abandoned during a 
crisis. But that's how Marion felt, trapped in her home for months 
during the bushfire crisis this summer.
Data shows that ‘Premium Grade Buildings’ can reduce the outdoor 
bushfire smoke contaminants by up to 90 per cent. Improving the 
standard of our homes will make them safer and more liveable, espe­
cially as our bushfires intensify.
‘Our biggest challenge with hazard reduction burning is the weather 
and the windows available to do it safely and effectively.’ 
#Bushfirecrisis
These actions were frequently described in the context of poli­
tics, especially the actions of Scott Morrison, and pointed out 
actions they felt elected officials had failed to pursue prior to the 
onset of the fires that would have reduced risks. There were 
143 tweets (6%) that mentioned one or more of these risk factors 
as well as climate change, such as interactions between the 
effects of climate change on bushfires and the need to support 
firefighting efforts: 
#SydneySmoke from the bushfires reached its worst level yet today, 
clocking in at 11 times the hazardous level. Yet Our PM Scott 
Morrison has seen fit to knock back calls for more funding for the fire­
fighters on the frontline of the #ClimateEmergency
‘Scientists and former emergency service chiefs say the increased 
threat demands both greater resources to fight fires and urgent action 
to cut emissions.’
Discussion
This study provides new empirical insights into how climate ac­
tion groups communicate about extreme weather events on 
Twitter/X and how they frame the relationship of these events to 
climate change. We found that 1,227 (59%) of tweets mentioned 
climate change, compared to 49% of Black Summer articles in 
Australian news media [67]. That Australian climate groups 
more frequently raised the issue of climate change than news 
media amid the fires is unsurprising—they sought to use the 
Black Summer as an opportunity for climate mobilization while 
public attention was directed to the topic and as shown, peaks in 
tweet activity correspond with key moments during the fire sea­
son. The frequent mentions of politics/elected officials in their 
tweets aligns with prior analyses of climate change Twitter dis­
cussions [11]. It also suggests that Australian climate NGOs tied 
the bushfires to their existing political aims, namely, to counter 
perceived climate inaction on the part of former Prime Minister 
Scott Morrison and political leaders at the time.
However, our findings offer novelty and value by showing how 
these groups framed the bushfire-climate change relationship 
and to what extent they incorporated climate science in their 
tweets. Only 28 tweets (1% of total) suggested inaccurately that 
climate change directly causes bushfires to occur. The notion 
that climate change directly causes extreme weather events mis­
leadingly implies that if climate change were to be fully stopped, 
fires (and resulting consequences) would no longer occur. In con­
trast, 327 tweets (16%) made scientific statements that specifi­
cally described how climate change affects bushfire frequency 
and severity, whereas 872 tweets (42%) simply mentioning cli­
mate change without detailing how it relates to bushfires. 
Comparatively, 29% of Australian news media coverage articles 
of the Black Summer covered climate change in depth and with 
accuracy [67]. Only seven accounts shared the van Oldenborgh 
et al. (2020) extreme event attribution study a total of 
15 times [74].
These findings suggest that Australian climate groups could 
more frequently draw upon climate science related to bushfires 
to provide further scientific evidence backing up their arguments 
for climate action. Additionally, our prior research has shown 
that EEA results—by providing a specific quantitative estimate of 
how climate change influenced a weather event—can be 
attention-grabbing and engaging for non-climate scientists [40]. 
To be sure, simply communicating scientific information is not 
necessarily an effective strategy to encourage climate action; 
nonetheless, that 95 of the 102 groups did not tweet about the 
Black Summer EEA study is potentially a missed opportunity to 
call further attention to the relationship between climate change 
and bushfires.
We also examined to what extent these groups mentioned fac­
tors beyond climate change that affect bushfire impacts, includ­
ing disaster risk reduction strategies, emergency responses, 
hazard reduction, and vulnerabilities. In the bushfire context, 
this includes firefighting, emergency communications, evacua­
tions, planned burns, and other strategies that seek to reduce fire 
impacts. We found that climate action groups mentioned these 
aspects of bushfire risks in a relatively low percentage of tweets 
(312, 15%). Although it remains crucial to communicate how cli­
mate change can affect different kinds of extreme weather 
events, climate action groups should be aware of potential issues 
of framing these events as solely a climate change issue, even if 
promoting climate action is their main objective. The effects of 
climate change on bushfires are only one aspect that ultimately 
shaped the impacts of the Black Summer [59]. As shown in other 
contexts, such as flooding in Brazil, public officials may strategi­
cally blame global climate change to avert responsibility for local 
decision-making and planning failures [26]. The most holistic 
communications about potential risk factors would incorporate 
the role of climate change in combination with other dynamics 
that affect the impacts of extreme weather events. We found 
only 143 tweets (6% of total) that accomplished this in the bush­
fire case.
Directions for future research and study 
limitations
Given that NGOs play a significant role as science communica­
tors [42], these findings raise questions about how NGOs engage 
with climate science/scientists and risk experts, and how they 
draw on these resources in their communications and cam­
paigns. Forging better links between these actors could help facil­
itate 
stronger 
knowledge 
exchange 
and 
dialogue 
about 
communication strategies in the extreme weather context. For 
instance, surveys, interviews, and other methods could further 
examine the channels by which climate action advocates access 
and make sense of scientific information and for what kinds of 
campaigns (and other goals) they utilize it [85]. This would pro­
vide practical guidance to help facilitate stronger knowledge ex­
change and accessible science communication among diverse 
actors. Future research could also more closely examine the 
6 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
science communication role perceptions of NGOs in the extreme 
weather context, especially to what extent they perceive commu­
nicating climate science as part of their missions, objectives, and 
campaigning strategies.
Another promising direction for future research would be to 
explore how other types of nuances around extreme weather 
events and their attribution to climate change are communicated 
by diverse actors across different communication channels. For 
instance, there are varying levels of scientific confidence and un­
derstanding about the impacts of climate change on the dura­
tion, frequency, and intensity of different types of extreme 
weather [72]. There are also other nuances and uncertainties 
around specific aspects of different types of extremes, such as 
how climate change may affect short-duration versus longer- 
duration extreme rainfall events [86]. Likewise, future studies 
could compare how climate action NGOs frame extreme weather 
events in their communications to other types of organizations, 
such as media outlets across the political spectrum, private 
sector companies, and thinktanks. Other actors may seek to 
downplay and/or ignore climate change in the extreme 
weather context.
This study has several important limitations. First, we exam­
ined tweets from a limited number of organizations in response 
to one type of extreme weather event—our dataset is only sub- 
set of climate action NGO communications from a single context. 
We also did not distinguish between different types of NGOs 
which may hold a range of different strategies and priorities. 
Future research could explore climate change communication 
differences between local grassroots groups versus larger top- 
down organizations [87], as well as how such groups engage with 
different types of extreme weather events. Larger groups may 
have more communication resources, which in turn could inform 
how they frame the topic.
Second, this study looked only at Twitter/X rather than other 
online platforms—future research could build on our findings to 
examine extreme weather-related communications from these 
groups across other websites and communication channels. 
Such research might find significant differences as character- 
length limitations on tweets encourage brevity, which could 
mean that groups chose not to provide more detailed scientific 
statements due to a lack of space and were constrained in their 
content decisions. Additionally, ongoing changes to the Twitter/X 
platform could affect how NGOs use the platform in both the 
content and frequency of their posts.
Third, although we inspected tweet images for relevant text or 
symbols associated with our coding criteria, we did not conduct a 
visual discourse analysis. Researchers are increasingly examin­
ing visuals in the context of extreme weather and climate 
change, and recent studies have revealed striking differences in 
emotional tones between text and visual narratives in news me­
dia coverage of heatwaves [88]. A robust visual analysis could 
add important insights into how climate groups use visuals to 
frame extreme weather events, their relationship with climate 
change, and their impacts.
Fourth, we analyzed tweets within the 2019–2020 fire season 
in connection with the notion that extreme weather events open 
a limited opportunity window for climate change communication 
while they remain a focus of public attention. Future research 
could offer a more longitudinal perspective on how climate 
groups engage with extreme weather events before, during, and 
after their occurrence; however, most Twitter activity during ex­
treme weather events has been shown to occur during the active 
phase of the event and rapidly drops off after [70]. This study 
also focused on communication providers rather than recipi­
ents—more research is needed to examine how diverse audien­
ces respond to different frames of extreme weather events and 
climate change, as well as dynamics of other communication 
channels in conveying this information.
Conclusion
This study examined how Australian climate action NGOs 
communicated on Twitter about climate change during the 
2019–2020 Australian Black Summer bushfires. Fifty-nine per­
cent of bushfire-related tweets mentioned climate change during 
the period of the fires. Forty two percent of tweets mentioned cli­
mate change without describing how it relates to bushfires; 16% 
described specifically how climate change influences the fre­
quency and intensity of bushfires; and 1% implied inaccurately 
that climate change causes bushfires. Fifteen percent of tweets 
discussed factors beyond climate change, such as vulnerability 
and disaster risk reduction strategies, that influence bushfire 
impacts. Only seven accounts mentioned an extreme event attri­
bution study of the Black Summer fires. These findings suggest 
that although these groups largely did not tweet scientifically in­
accurate information, they could further draw upon climate sci­
ence to offer more precise climate change attribution statements 
and more often incorporate a broader range of risk factors that 
shape the impacts of bushfires. As populations around the world 
continue to confront many kinds of intensified extreme weather, 
assessing the framing of these events—and how different frames 
promote different kinds of actions—will grow in importance.
Ethics statement
The study did not require IRB review in accordance with guide­
lines of the University of Oxford’s Central University Research 
Ethics Committee.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data are available at Oxford Open Climate 
Change online.
Conflict of interest
The authors report there are no conflict of interests to declare.
Authors’ contributions
Joshua Ettinger (Conceptualization [lead], Formal analysis [lead], 
Methodology [lead], Writing—original draft [lead]), Mary Sanford 
(Formal analysis [supporting], Methodology [supporting], Writing— 
review & editing [equal]), Peter Walton (Methodology [supporting], 
Supervision [equal], Writing—review & editing [equal]), David 
Holmes (Methodology [supporting], Writing—review & editing 
[equal]), and James Painter (Methodology [supporting], Supervision 
[equal], Writing—review & editing [equal])
References 
01. Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pirani A et al. Climate change 2021: 
the physical science basis. Contribution of working group I to 
the sixth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on 
climate change, 2021, 2.
Ettinger et al. | 7  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
02.
Swain DL, Singh D, Touma D et al. Attributing extreme events to 
climate change: A new frontier in a warming world. One Earth 
2020;2:522–7.
03.
Arias PA, Rivera JA, S€orensson AA et al. 2023. Vulnerability and 
high temperatures exacerbate impacts of ongoing drought in 
Central South America [Online]. World Weather Attribution, 2023. 
https://www.worldweatherattribution.org/wp-content/uploads/WWA- 
Argentina-Uruguay-drought-Scientific-Report.pdf (15 March 2023, date 
last accessed).
04.
Harrington LJ, Wolski P, Pinto I et al. Attribution of severe low 
rainfall in southern Madagascar. World Weather Attribution, 
2021. 
https://www.worldweatherattribution.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/ScientificReport_Madagascar.pdf (27 October 2023, 
date last accessed).
05.
Boykoff M, Katzung J, Nacu-Schmidt A et al. A review of media 
coverage of climate change and global warming in 2021. Media 
and Climate Change Observatory, Cooperative Institute for 
Research in Environmental Sciences, University of Colorado. 
http://sciencepolicy.colorado.edu/icecaps/research/media_cov 
erage/summaries/special_issue_2021.html (14 March 2023, 
date last accessed).
06.
Painter J, Hassol SJ. Reporting extreme weather events. In: 
Holmes David C, Richardson LM eds. Research handbook on 
communicating climate change. Edward Elgar Publishing. 
2020:183–195.
07.
Hopke JE. Connecting extreme heat events to climate change: 
Media coverage of heat waves and wildfires. Environ Commun 
2019;14(4):1–17.
08.
Dunne D, McSweeney R, Viglione G et al. Media reaction: UK’s 
record-smashing 40C heatwave and climate change. Carbon 
Brief. https://www.carbonbrief.org/media-reaction-uks-record- 
smashing-40c-heatwave-and-climate-change/ (14 March 2023, 
date last accessed).
09.
Hautea S, Parks P, Takahashi B et al. Showing they care (or 
don’t): Affective publics and ambivalent climate activism on 
TikTok. Soc Media þ Soc 2021;7:20563051211012344.
10.
Treen K, Williams H, O’Neill S et al. Discussion of climate 
change on Reddit: Polarized discourse or deliberative debate? 
Environ Commun 2022;16:680–98.
11.
Chen K, Molder AL, Duan Z et al. How climate movement actors 
and news media frame climate change and strike: Evidence 
from analyzing twitter and news media discourse from 2018 to 
2021. Int J Press/Politics 2023;28:384–413.
12.
Newman N, Fletcher R, Robertson CT et al. Reuters Institute 
Digital News Report 2022. Reuters Institute for the Study of 
Journalism. 
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/digital- 
news-report/2022 (15 March 2023, date last accessed).
13.
Kirilenko AP, Molodtsova T, Stepchenkova SO. People as sen­
sors: Mass media and local temperature influence climate 
change discussion on Twitter. Glob Environ Change 2015; 
30:92–100.
14.
Sisco MR, Bosetti V, Weber EU. When do extreme weather 
events generate attention to climate change? Clim Change 2017; 
143:227–41.
15.
Berglez P, Al-Saqaf W. Extreme weather and climate change: so­
cial media results, 2008–2017. Environ Hazards 2021;20:382–99.
16.
Moernaut R, Mast J, Temmerman M et al. Hot weather, hot topic. 
Polarization and sceptical framing in the climate debate on 
Twitter. Inform Commun Soc 2022;25:1047–66.
17.
Roxburgh N, Guan D, Shin KJ et al. Characterising climate 
change discourse on social media during extreme weather 
events. Glob Environ Change 2019;54:50–60.
18. Olynk Widmar N, Rash K, Bir C et al. The anatomy of natural dis­
asters on online media: hurricanes and wildfires. Nat Hazards 
(Dordr) 2022;110:961–98.
19. Kankanamge N, Yigitcanlar T, Goonetilleke A. How engaging 
are disaster management related social media channels? The 
case of Australian state emergency organisations. Int J Disaster 
Risk Reduct 2020;48:101571.
20. Liu W, Lai C-H, Xu W. Tweeting about emergency: A semantic 
network analysis of government organizations’ social media 
messaging during Hurricane Harvey. Public Relat Rev 2018; 
44:807–19.
21. Martınez-Rojas M, Pardo-Ferreira M del C, Rubio-Romero JC. 
Twitter as a tool for the management and analysis of emer­
gency situations: A systematic literature review. Int J Inf Manage 
2018;43:196–208.
22. Takahashi B, Tandoc EC, Carmichael C. Communicating on 
Twitter during a disaster: An analysis of tweets during Typhoon 
Haiyan in the Philippines. Comput Hum Behav 2015;50:392–8.
23. Zander KK, Sibarani R, Lassa J et al. How do Australians use so­
cial media during natural hazards? A survey. Int J Disaster Risk 
Reduct 2022;81:103207.
24. Chester L. The 2019–2020 Australian bushfires: A potent mix of 
climate change, problematisation, indigenous disregard, a frac­
tured federation, volunteerism, social media, and more. Rev 
Evol Polit Econ 2020;1:245–64.
25. Kelman I, Gaillard JC, Mercer J. Climate change’s role in disaster 
risk reduction’s future: Beyond vulnerability and resilience. Int J 
Disaster Risk Sci 2015;6:21–7.
26. Lahsen M, Ribot J. Politics of attributing extreme events and dis­
asters to climate change. WIREs Clim Change 2021;e750.
27. IPCC. Annex I: glossary. In: Matthews J, Masson-Delmotte BR, 
Zhai VP et al. (eds.), Global Warming of 1.5C. An IPCC Special 
Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5C above Pre- 
Industrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission 
Pathways, in the Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the 
Threat of Climate Change, Sustainable Development, and Efforts to 
Eradicate Poverty. Geneva, Switzerland: World Meteorological 
Organization, 2018.
28. Raju E, Boyd E, Otto F. Stop blaming the climate for disasters. 
Commun Earth Environ 2022;3:1–2.
29. Chmutina K, von Meding J. A dilemma of language: “natural dis­
asters” in academic literature. Int J Disaster Risk Sci 2019; 
10:283–92.
30. Pearce F. It’s not just climate: Are we ignoring other causes of 
disasters? [Online], Yale Environment 360, 2022. https://e360. 
yale.edu/features/its-not-just-climate-are-we-ignoring-other-causes- 
of-disasters (14 March 2023, date last accessed).
31. Bouwer LM, Observed and projected impacts from extreme 
weather events: Implications for loss and damage. In: Mechler 
R, Bouwer LM, Schinko T et al. (eds.), Loss and Damage from 
Climate Change: Concepts, Methods and Policy Options. Cham: 
Springer International Publishing, 2019, 63–82.
32. Ebi KL, Vanos J, Baldwin JW et al. Extreme weather and climate 
change: Population health and health system implications. 
Annu Rev Public Health 2021;42:293–315.
33. Lizarralde G, Bornstein L, Robertson M et al. Does climate 
change cause disasters? How citizens, academics, and leaders 
explain climate-related risk and disasters in Latin America and 
the Caribbean. Int J Disaster Risk Reduct 2021;58:102173.
34. Entman RM. Framing: Toward clarification of a fractured para­
digm. J Commun 1993;43:51–8.
8 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
35.
Guenther L, J€orges S, Mahl D et al. Framing as a bridging concept 
for climate change communication: A systematic review based 
on 25 years of literature. Commun Res 2023;00(0):1-25.
36.
Gifford R, Comeau LA. Message framing influences perceived 
climate change competence, engagement, and behavioral 
intentions. Glob Environ Change 2011;21:1301–7.
37.
Morton TA, Rabinovich A, Marshall D et al. The future that may 
(or may not) come: How framing changes responses to uncer­
tainty in climate change communications. Glob Environ Change 
2011;21:103–9.
38.
Marlon JR, Bloodhart B, Ballew MT et al. How hope and doubt af­
fect climate change mobilization. Front Commun 2019;4:20.
39.
Birkland TA, Schwaeble KL. Agenda setting and the policy pro­
cess: Focusing events. In: Wagner M, et al. Eds, Oxford research en­
cyclopedia of politics, 2019. Oxford University Press.
40.
Ettinger J, Walton P, Painter J et al. “What’s up with the weath­
er?” Public engagement with extreme event attribution in the 
United Kingdom. Weather Clim Soc 2021;13:341–52.
41.
Doyle J. Climate action and environmental activism: The role of 
environmental NGOs and grassroots movements in the global 
politics of climate change. In: Boyce T, Lewis J, Eds, Climate 
Change and the Media. Peter Lang. 2009:103–116.
42.
Faehnrich B. Digging deeper? Muddling through? How environ­
mental activists make sense and use of science–an exploratory 
study. JCOM 2018;17:A08.
43.
Maeseele P. NGOs and GMOs. Javnost 2009;16:55–72.
44.
R€odder S. The ambivalent role of environmental NGOs in cli­
mate communication. JCOM 2020;19:C03.
45.
Yearley S. Communication strategies of environmental NGOs 
and advocacy groups. In: Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate 
Science, 2017. https://oxfordre.com/climatescience/display/10. 
1093/acrefore/9780190228620.001.0001/acrefore-97801902286 
20-e-402 (27 October 2023, date last accessed).
46.
Jasanoff S. NGOs and the environment: From knowledge to ac­
tion. Third World Quart 1997;18:579–94.
47.
Eden S. NGOs, the science-lay dichotomy, and hybrid spaces of 
environmental knowledge. In: Meusburger P, Livingstone D, 
J€ons H (eds.), Geographies of Science. Dordrecht: Springer 
Netherlands, 2010, 217–30.
48.
Bortree DS, Seltzer T. Dialogic strategies and outcomes: An 
analysis of environmental advocacy groups’ Facebook profiles. 
Public Relat Rev 2009;35:317–9.
49.
Comfort SE, Hester JB. Three dimensions of social media mes­
saging success by environmental NGOs. Environ Commun 2019; 
13:281–6.
50.
Lovejoy K, Saxton GD. Information, community, and action: 
How nonprofit organizations use social media. J Comput-Mediat 
Commun 2012;17:337–53.
51.
Bazago FG, Guardia MLG, Garcıa JS. Environmental discourse in 
natural disaster scenarios. 
Econ 
Res 
Ekon Istraz 2020; 
33:3093–107.
52.
Vu HT, Do HV, Seo H et al. Who leads the conversation on cli­
mate change?: A study of a global network of NGOs on Twitter. 
Environ Commun 2020;14:450–64.
53.
Osaka S, Painter J, Walton P et al. Media representation of ex­
treme event attribution: A case study of the 2011–2017 
California drought. Weather Clim Soc 2020;12:4,847–62.
54.
Painter J, Ettinger J, Doutreix M-N et al. Is it climate change? 
Coverage by online news sites of the 2019 European summer 
heatwaves in France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the UK. 
Clim Change 2021;169:4:1–28.
55. Abram NJ, Henley BJ, Sen Gupta A et al. Connections of climate 
change and variability to large and extreme forest fires in south­
east Australia. Commun Earth Environ 2021;2:1–17.
56. Filkov AI, Ngo T, Matthews S et al. Impact of Australia’s cata­
strophic 2019/20 bushfire season on communities and environ­
ment. Retrospective analysis and current trends. J Saf Sci Resil 
2020;1:44–56.
57. Johnston FH, Borchers-Arriagada N, Morgan GG et al. 
Unprecedented health costs of smoke-related PM2.5 from the 
2019–20 Australian megafires. Nat Sustain 2021;4:42–7.
58. Dickman CR. Ecological consequences of Australia’s “Black 
Summer” bushfires: Managing for recovery. Integr Environ Assess 
Manag 2021;17:1162–7.
59. Binskin M, Bennett A, Macintosh A. Royal Commission into 
National Natural Disaster Arrangements Report. Canberra: 
Commonwealth of Australia, 2020.
60. Van Eeden LM, Nimmo D, Mahony M et al. Impacts of the un­
precedented 2019–2020 bushfires on Australian animals. Report 
prepared for WWF-Australia, Ultimo NSW, 2020.
61. Geary WL, Buchan A, Allen T et al. Responding to the biodiver­
sity impacts of a megafire: A case study from south-eastern 
Australia’s Black Summer. Divers Distrib 2022;28:463–78.
62. Akter S, Grafton RQ. Do fires discriminate? Socio-economic dis­
advantage, wildfire hazard exposure and the Australian 2019– 
20 ‘Black Summer’ fires. Clim Change 2021;165:53.
63. Jones MW, Abatzoglou JT, Veraverbeke S et al. Global and re­
gional trends and drivers of fire under climate change. Rev 
Geophys 2022;60:e2020RG000726.
64. Kidd J. Sydney smoke ‘unlikely to clear for days’ as bushfires 
burn around NSW. ABC News. https://www.abc.net.au/news/ 
2019-11-21/sydney-smoke-from-fires-unlikely-to-clear-today- 
authorities-warn/11723876 (15 March 2023, date last accessed).
65. Australian Institute for Disaster Resilience. Black Summer 
bushfires, VIC, 2019–20. Australian Institute for Disaster 
Resilience, 
2023. 
https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/resources/ 
black-summer-bushfires-vic-2019-20/ (15 March 2023, date 
last accessed).
66. Henriques-Gomes L. Mallacoota after the bushfire horror: ‘All 
you can do is help now’. The Guardian. https://www.theguar 
dian.com/australia-news/2020/jan/09/mallacoota-after-the- 
bushfire-horror-all-you-can-do-is-help-now (15 March 2023, 
date last accessed).
67. Burgess T, Burgmann JR, Hall S, Holmes   et al. Black Summer: 
Australian newspaper reporting on the nation’s worst bushfire 
season, Monash Climate Change Communication Research 
Hub, Monash University, Melbourne, 2020.
68. Mocatta G, Hawley E. Uncovering a climate catastrophe? Media 
coverage of Australia’s Black Summer bushfires and the revela­
tory extent of the climate blame frame. M/C J 2020;23.
69. Weber D, Nasim M, Falzon L et al. #ArsonEmergency and 
Australia’s “Black Summer”: Polarisation and misinformation 
on social media. In: van Duijn M, Preuss M, Spaiser V et al. (eds.), 
Disinformation 
in 
Open 
Online 
Media. 
Cham: 
Springer 
International Publishing, 2020, 159–73.
70. Ogie R, Moore A, Wickramasuriya R et al. Twitter data from the 
2019–20 Australian bushfires reveals participatory and tempo­
ral variations in social media use for disaster recovery. Sci Rep 
2022;12:1–16.
71. Leimbach T, Palmer J. #AustraliaOnFire: Hashtag activism and 
collective affect in the Black Summer Fires. J Aust Stud 2022; 
46:496–511.
72. Allan RP, Hawkins E, Bellouin N et al.; IPCC. 2021: Summary for 
Policymakers. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
Ettinger et al. | 9  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
2021. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/ 
IPCC_AR6_WGI_SPM.pdf (27 October 2023, date last accessed)
73.
King AD, Pitman AJ, Henley BJ et al. The role of climate variabil­
ity in Australian drought. Nat Clim Chang 2020;10:177–9.
74.
van Oldenborgh GJ, Krikken F, Lewis S et al. Attribution of the 
Australian bushfire risk to anthropogenic climate change. Nat 
Hazards Earth Syst Sci Discuss 2021;21:941–60.
75.
Smith E, Holmes L, Larkin B et al. Supporting volunteer fire­
fighter well-being: Lessons from the Australian “Black Summer” 
bushfires. Prehosp Disaster Med 2022;37:273–6.
76.
Cousins S. Bushfires expose weaknesses in Australia’s health 
system. Lancet 2020;395:175–6.
77.
Bradstock RA, Nolan R, Collins L et al. A broader perspective on 
the causes and consequences of eastern Australia’s 2019–20 
season of mega-fires: a response to Adams et al. Glob Change Biol 
2020;26:e8–9.
78.
Levin N, Yebra M, Phinn S. Unveiling the factors responsible 
for Australia’s Black Summer Fires of 2019/2020. Fire 2021; 
4:58.
79.
Steffensen V. Fire country: How indigenous fire management 
could help save Australia. Int J Wildland Fire 2020;29:1052–3.
80.
Fletcher M-S, Romano A, Connor S et al. Catastrophic bushfires, 
indigenous fire knowledge and reframing science in Southeast 
Australia. Fire 2021;4:61.
81. Tolhurst K. We have already had countless bushfire inquiries. 
What good will it do to have another? The Conversation 2020.
82. CANA. Climate Action Network Australia. https://www.cana. 
net.au/ (15 March 2023, date last accessed).
83. Gulliver R, Fielding KS, Louis W. The characteristics, activities 
and goals of environmental organizations engaged in advocacy 
within the Australian environmental movement. Environ 
Commun 2020;14:614–27.
84. Kyng€as H, Kaakinen P. Deductive content analysis. In: Kyng€as 
H, Mikkonen K, K€a€ari€ainen M (eds.), The Application of Content 
Analysis 
in 
Nursing 
Science 
Research. 
Cham: 
Springer 
International Publishing, 2020, 23–30.
85. Thierry A. “Heading for extinction”: The representation of scien­
tific knowledge in extinction Rebellion’s recruitment talks. Front 
Commun 2023;8:1–15.
86. King AD, Reid KJ, Saunders KR. Communicating the link be­
tween climate change and extreme rain events. Nat Geosci 2023; 
16:552–54.
87. Lovejoy K, Waters RD, Saxton GD. Engaging stakeholders 
through Twitter: How nonprofit organizations are getting more 
out of 140 characters or less. Public Relat Rev 2012;38:313–8.
88. O'Neill S, Hayes S, Straub N et al. Visual portrayals of fun in the 
sun in European news outlets misrepresent heatwave risks. 
Geogr J 2023;189:90–103.
10 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad011/7311736 by guest on 26 August 2024
