Marine methods for carbon dioxide removal:
fundamentals and myth-busting for the wider
community
Eelco J. Rohling
1,2,*
1Research School of Earth Sciences, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2600, Australia
2Ocean and Earth Science, National Oceanography Centre, University of Southampton, Southampton SO14 3ZH, UK
*Correspondence address. Research School of Earth Sciences, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. E-mail: eelco.rohling@anu.edu.au
Abstract
To avoid global warming in excess of 1.5C under the current sluggish adoption of drastic reductions in global greenhouse gas emis-
sions, application of methods to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere will become essential in the near future; yet, develop-
ment of these methods is in its infancy. Land-based methods are further developed than marine methods, but it is likely that
similar-scaled application will be necessary in both realms. There are many misconceptions in discussion groups and fora about the
‘simplicity’ or ‘ease’ of proposed marine applications, partly because the complex marine carbon cycle is insufﬁciently understood by
the proponents, having been discussed in largely inaccessible, technical texts only. This review outlines the basic operation of the
marine carbon cycle in straightforward terms, with some simpliﬁcations, to help advance the debate among the wider community.
Break-out boxes provide additional detail where desired, and references (and the sources cited therein) provide avenues for further
study. The review then discusses two potential marine methods for atmospheric carbon removal that are thought to offer the great-
est potential in terms of carbon removal mass: ocean iron fertilization and ocean alkalinity enhancement. Finally, six statements/
arguments that seem to regularly crop up in carbon removal discussion groups are evaluated within the perspective of the compiled
and reviewed information.
Keywords: marine; carbon dioxide; removal; fundamentals; myth-busting
INTRODUCTION
With every passing year of continuing, unabated emissions, the
likelihood of failure to limit global warming to 1.5C above pre-
industrial levels through net-zero emissions alone is rapidly in-
creasing [1]. This realization is driving a wave of interest in meth-
ods for greenhouse gas removal from the climate system. With
respect to carbon, the focus of this review, these are described in
various guises as negative emissions technologies, carbon se-
questration (CS) and carbon dioxide (CO2) removal approaches.
These methods target removal of carbon (CO2 and/or CH4) from
the atmosphere, ‘locking it away’ for long periods of time (in ex-
cess of several centuries) in a wide variety of semi-permanent
‘reservoirs’ (for overviews, see Refs [2–4]).
During pre-industrial history, the ocean dominated atmo-
spheric CO2 concentrations because it contains 60 times more
carbon and because natural dynamics of CO2 exchange between
the ocean and atmosphere were slow enough. In fact, the ocean
is the largest reservoir of carbon after sedimentary rocks. As a re-
sult, there is a lot of interest in potential atmospheric carbon re-
moval using long-term storage in the ocean. Not all methods are
about improved carbon uptake into the ocean—methods that
aim to ‘switch off’ long-standing sources of carbon outgassing
from the ocean into the atmosphere are equally important.
Essentially, some methods aim to add carbon into the oceanic
reservoir, while others aim to prevent escape of carbon from the
oceanic reservoir; both increase net carbon storage in the ocean
There is particular interest in methods that use ocean chemistry,
physics and/or biology for CO2 capture and then store it for
multi-centennial to millennial timescales in the deep-sea, or per-
manently in seafloor sediments. Although total atmospheric car-
bon removal potential for marine methods is very uncertain, two
of these methods are often listed as having the greatest atmo-
spheric carbon removal potentials: (i) ocean iron fertilization and
(ii) ocean alkalinity enhancement (OAE) [2–4]. These methods will
be discussed in more detail toward the end of this paper. A third
method that receives quite a lot of attention is artificial upwell-
ing, but its carbon removal potential is still thought to be much
lower than that of the other two methods (see synthesis in Ref.
[4]); hence, it is not included in the discussion here. In addition,
the two methods discussed already highlight the main benefits,
feedbacks and side-effects that need to be considered with all
marine methods.
Participation
to
atmospheric
carbon
removal
discussion
groups
(e.g.
carbondioxideremoval@googlegroups.com)
has
revealed a lively debate among researchers, engineers, inventors,
entrepreneurs and engaged members of the public on atmo-
spheric carbon removal methods, their potentials and their
impacts. Yet, it has also revealed that ocean-focused ideas and
Received: November 18, 2022. Revised: April 17, 2023. Accepted: April 19, 2023
V
C The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, 3(1), kgad004
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgad004
Advance Access Publication Date: 21 April 2023
Review
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
concepts (which sometimes include calls for immediate imple-
mentation) often would be well-served by a deeper appreciation
of the oceanic carbon cycle, and especially of the intricate feed-
backs and interdependences between biological and a-biological
carbon cycling that affect the efficacies and potential side-effects
of the ideas proposed. The oceanic carbon cycle is among the
most challenging topics in oceanography, and most available lit-
erature is highly technical. To assist the wider community inter-
ested in oceanic methods for atmospheric carbon removal, this
paper reviews and synthesizes the essence of the marine carbon
cycle in straightforward terms (with some simplifications), while
providing key references to guide further in-depth study. It will
specifically address a series of statements or arguments that
seem to come up rather frequently in carbon drawdown discus-
sion groups, namely:
1) Oceanic CO2 uptake with changing temperature may be cal-
culated simply with physical solubility arguments.
2) Carbonate formation should be promoted because it causes
carbon drawdown.
3) Ocean iron fertilization will draw down carbon and store it
in increased ﬁsh populations (which are commercially in-
teresting).
4) Ocean iron fertilization has only positive (enriching) side-
effects.
5) Enhanced primary production will be buried in sediments
without major detrimental impacts.
6) Impacts of regionally applied methods in the ocean can be
conﬁned to that region.
This review outlines the nature of the system that proposed
methods aim to influence, and highlights the types of (sometimes
far-reaching) trade-offs and side-effects that need to be considered.
It starts with an overview of the fundamental bio-geo-chemical
reactions that govern the physical, chemical and biological controls
on carbon movements through the ocean, and of the key interac-
tions between these controls (Sections ‘Fundamentals’, ‘Spatial
property distributions’ and ‘Vertical gradients—carbon transport
into the ocean interior’). Then follows a discussion of two main oce-
anic methods for atmospheric carbon removal, along with their im-
mediate drawbacks and potential for unexpected, remote or
delayed side-effects (Section ‘Using ocean biogeochemistry to miti-
gate CO2 emissions’). Finally, the compiled information is used to
debunk the above six frequent statements/arguments collected
from carbon drawdown discussion groups (Section ‘Debunking fre-
quently encountered statements/arguments’). The article does not
go into detail about ecological consequences (such as species-
dominance changes, bio-physical adaptation pressures, food-web
changes and foreign species invasion), as these are highly applica-
tion and location specific. Most numbers and concentrations
reported in this article are indicative rather than precise; for precise
numbers, rigorous corrections to standard reference conditions
would need to be made throughout, but the core arguments made
here are not affected.
FUNDAMENTALS
For detailed descriptions of the reactions and interactions in-
volved in the marine carbon cycle, see the overviews of Refs
[5–12], and their cited sources.
Molecules of CO2 (as for any gas) continually cross the air–sea
interface; the flows into and out of the water are known as fluxes.
When influx and outflux are identical, then the air and water gas
reservoirs are said to be in equilibrium. The abundance of
atmospheric CO2 is expressed in terms of its partial pressure in
dry air; i.e. after removal of all water vapor (pCOatm
2
, in micro-
atmospheres, latm). The concentration of non-ionized CO2 dis-
solved in sea water is indicated with [CO2], where the square
brackets indicate ‘concentrations of’ and the units are lmol kg1.
Finally, measurement of pCO2 in water (pCOw
2 ) is not possible in a
similar manner to the measurement of pCOatm
2
, and pCOw
2 is in-
stead defined as the pCOatm
2
that would be reached if there were a
perfect equilibrium with [CO2] (Henry’s Law; [13]). The equilib-
rium relationship between [CO2] and pCOw
2 is determined by K0,
the
largely
temperature-dependent
and
somewhat
salinity-
dependent solubility of CO2: K0 ¼ [CO2]/pCOw
2 (Fig. 1). For illustra-
tion, K0 for CO2 is 0.033 mol kg1 atm1 at a temperature of 20C
and salinity of 34.5 g kg1 [11]. Hence, for a modern pCO2 of
410 latm, the equilibrium value of [CO2] in subtropical waters
at the
aforementioned temperature and
salinity would be
0.033  410 ¼ 13.53 lmol kg1. As for all soluble gases, the solubil-
ity (K0) of CO2 increases with lowering of temperature and/or
salinity (Fig. 1). For CO2, K0 ranges from minima of 0.02–0.03 mol
kg1
atm1
in
warm
tropical
and
subtropical
regions,
to
0.06–0.07 mol kg1 atm1 in cold polar regions [11].
Net air–sea CO2 exchange into or out of surface sea water
occurs whenever pCOw
2 is out of equilibrium with pCOatm
2
. When
pCOw
2 is lower than pCOatm
2
, there will be CO2 influx from the at-
mosphere into the sea water and vice versa. For example, a cool-
ing of the water would increase K0 and thus the water’s capacity
to absorb CO2, with the opposite for a warming. However, there is
a complication in that CO2—contrary to other atmospheric gases
such as O2 and N2—not only dissolves molecularly but also
undergoes rapid dissociation reactions with water to form bicar-
bonate and carbonate ions (HCO
3 and CO2
3 , respectively). The
following equilibria are involved: CO2 þ H2O  HCO
3 þ Hþ 
CO2
3
þ 2Hþ. Note that release of Hþ lowers seawater pH because
pH ¼ log10 [Hþ]. The sum of CO2, HCO
3 and CO2
3
concentrations
is known as Dissolved Inorganic Carbon: DIC ¼ [CO2] þ [HCO
3 ] þ
[CO2
3 ]. Rather than DIC, some studies refer to this sum as RCO2
(e.g. ‘total CO2’) [5]. Total DIC can be measured by acidifying a
seawater sample and then measuring the amount of extracted
unionized CO2 [6]; as with all concentration measurements (in-
cluding salinity), DIC is sensitive to dilution/concentration associ-
ated with freshwater fluxes and is therefore often standardized
to a reference salinity. There is a distinct relationship between
the relative concentrations of the three so-called carbonate spe-
cies (CO2, HCO
3 and CO2
3 ) and seawater pH (Fig. 2). In surface
sea water, with pH between 8.0 and 8.2, HCO
3 dominates the
DIC, while CO2
3
accounts for 10% and CO2 for only 0.6% [11].
Another concept that is essential when discussing the ocean
carbon cycle is alkalinity. A comprehensive overview of different
definitions is given by Middelburg et al. [10]; here we consider a
simplified representation. Sea water contains so-called conserva-
tive ions from strong electrolytes that are completely ionized un-
der
all
conditions,
and
non-conservative
ions
from
weak
electrolytes that are partially ionized in relation to temperature,
salinity and/or pH [11]. The most abundant conservative cations
(positive ions) are Naþ, Mg2þ, Ca2þ and Kþ and the key anions
(negative ions) are Cl and SO2
4 . The charge concentrations (con-
centration times 1 for single-charged ions or times 2 for double-
charged ions) of all conservative cations and anions add up to
þ605.6 and 603.2 milli-mol (mmol) kg1. This indicates a
charge imbalance of 2.400 mmol kg1 (i.e. 2400 lmol kg1) which
is known as total alkalinity (ALKT). However, sea water is highly
conductive, and cannot maintain a net charge. Therefore, the net
2
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
positive charge imbalance left by the conservative ions must be
balanced by an equal-sized net negative charge imbalance due to
the total non-conservative ions of 2400 lmol kg1 [11, 12]. Note
that this example is simplified for clarity and that more (minor)
ions are involved in reality. More precisely, mean ocean alkalinity
is 2.32–2.35 mmol kg1 [10, 11].
The dominant non-conservative ions are the anions HCO
3 and
CO2
3 . B(OH)4
 is next, but has an 5 times smaller charge con-
centration than CO2
3 , and OH has an 20 times smaller charge
concentration still [11]. Hþ is the only non-conservative cation of
note, but has a negligible charge concentration (yet, it determines
pH). In other words, ALKT is the net positive charge that must be
Figure 1. CO2 solubility in sea water between 0 and 35C, at three different salinities. After Weiss [16]. Salinity (S) was gravimetrically determined, in g
kg1. As summarized in Bailey et al. [14], the dependence of K0 to temperature and salinity that is commonly used in climate models (Orr et al., 2017)
[15] derives from the work of Weiss [16]: ln(K0) ¼ 60.2409 þ 93.4517 (100/T) þ 23.3585 ln(T/100) þ S f0.023517  0.023656 (T/100) þ 0.0047036 (T/100)2g,
where T is temperature in Kelvin (K ¼ C þ 273.15) and S is salinity (see also [6, 12]). Note that Bailey et al. [14] argue that this relationship may
underestimate K0 by up to 10% at natural salinities and sub-zero temperatures down to 2C (polar extremes).
Figure 2. Bjerrum plot of carbonate species in sea water relative to pH. Here, CO2 includes dissolved molecular CO2 and H2CO3. Pre-industrial ocean pH
was 8.2, at which HCO
3 is clearly dominant.
Marine methods for carbon dioxide removal
|
3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
balanced by the dominant anions HCO
3 and CO2
3
(to be precise,
B(OH)4
 should be included here too) [5], and it can be measured
using some form of acidimetric titration [6]; it is independent
from temperature and pressure, but sensitive (along with salin-
ity) to dilution/concentration associated with freshwater fluxes.
Given that HCO
3 and CO2
3
dominate the non-conservative ion
charge concentration, the so-called carbonate alkalinity (ALK)
can be described as the sum of their charge concentrations, and
ALK then explains more than 95% of ALKT [8, 11, 12]. ALK pro-
vides a useful measure of the degree to which CO2 has reacted
with water to form HCO
3 and CO2
3
[8], and it is commonly as-
sumed that ALKT  ALK ¼ [HCO
3 ] þ 2[CO2
3 ].
Besides ALKT  ALK ¼ [HCO
3 ] þ 2[CO2
3 ], a second very useful
simplification can be made, namely that DIC  [HCO
3 ] þ [CO2
3 ] be-
cause CO2 contributes very little to DIC in natural sea water.
Combination of these two relationships allows approximating the
concentration of CO2
3
from ALKT and DIC measurements because
ALKT – DIC  [CO2
3 ]. Moreover, given that ALKT is much larger than
[CO2] (which equals K0 pCOatm
2
; see top of this section), and that
ALKT  [HCO
3 ] þ 2[CO2
3 ], it is evident that the charge balance of
the ocean—and thus its alkalinity—creates a massive (two orders of
magnitude) increase in the ocean’s capacity to store carbon in the
form of bicarbonate and carbonate ions, relative to a scenario with-
out ocean alkalinity [11]. In other words, ocean alkalinity is critical
to CO2 storage in sea water. Moreover, the unique characteristic of
CO2 of reacting with water causes the total oceanic carbon concen-
tration to be some 60 times larger than that in the atmosphere,
which in turn caused the ocean to dominate atmospheric pCO2 un-
der natural conditions over timescales of a few millennia (a few
ocean overturnings).
SPATIAL PROPERTY DISTRIBUTIONS
Williams and Follows [11] present maps of surface-water [CO2],
[HCO
3 ], [CO2
3 ], DIC and ALKT distributions. In summary, modern
surface-water [CO2] varies from minima of 5–10 lmol kg1 in
tropical and subtropical regions, to maxima of 20–25 lmol kg1 in
high latitudes, especially in the Southern Ocean. The surface-
water [HCO
3 ] distribution is similar, varying from minima of
1600–1700 lmol kg1 in tropical regions, to maxima of 2000–
2100 lmol kg1 in high latitudes, especially in the Southern
Ocean. The surface-water [CO2
3 ] distribution shows an opposite
pattern, from minima of 100–150 lmol kg1 in high latitudes, to
maxima of 250–300 lmol kg1 in tropical to subtropical regions.
Surface-water ALKT shows a virtually linear relationship with sa-
linity, with minima of 2100–2250 lmol kg1 in high-precipitation
regions in the tropics and some high latitudes, to maxima of
2400–2500 lmol kg1 in the highly evaporative centers of subtrop-
ical gyres. The surface-water DIC distribution, by definition, com-
bines those of [CO2], [HCO
3 ] and [CO2
3 ].
The spatial ALKT distribution is dominated by evaporation and
precipitation/freshwater input, whereas the DIC distribution
reflects both the influences of evaporation and precipitation/
freshwater input, and changes in CO2 solubility with tempera-
ture. There is a further complication in that full potential air–sea
CO2 exchange (equilibration) is not commonly realized—the real-
istic air–sea gas exchange is smaller than the potential air–sea
gas exchange.
Influence of CO2 solubility
Solubility determines the equilibrium amount of absorption for any
gas, while the rate of air–sea gas transfer is affected by physical pro-
cesses that include molecular diffusion, turbulent mixing, waves,
bubbles and spray [11, 17]. These processes are rapid; e.g. oxygen
reaches air–sea equilibrium within a month. If this were the case
also for CO2, then its air–sea exchange would keep pace with pro-
cesses that tend to drive pCOw
2 away from equilibrium, creating a
surface ocean with uniform pCOw
2 and a steady DIC increase with
cooling from the equator to the poles [5]. However, the equilibration
period for CO2 is some 10 times longer because it involves the size-
able surface-water DIC reservoir through the reaction H2O þ CO2 þ
CO2
3
 2HCO
3 (Box 1) [5, 8, 10]. The approximately 10months
needed for the DIC reservoir in the upper 50m of surface water to
equilibrate with the atmosphere is long relative to the typical
surface-water residence time of a few days to years [8, 18]. In conse-
quence, seasonal temperature may have changed since CO2 equili-
bration started, and/or surface water may have traveled hundreds
or thousands of kilometers into another region where local condi-
tions are out of equilibrium. Thus, surface water pCOw
2 is forever
chasing to reach equilibrium, but in most places never quite gets
there (i.e. the system only reaches a so-called quasi-steady state).
Surface ocean pCOw
2 overall is >80% saturated [8, 19, 20].
Spatial patterns in surface-water DIC, therefore, reflect both sol-
ubility with temperature, and superimposed deviations due to solu-
bility changes that are more rapid than equilibration (e.g. due to
seasonal temperature changes or temperature changes along flow
pathways, as discussed before). But there are two more critical pro-
cesses that cause superimposed deviations, namely: organic matter
production and remineralization (decomposition), including upwell-
ing of deep waters that have been enriched in carbon due to organic
matter remineralization at depth; and calcium carbonate (CaCO3)
production and dissolution [5, 7, 8, 11, 12]. These processes relate to
the so-called biological pump, by which biological processes drive
important changes in oceanic carbon and alkalinity gradients. The
biological pump consists of two processes: the soft tissue pump
(photosynthesis/respiration) and the carbonate or alkalinity pump.
These pumps are discussed in the following section.
Influence of the soft tissue and carbonate, or
alkalinity, pumps
The soft tissue pump relates to the cycling of organic matter. In
its most basic representation, the reaction for photosynthetic
generation of organic matter (CH2O) or—in reverse—respiration
of organic matter, is CO2 þ H2O  CH2O þ O2. In this form, the re-
lationship suggests that nutrients play no role, but this is not the
case; in more detail, marine organic matter is better represented
Box 1 CO2 exchange involves a negative (buffering) feed-
back. Through the buffering reaction H2O þ CO2 þ CO2
3

2HCO
3 , CO2 added to sea water is scavenged by CO2
3
ions. A
minor portion of the produced HCO
3 will then dissociate:
HCO
3 ! Hþþ CO2
3 . This lowers the pH while, overall, there
will be a net decrease in the proportion of CO2
3
in DIC [12].
The result of this buffering process is that an increase of
10% in pCOatm
2
after full equilibration leads to a 10% in-
crease in seawater [CO2] along with an 1% increase in DIC;
the 1:10 ratio depends on the so-called Revelle factor (B),
which scales with DIC/[CO2
3 ] and ranges from 8 in warm
waters to 16 in cold waters [5, 10, 11, 21]. Under warming
due to anthropogenic CO2 increase, both CO2 solubility
and—importantly—B will decrease, which makes the ocean
less efﬁcient at absorbing CO2.
4
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
by C106H175O42N16P1 or C106H177O37N16P1S0.4 [9], in which the in-
volvement of the main nutrients N and P is evident. This more
detailed version also reveals the C:N:P ratio of 106:16:1, which is
found throughout much of the ocean and is known as the
Redfield ratio, although different studies using different methods
find slightly different proportions [5, 7, 8, 22–24]. So, when or-
ganic matter is formed through photosynthesis, both carbon and
nutrients (N and P) are taken from sea water, while oxygen is re-
leased. Conversely, when organic matter is respired, oxygen is
consumed from sea water while carbon and nutrients are re-
leased
into
it.
Including
oxygen,
the
C:N:P:O2
ratio
is
106:16:1:170. Hence, the ratio of oxygen consumption for respi-
ration relative to phosphate (PO3
4 ) release by that respiration is
170 to 1 [11, 25], although recent estimates suggest that this ratio
may be closer to 150 or 154 to 1 [9].
Photosynthesis occurs in the sunlit upper hundred meters or
so of the water column (the so-called photic layer), while respira-
tion occurs both within the photic layer and below it (respiration
of dead organic matter that sinks below the photic layer). Thus,
the processes of photosynthesis, sinking and respiration of or-
ganic matter (also known as soft tissue) drive carbon and
nutrients from the surface into the deep sea. This action is
known as the so-called soft tissue pump. Apart from its impacts
on carbon and nutrients, the soft tissue pump is a powerful agent
for deep-water deoxygenation through the oxygen utilization in
respiration, especially if there is limited replacement by new, ox-
ygenated deep water.
Across all biota, the standing stock of marine biomass
amounts to some 6 GtC, and about half of this concerns photo-
synthesizing marine primary producers [26]. This standing stock
of 3 GtC of marine primary producers drives a global mean new
primary production rate of 50 GtC y1 [27–29], which reflects the
short lifespan (high turn-over rate) of marine phytoplankton of,
on average, 22 days (3/50 years). Typically, marine ecosystems
are highly efficient at recycling, with high levels of remineraliza-
tion of dead organic matter already within the photic layer. There
is 11 GtC of net export production of organic matter from the
photic layer, the vast majority (>90%) of which is remineralized
in the water column at depth (it becomes DIC—and most of the
remineralization happens within the upper 1000 m of the water
column), while considerable remineralization also happens at
the sea floor and in the sediments. On average, only 0.2 GtC of
organic matter (as particulate organic carbon) gets preserved in
seafloor sediments [27–30]; i.e. less than 0.1% of the initial pro-
duction (Fig. 3). More than 80% of this burial occurs in coastal
and ocean margin sediments, with deep sea burial estimated at
<0.01 GtC [33], so that water depth appears to be a critical con-
trolling factor for organic carbon burial potential. The soft-tissue
pump causes a major reduction in surface-water DIC and pCOw
2
through photosynthesis, and raises DIC and pCOw
2
at depth
through respiration (Fig. 3). It also causes a minor increase in
ALKT of surface waters and minor decrease in ALKT at depth be-
cause of uptake and release of nutrients (e.g. [5, 56]).
The carbonate or alkalinity pump relates to the processes in-
volved in hard (CaCO3) body part formation and dissolution. In its
most basic form, the reaction involved in the formation and dis-
solution of CaCO3 is: Ca2þ þ CO2
3
 CaCO3, but it is often repre-
sented in relation to the much more common bicarbonate ion:
Ca2þ þ 2HCO
3  CaCO3 þ H2O þ CO2. The latter might seem to
suggest that 1 mol of CO2 is produced for every 1 mol of CaCO3
production, but this is misleading because most of the liberated
CO2 immediately reacts with water following the equilibrium
reactions CO2 þ H2O  HCO
3 þ Hþ  CO2
3
þ 2Hþ (Box 2), so that
the actual CO2 increase is in the range of 0.6–0.8 depending on
pH/pCO2 of the water [12, 36]. The amount of CaCO3 permanently
deposited on the ocean floor is determined by the flux of calcium
into the ocean from rivers [7] and occurs mainly through forma-
tion of CaCO3 tests of marine organisms, especially planktic fora-
minifera and calcareous nannoplankton [37] and to a lesser
extent coral reefs and inorganic precipitates [38, 39]. The CaCO3-
bound carbon is referred to as particulate inorganic carbon (PIC).
Rivers were thought to bring 0.2 GtC y1 of PIC into the ocean
(although recent estimates indicate that this number may be
some 7 times smaller [40] and 1 GtC y1 of PIC is formed in the
surface ocean. About 0.3 GtC y1 of PIC is buried as CaCO3 in
shallow-water sediments. Some 0.9 GtC y1 of PIC is exported
(sinks) to below the photic zone (80%) [7, 37, 41, 42], of which
0.8 GtC y1 is dissolved into deeper waters (it becomes DIC—
about half of this dissolution happens in the upper 1–2 km of the
water column), and only 0.1 GtC y1 is buried into deep-sea
sediments (Fig. 3) [27–30]. CaCO3 formation reduces ALKT and
DIC and somewhat raises pCOw
2 in surface waters, while dissolu-
tion of CaCO3 at depth increases ALKT and DIC and somewhat
lowers pCOw
2 in deep water (Box 2 and Fig. 4).
VERTICAL GRADIENTS—CARBON
TRANSPORT INTO THE OCEAN INTERIOR
For vertical gradients, the ‘pumps’ discussed in Section ‘Influence
of the soft tissue and carbonate, or alkalinity, pumps’ are of criti-
cal importance. Overall, some 4–5 times more carbon is exported
from the photic layer by the soft tissue pump (st) than by the car-
bonate pump (carb). This proportionality is represented by the
so-called rain ratio (Cst/Ccarb ¼ 4:1 to 5:1) [5, 8, 11, 12, 43, 44]. As a
consequence, the soft tissue pump dominates vertical DIC gra-
dients in the ocean. Because the soft tissue pump involves also
PO3
4
(in Redfield ratio relative to carbon), while the carbonate
pump does not affect PO3
4 , the contributions of the soft tissue
and carbonate pumps to measured vertical DIC gradients can be
disentangled using measured vertical PO3
4
gradients. Conversely,
the contributions of the carbonate pump can be approximated
using the ALKT distribution (Fig. 4) [8, 35]. It is critical to empha-
size that use of the PO3
4 (phosphate)-based estimate for the soft
tissue pump and the ALKT-based estimate for the carbonate
pump yields DIC changes that would result from these pumps if
there were no concomitant air–sea gas exchange working to ‘re-
set’ the carbon equilibrium. Notably, air–sea gas exchange, in
combination with ocean circulation, would over time allow some
of the accumulating deep CO2 to outgas back into the atmo-
sphere. Hence, real vertical DIC changes are expected to differ
somewhat from the sum of the P-based estimate for the soft tis-
sue pump and the ALKT-based estimate for the carbonate pump
[8]. In fact, combining these two estimates reveals that the soft
tissue pump (DCst) can explain at most 220 lmol kg1, or 70%, of
the observed vertical DIC gradient (DDIC) of 315 lmol kg1 of
pre-industrial times (before anthropogenic CO2 emissions), and
the carbonate pump (DCcarb) at most 60 lmol kg1, or 20% [8]. The
residual effect of 35 lmol kg1, or 10% of DDIC, relates to the
net effect of the so-called gas-exchange pump [8] (Box 3 and
Fig. 5). To understand why the net gas-exchange effect is positive,
a bit more detail is needed.
Combination of the net biological (bio) and gas-exchange
(gasx) pumps determines the relationship that drives DDIC,
according to DDIC¼ DCbioþ DCgasx. We have seen above that DCbio
splits into the soft tissue (st) and carbonate (carb) pumps, so that
DDIC ¼ DCstþ DCcarbþ DCgasx. The gas-exchange pump in turn can
Marine methods for carbon dioxide removal
|
5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
also be split into two components. One is temperature dominated,
with a small influence of freshwater fluxes [8, 45], and reflects the
physical transfer of cold, carbon-rich water from the surface at high
latitudes into the deep sea; this is known as the solubility pump (or
thermal gas-exchange pump; DCgasx(sol)), which enhances DIC at
depth [8, 11, 46]. The second component of the gas-exchange pump
is driven by surface carbon chemistry changes that result from bio-
logical processes; this is the biological gas-exchange component
(DCgasx(bio)) [8]. Note that the latter is not technically a ‘pump’ in
that it does not act against a gradient. Instead, it concerns the
respiration driver behind high DIC and pCOw
2 values at depth that,
upon upwelling, fuel outgassing into the atmosphere. Thus, the
complete relationship becomes: DDIC¼ DCst þ DCcarb þ DCgasx(sol) þ
DCgasx(bio) (Fig. 5). Because DCgasx(bio) represents the gas-exchange-
related ‘dampening’ of DIC gradients relative to the potential PO3
4 -
based estimates of DCbio, values for DCgasx(bio) are negative. In other
words, the two gas-exchange terms (DCgasx(sol) and DCgasx(bio)) have
opposing influences. The net gas-exchange pump influence is only
about a third of what would be expected based on thermal gas-
exchange arguments alone (Box 3) [8].Because the soft tissue pump
and carbonate pump have different impacts on ALKT, DIC and
pCOw
2 , the net effect of the total biological pump on both surface-
water and deep-water chemistry over time depends on the rain rate
of organic carbon to CaCO3-bound carbon [5, 8, 11, 12]. Other plank-
ton groups, notably diatoms and radiolaria, build their hard body
parts out of opal (SiO2), and yet others are organic-walled (e.g. dino-
flagellates). These groups affect only the soft tissue pump; they do
not contribute to the carbonate pump. Hence, when considering
processes that utilize marine primary production and the biological
pump to enhance CO2 removal from the atmosphere into the
ocean, diatoms are of particular interest because they completely
lack the carbonate pump, but even the dominant carbonate-
bearing coccolithophores remain of interest because their soft tis-
sue pump component outperforms their carbonate pump compo-
nent. Moreover, the presence of mineral (especially carbonate) hard
body parts provides ballasting of organic carbon, which increases
biological pump efficiency [48, 49].
Figure 3. Pre-industrial ﬂow of carbon through the ocean system. Pathways, reservoir sizes (regular font, in GtC) and ﬂuxes (italic numbers, in GtC y1)
are indicated with different colors for: PIC (red), dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC; blue) and particulate and dissolved organic carbon (POC and DOC;
brown). DOC is the organic matter that can ﬁt through a ﬁlter, while POC is the organic matter that is too large and thus is ﬁltered out (common ﬁlter
sizes between 0.7 and 0.22 lm). Basis diagram after Sabine and Feely [29]. *, Marine biota total biomass value of 6 GtC after Bar On et al. [26]; **, surface
sediment total 150 GtC [26, 27, 29] and 1600 GtC [11, 34] and ***, exponential decrease with depth due to respiration [32].
Box 2. Somewhat counterintuitively, surface-water produc-
tion of CaCO3 does not reduce surface-water pCOw
2 , but in-
stead increases it. This is because CO2
3
is consumed in the re-
action Ca2þ þ CO2
3
! CaCO3. The CO2
3
reduction leads to
partial compensation for this loss via a shift in the buffering
reaction 2HCO
3  H2O þ CO2 þ CO2
3
(here reorganized to in-
dicate the direction of shift from left to right), which implies a
release of CO2 and thus an increase in surface-water pCOw
2 .
The CO2 release can also be viewed from the fact that CaCO3
formation reduces surface-water ALKT by twice as much as
DIC because of the double charge of Ca2þ versus the single C
atom used, so that the CaCO3 arrow crosses pCOw
2 contours to
higher values (Fig. 4). The opposite applies to carbonate disso-
lution, which drives a reduction in pCOw
2 [5].
6
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
USING OCEAN BIOGEOCHEMISTRY TO
MITIGATE CO2 EMISSIONS
Carbon storage mechanisms
Broecker and Peng [5] argue that simple physical solution would
have resulted in ocean uptake of only 3% of humanity’s CO2
emissions since the onset of the industrial revolution (almost all
of the emissions would have remained in the atmosphere).
However, early estimates suggested that the ocean has instead
taken up 40% of humanity’s historical CO2 emissions [50], while
the uptake fraction of current emissions is 23 6 5% (measured for
2009–18) [5, 51]. Broecker and Peng [5] also state that the only two
pathways for significant amounts of CO2 to enter into the oceanic
DIC reservoir are the buffering reaction (H2O þ CO2 þ CO2
3

2HCO
3 ) that affects CO2 entering surface waters via air–sea ex-
change and deeper water via organic matter remineralization,
and the CaCO3 dissolution reaction (CaCO3 þ H2O þ CO2  Ca2þ
þ 2HCO
3 ). The CO2
3
in the first equation is that dissolved in the
ocean, and the CaCO3 in the second equation is entirely domi-
nated by the massive mass of interchangeable carbonate in ma-
rine surface sediments, which is estimated between 150 GtC
(1250 GtCaCO3) [27, 28, 30] and 1600 GtC (13 330 GtCaCO3) [34, 11]
(Fig. 3).
CaCO3 dissolution is determined by the so-called saturation
state of sea water (X), which is a function of the carbonate ion con-
centration; [CO2
3 ] [5, 12]. If we assume that [Ca2þ] is more or less
uniform and constant in the ocean, then the saturation state of sea-
water is given by: X ¼ [CO2
3 ]/[CO2
3 ]sat, where [CO2
3 ] is the actual
concentration in a seawater sample, and the subscript sat indicates
saturation at the pressure, temperature and salinity of the sample.
CaCO3 tends to grow under supersaturated conditions (X > 1), and
to
dissolve
under
undersaturated
conditions
(X < 1).
Because
[CO2
3 ]sat is a weak function of temperature and salinity but a strong
function of water depth (pressure), deeper waters are more corro-
sive to CaCO3 than shallower waters [52, 53]. In essence, CaCO3
becomes more soluble with lowering temperatures, and especially
with increasing pressure (depth). At typical deep-sea temperatures
(2C), CaCO3 is about twice as soluble at 500 atmospheres (atm) of
pressure (¼5000m depth) as at 1atm of pressure (surface) [5]. An
approximate relationship relative to pressure only is [CO2
3 ]sat 
(4.35 107/[Ca2þ]) e(P/511) [53], where P is water pressure at the
depth evaluated and [Ca2þ] is almost constant at 10.2  103mol
kg1 [54], so that the relationship further simplifies to [CO2
3 ]sat 
4.27 105 e(P/511). The seawater saturation state (X) contrasts the
actual [CO2
3 ] with the saturation value [CO2
3 ]sat, and it is especially
the biological pump that causes fluctuations in [CO2
3 ]. Its com-
bined soft-tissue and carbonate processes lead to a strong increase
in DIC and a considerable increase in ALKT (Box 4 and Fig. 6), which
drive a rapid decrease in [CO2
3 ] and, hence, reduce X. This makes
deep water that has received more mineralization products more
Box 3.
The solubility or thermal gas-exchange pump
(DCgasx(sol)) is affected by the (slow) surface water pCOw
2
equilibration discussed above and its interaction with the
large-scale oceanic surface-to-deep water circulation. For
an average surface-to-deep water cooling of 18C and a DIC
solubility change of 9 lmol kg1 C1 [47], DCgasx(sol) would
be expected to contribute 155 lmol kg1 to DDIC, if pCOw
2
equilibration were instantaneous [8]. The slowness of the
realistic air-sea pCOw
2 equilibration, discussed above, reduces
the expected DCgasx(sol) contribution to 100 lmol kg1 [8, 45].
This is still some 3 times greater than the net DCgasx contribu-
tion to DDIC (35lmol kg1). The discrepancy arises from the
impact of the second component of the gas-exchange pump
(DCgasx(bio)), and its impact can therefore be estimated as
DCgasx(bio) ¼ DCgasx – DCgasx(sol) ¼ 35 – 100 ¼ 65lmol kg1
(Fig. 5). The potential effect of the biological pump on vertical
DIC gradients was determined by DCbio ¼ DCst þ DCcarb ¼
220þ 60¼ 280lmol kg1. Now, we see that biology-related gas
exchange moderates that value to a realistic net value of
280  65¼ 215lmol kg1. The biology-related gas-exchange
component (DCgasx(bio)¼ 65 lmol kg1) appears to offset two-
thirds
of
the
solubility-related
gas-exchange
component
(DCgasx(sol) ¼ 100 lmol kg1). Hence, simple solubility-based
arguments about carbon storage in the interior of the ocean
may produce overestimates by a factor of 3. And if the simple
solubility arguments fail to account for slowness of the realis-
tic air-sea pCOw
2 equilibration, then this overestimation rises
to a factor of 5.
Box 4. To illustrate the impacts of soft tissue remineralization
and carbonate dissolution on seawater [CO2
3 ], an example is
borrowed from Broecker and Peng [5]. Both soft tissue reminer-
alization and carbonate dissolution increase DIC; in more
detail, the soft tissue remineralization maximum resides shal-
lower than the carbonate dissolution maximum, but this is ig-
nored here. However, the effects of nitrate (NO
3 ) in the soft
tissue pump (NO
3 ) need to be included (Fig. 6). For every 1mol
of C in soft tissue, some 0.15 moles of NO
3 are included (see
Redﬁeld ratio). For a molar rain rate of 4:1 for carbonate-pro-
ducing
plankton,
remineralization
at
depth
releases
4  0.15¼ 0.6moles of NO
3 (a change in charge concentration
of 0.6 moles in deep-water ALKT). Hence, combined reminer-
alization and dissolution increase deep-water DIC  [HCO
3 ] þ
[CO2
3 ] by 5moles. Meanwhile, deep-water ALKT increases by
þ2 (release of 1mole of Ca2þ) and 0.6 moles (due to NO
3
release)¼ 1.4moles in total. There are many additional inﬂu-
ences, which will be ignored here for clarity [10]. The change
in ALKT, therefore, is 28% of the change in DIC. Starting with a
water mass with DIC ¼ 2000lmol kg1 and ALKT¼ 2200lmol
kg1, and assuming that this water parcel would undergo a to-
tal DIC change of 200lmol kg1 due to remineralization and
dissolution (to 2200lmol kg1), then this water parcel would
have undergone a (1.4/5) 200¼ 60lmol kg1 increase in
ALKT (to 2260lmol kg1). Given the relationship between
[CO2
3 ], ALKT and DIC discussed previously, [CO2
3 ]  ALKT –
DIC ¼ 2200 2000¼ 200lmol kg1 in the original water parcel,
while [CO2
3 ]  ALKT – DIC¼ 2260 2200 ¼ 60lmol kg1 in the
modiﬁed water parcel. Hence, [CO2
3 ] has dropped greatly due
to the combined effect of remineralization and dissolution, re-
ducing X and making deep water more corrosive to CaCO3.
Meanwhile, given the simpliﬁcation DIC  [HCO
3 ] þ [CO2
3 ] dis-
cussed previously, original [HCO
3 ] was 2000 200¼ 1800lmol
kg1, while the modiﬁed-water [HCO
3 ] is 2200 60¼ 2140lmol
kg1; i.e. [HCO
3 ] has gone up by 340lmol kg1. This is because
the CO2 released from mineralization of soft tissue exceeds the
amount of CO2
3
released by dissolution of carbonate, and
the buffering reaction (H2O þ CO2 þ CO2
3
 2HCO
3 ) combines
the excess released CO2 with CO2
3
that was in the water
already, producing HCO
3 .
Marine methods for carbon dioxide removal
|
7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
corrosive to CaCO3 (Box 4). As a result, CaCO3 can exist in marine
sediments only down to a certain depth, and is absent below that
level because of dissolution (below). Given that presence of CaCO3
makes marine sediments pale beige or gray in color, and that its ab-
sence leaves dark brown-gray colors (clay minerals), one can imag-
ine a sort of ‘snow line’ with CaCO3 present above it, but not below
it [55].
Several important levels have been identified with regard to
carbonate dissolution in the ocean. The shallowest marks the
depth below which notable CaCO3 dissolution occurs (it is often
referred to as the lysocline, although this term is through the lit-
erature used for a variety of slightly different, related concepts).
Considering seafloor sediments, this level is commonly recog-
nized at a depth where overlying water is still supersaturated
(X > 1); the observed carbonate dissolution is driven by saturation
reduction due to respiration within sediment pore waters (e.g.
[31]). The next level down is the saturation horizon, where ocean
water itself first becomes undersaturated (X ¼ 1). Note that the
discussion here focuses entirely on calcite and ignores the meta-
stable form aragonite(e.g. [5, 12]). Roughly a kilometer below the
saturation horizon lies the compensation depth, which geochem-
ically is the level where dissolution at the sediment–water inter-
face exactly balances the rain of CaCO3 from above [53, 57–59],
and which geologically is the level where the sedimentary CaCO3
content drops to 10% due to dissolution [53, 60–62]. Finally, the
so-called snow line is recognized, below which no solid calcite is
found in the sediment due to dissolution [53, 55].
The compensation depth and the snow line are identical when
the system is in steady state. However, when a large CO2 pertur-
bation makes its way into the ocean interior (e.g. the anthropo-
genic emissions signal), the saturation horizon and geochemical
compensation depth shift to shallower water, and the CaCO3 that
had accumulated above the snowline now falls below the com-
pensation depth, causing intense dissolution. This so-called car-
bonate compensation process is the ultimate natural mechanism
Figure 4. Effect of key processes on pCO2 in ALKT–DIC space. Seawater pCO2 (orange lines and numbers, in latm) is calculated at a temperature of 25C,
salinity of 35 and pressure of 1 atm (water depth of 0 m). CaCO3 dissolution increases seawater ALKT and DIC in a ratio of 2:1, with a net effect of
decreasing seawater pCO2. CaCO3 formation has the opposite effects. CO2 invasion and release into/from the ocean only affects seawater DIC.
Photosynthesis mainly consumes seawater DIC and only slightly increases seawater ALKT due to nutrient uptake; respiration has the reverse effect.
Modiﬁed after Yu et al. [35].
Figure 5. Total vertical DIC gradient and its component parts. The total
vertical DIC gradient (purple) comprises the soft tissue (brown),
carbonate/alkalinity (cream) and net gas exchange (red) contributions.
The net gas exchange contribution (red) results from a solution
component (blue) and a biological component (green).
8
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
for ‘cleaning up’ a major CO2 perturbation [11, 34]. It requires the
large-scale ocean circulation (transporting the CO2) to make
many passes through the deep sea where the CaCO3 lies; each
pass takes many centuries to a millennium, and during each
pass only a fraction of the ocean volume interacts with the sedi-
mentary CaCO3 [5]. Hence, carbonate compensation is an intrin-
sically slow process. Over many tens of thousands of years, the
CO2 anomaly gets smaller and smaller following an exponentially
decaying curve, and eventually only up to 10% of the original
emissions spike remains in the atmosphere [11, 34, 63–65]. In spe-
cific locations in the deep western North Atlantic, enough an-
thropogenic CO2 has now been transported into the deep sea via
North Atlantic Deep Water formation to have started the process
of carbonate compensation (the calcite compensation depth has
risen 300 m) [66].
Given that there is no conceivable way of accelerating carbon-
ate compensation to timescales short enough to be of relevance
to society, oceanic methods for anthropogenic CO2 capture in-
stead need to consider shorter-term processes. This means stor-
age of the sequestered carbon (i) in the vast oceanic DIC reservoir
with multi-centennial timescales and/or (ii) through burial in
sea-floor sediments with timescales up to millions of years. To
achieve this, methods have been proposed that manipulate either
the soft tissue pump, or ocean alkalinity.
Using the soft-tissue pump
The soft tissue pump is responsible for the majority of carbon
transport from the ocean surface into the ocean interior, and even
into sea-floor sediments (Fig. 3). It involves the reaction CO2 þ H2O
 CH2O þ O2, with the understanding that carbon changes go
hand-in-hand with similar-sign changes in N and P, and opposite-
sign
changes
in
O2,
following
ratios
of
approximately
C:N:P:O2 ¼ 106:16:1:170 [11, 25]; although recent estimates for the
O2:P and O2:C ratios suggest 150 to 154 and 1.45, respectively
[9]. Thus, the soft tissue pump brings not only C into deeper wa-
ters, but also the major (or macro-) nutrients P and N. Upwelling of
waters enriched in these elements back into the photic layer will
trigger new production, consuming C, N and P in roughly similar
proportions as they occur in the water. However, not only P and N
are important, but also trace amounts of other elements following
the extended Redfield ratio: C124,000 N16,000 P1,000 S1,300 K1,700 Mg560
Ca500 Sr5 Fe7.5 Zn0.8 Cu0.38 Co0.19 Cd0.21 Mo0.03 [67, 68]. In some oce-
anic regions, high macro-nutrient conditions exist but productivity
remains low (i.e. concentrations of chlorophyll, the main com-
pound involved in photosynthesis, remain low); these are known
as high nutrient low chlorophyll (HNLC) regions, and productivity
in these regions is often limited by a shortage of iron in a
bio-available form (e.g. [69–75] and references therein). Biological
production in 30% of the modern surface ocean is thought to be
limited primarily by Fe [68, 76]. Upwelling in a HNLC region leads
to CO2 outgassing because of a lack of new biological production to
consume the carbon that accumulated in the water through remi-
neralization; thus pCOw
2 > pCOatm
2
. In consequence, there is consid-
erable interest in ‘fertilizing’ such areas (notably the Southern
Ocean, Equatorial Pacific and North Pacific) with iron to stimulate
biological productivity and thus reduce pCOw
2 , which in turn would
minimize outgassing and possibly even achieve net CO2 sequestra-
tion—the scale of the net CO2 impact remains debated [74–75].
Due to uptake of the nutrients NO
3 and PO3
4 , enhanced photosyn-
thesis also leads to an increase in surface-water alkalinity (Fig. 4),
which promotes further CO2 uptake (see also next section). For
such fertilizing approaches to be successful, a means needs to be
found to make newly produced POC sink rapidly into the deep sea
(preferably to the sea floor), to avoid immediate reversal of the pro-
cess by remineralization in shallow water (Box 5). However, several
issues need to be considered; notably oxygen utilization and nutri-
ent robbing, as discussed next.Respiration of sinking organic mat-
ter utilizes oxygen, both in the water column while the organic
matter is sinking, and on/in the sea floor once organic matter has
accumulated there. Even if burial of a larger than normal propor-
tion of organic matter in sediments could somehow be achieved,
the fraction buried will still be only a minor portion of the total ex-
port production; the vast majority of sinking organic matter will be
respired in the water column (as mentioned, water depth thus
exerts an important control on burial rates), and both on the sea
floor and at shallow burial depths inside the sediments. For exam-
ple, 3–5% of gross primary production ends up on the seafloor to-
day and only a tenth to a fifth of this is preserved in sediments
while the rest is remineralized within the sediments through fur-
ther oxidation using oxygen and then sulfate (2CH2O þ SO2
4
!
2HCO
3 þ H2S) and subsequent microbial methanogenesis (2CH2O
! CO2 þ CH4) [9, 77]. Even in modern regions of optimum net or-
ganic carbon burial fluxes, burial represents only 1% of primary
production [78]. A region’s existing type of ecosystem plays an im-
portant role; ecosystems with high nutrient retention and a super-
efficient microbial loop (notably, in warm water, which accelerates
respiration rates; e.g. the Red Sea) have much lower proportions of
carbon burial relative to new production than other, less efficiently
recycling ecosystems [79].
Modeling of future warm (high CO2) conditions with doubled
phosphorus and iron input indicates that organic carbon burial in
marine sediments might eventually draw down a total of
Figure 6. Schematic impacts of the soft-tissue (black) and carbonate/alkalinity (green) pumps on deep-water DIC and ALKT. Values in molar units. The
example considers the inﬂuences of soft (organic) tissue and carbonate formed in the upper water column that sink with an assumed rain ratio of 4:1,
and then remineralize and dissolve in deeper waters. Following an example presented in Broecker and Peng [5].
Marine methods for carbon dioxide removal
|
9
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
1600 GtC, although this would take tens of thousands of years,
and will be associated with massive spatial expansion of anoxic
deep-water conditions, similar to that during two major oceanic
anoxic events in Earth’s history [80]. However, 1600 GtC greatly
exceeds what may be needed to limit global warming to 1.5C
above pre-industrial levels, which instead requires 70–280 GtC re-
moval by 2100 [81]. Land-based CO2 removal of 100 GtC may be
conceivable with large-scale reforestation and soil regeneration
(especially when including soil biochar enrichment) and techno-
logical solutions may increase this ([4, 82–85] and references
therein). Hence, a similar marine contribution of 100 GtC would
be a useful target, which would avoid the worst of the side-
effects of the 1600 GtC model of Ruvalcaba Baroni et al. [80]. For
example, model experiments by Oschlies et al. [86] considered
70 GtC over a 100-year period.
The key challenge for ocean iron fertilization methods is to de-
vise effective ways of transporting organic matter to the sea floor
(which is especially difficult in deep waters) and achieve burial
with as little remineralization as possible, to avoid complications
such as seawater de-oxygenation [75, 86–89] and substantial
downstream return-flow of CO2 from sea water (see Oschlies et al.
[86] for the Southern Ocean and Gnanadesikan et al. [90] for the
tropical Pacific). Ref. [75] reviewed all major iron fertilization
experiments to date, and concluded that ‘. . . detection of signifi-
cant carbon export below the winter mixed layer following an
[iron-triggered] increase in primary productivity required at least
three conditions: (1) a shift to a diatom-dominated community;
(2) low bacterial respiration and grazing-pressure rates within the
mixed layer and (3) a sufficient experimental duration [to allow
observation of] both immediate and delayed responses to iron ad-
dition’. Possibilities for artificially accelerating organic-matter
transport to the sea floor include ballasting of phytoplankton
blooms with clay minerals or other detrital (e.g. dust) material
[48, 91–94, 134], and/or specifically triggering phytoplankton
blooms in regions where the physical circulation assists excess
DIC transport into the deep sea, such as the Ross Sea near
Antarctica [95]. The latter condition may more broadly apply to
the region around Antarctica to the south of the so-called
Southern Ocean Biogeochemical Divide, where circulation accu-
mulates macro-nutrients that can sustain major productivity
increases, and where rapid sinking of waters assists excess DIC
transport from the surface into the deep sea [96].Achieving rapid
sinking and burial of organic matter in fertilized HNLC regions
has negative side-effects as well; the associated nutrient export
from surface waters and their accumulation at and above the
sea floor represent significant changes in the long-standing
ecosystem operation of these regions, with repercussions
throughout their food webs. Moreover, nutrient deprivation in
areas downstream of the fertilized HNLC regions, a process
called nutrient-robbing (e.g. [69, 86, 100–102]), is also likely to
have adverse impacts on ecosystem operation (see also Box 6).
Finally,
cessation
of
iron
fertilization
in
many
locations
appears to result in a ‘rebound’ effect of net CO2 outgassing
that has a major negative impact on the efficiency of iron fer-
tilization [95]. The wide range of ecosystem impacts of iron fer-
tilization must be much better understood before large-scale
implementation of the method is contemplated because they
include potentially disastrous (i) marine feedbacks that partly
or entirely offset the CO2 sequestration gains in the fertilized
HNLC region, including production of the powerful greenhouse
gases N2O or methane, and a rebound effect when iron fertili-
zation is stopped, which would quickly erode the net benefit
(and cost efficiency) of iron fertilization (e.g. [74, 75, 86, 87, 90,
95, 103]); (ii) toxic algal bloom development [75, 104, 105]; (iii)
water-column de-oxygenation [75, 86–89] and/or (iv) side-
effects to critical ecosystem services over a much wider spatial
domain [69, 74, 97] (Box 6).
Box 5. It is possible that marine biomass stocks, including
those potentially interesting to ﬁsheries, might increase in a
fertilized region. However—even ignoring that this growth
may be (partially) offset by a decline in downstream
regions—such growth would be a one-time change only, fol-
lowed by a new steady state where ﬂux in equals ﬂux out.
Even if a doubling or tripling of the 3 GtC global biomass
stock in classes larger than single-celled plankton [26] could
be achieved, such a one-time change would only represent a
few percent of the oceanic C sequestration desired. Hence,
the bulk of productivity-based oceanic C sequestration must
be done by action of the soft-tissue pump, with focus on the
rapidly
overturning
single-celled
phytoplankton,
rather
than by a marine biomass stock expansion at higher trophic
levels (but note that there are also proposals for artiﬁcial up-
welling as a method for carbon removal that focuses on
multi-cellular macro-algae; e.g. Sargassum).
Box 6. Recent work on iron transport and limitation further
emphasizes concerns that nutrient-robbing associated with
fertilizing HNLC regions may affect nutrient cycling and eco-
system interdependences on a global scale, and casts doubt
over the net CO2 sequestration potential of iron fertilization. It
proposes that, over geological time, a global macronutrient
and micronutrient colimitation with optimized net productiv-
ity may have developed in the oceans, which is mediated by
macronutrient, iron, and ligand redistribution via ocean circu-
lation;
the
so-called
ligand-iron-microbe
feedback
[69].
Ligands are phytoplankton- and other microbe-produced ‘or-
ganic molecules that bind to iron and act as a refuge from loss
by scavenging and precipitation, and [.. .] most oceanic dis-
solved [bio-available] iron is associated with organic chelating
ligands’ [69]. The authors propose that ligands produced by
phytoplankton using nutrients in the dust-replete North
Atlantic, which is (via Antarctic Intermediate Water) down-
stream of the Southern Ocean HNLC region, cause iron trans-
port via deep currents back into the Southern Ocean, where it
feeds phytoplankton. This feedback keeps iron available in the
ocean in ‘just enough’ amounts. Following this framework,
further iron additions to the Southern Ocean are unlikely to
drive appreciable increases in net global productivity (thus,
CO2 sequestration) on a global scale, although major detri-
mental ecosystem impacts may be caused [69, 97]. Yet, the
framework represents a highly idealized representation of the
complex iron cycle in the ocean [68], which casts doubt on its
inferred perfectly closed loop. Moreover, ocean carbon inven-
tory changes in the geological past in part reﬂect an important
contribution of iron fertilization in ocean C sequestration (e.g.
[98, 99]), which challenges the conclusion of Lauderdale et al.
[69] that iron additions would not appreciably affect CO2 se-
questration.
10
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
All this should not be taken to mean that ocean iron fertiliza-
tion should be discarded as a potential method for atmospheric
carbon removal. Instead, it emphasizes that careful work is
needed to better understand the true scale of the benefits, and
the likelihood of side-effects that might potentially offset any
benefits. There are not enough data to fully assess what exactly
might be expected from ocean iron fertilization. Because of the
potentially wide-ranging impacts, a targeted research effort is
needed to resolve the governing framework of processes and
interactions before large-scale implementation is sought.
Altering ocean alkalinity
Theoretically, there is vast potential for CO2 sequestration into
the interior of the ocean via ocean alkalinity enhancement (OAE)
(e.g. [4, 88, 106–109]). This leads to storage in the oceanic DIC res-
ervoir, over multi-decadal to multi-centennial timescales. The
method essentially works by artificially increasing the positive
charge concentration of cations in sea water, with specific inter-
est in Ca2þ and Mg2þ. This increase would be realized through ad-
dition of ground silicate rock or industrially produced lime (Box 7)
to coasts in warm regions where wave agitation keeps mobilizing
and pulverizing the material and high temperatures maximize
weathering rates, or to open-ocean surface waters (e.g. [106, 109],
and references therein). Note that the direct CO2 consumption
during chemical weathering in this method is strongly aug-
mented by indirect CO2 drawdown associated with the method’s
alkalinity addition to the ocean (see below).The mining effort
needed to obtain sufficient silicate rock and/or limestone (for
lime production) for removal of several gigatons of CO2 per year
is similar to the mining effort for the current global cement in-
dustry (7 Gt of source rock per year [109]. Other proposals in-
clude so-called accelerated weathering of limestone using CO2-
rich industrial flue-gas [116–119] (Box 8), and various electro-
chemical processes [109, 120–122] including a concept focused on
Cl reduction via electrodialysis [123, 124].
Addition of alkalinity to the ocean helps to offset ocean acidifi-
cation (the lowering of ocean pH due to anthropogenic CO2 ab-
sorption)
[106,
108],
which
is
a
major
threat
to
marine
ecosystems [106, 125, 126]. More relevant to this review, the in-
creasing positive charge concentration due to OAE will force an
increase in the negative charge concentration of the dominant
anions [HCO
3 ] and [CO2
3 ], through a reduction in dissolved [CO2].
Visualized in Fig. 2, the process drives a shift to the right along
the X-axis, with increases in [HCO
3 ] and [CO2
3 ] along with a de-
crease in dissolved [CO2]. The dissolved [CO2] reduction implies a
drop in pCOw
2 , and thus increases atmospheric CO2 absorption.
But the slowness of air-sea CO2 equilibration then comes into
play, which means that intensive OAE could cause severe tempo-
rary/regional CO2 depletion, causing intense pCOw
2 gradients be-
tween well-mixed waters and the OAE source. In extreme cases,
spots with CO2 limitation of productivity might develop, when
pCOw
2
locally falls below 100 latm, although mixing (and/or
more diffuse addition) will alleviate that and overall productivity
is thought to remain limited by nutrient and light availability
[106, 127–131]. More significantly, OAE increases X, [HCO
3 ] and
pH, and thus promotes calcification (CaCO3 formation). Yet, cal-
cification reduces alkalinity (Box 2 and Fig. 4), and thus offsets
the desired effects of OAE. This, combined with further biogeo-
chemical feedbacks—e.g. changes in the rain rate, including an
enhanced carbonate pump as well as enhanced carbonate bal-
lasting of POC—makes the net impacts of OAE difficult to quan-
tify [106]. Much deeper understanding of this complex network of
feedbacks is needed before such quantifications become feasible,
and the expanded understanding needs to include also the
impacts of addition of silica, Mg versus Ca, and trace elements
through OAE [106]. Note also that OAE applied in an indiscrimi-
nate manner may trigger detrimental feedbacks that might offset
(or worse) the CO2 drawdown targeted with the OAE, which calls
for careful monitoring of the seawater saturation state during the
addition, so that the volume of alkalinity added can be adjusted
accordingly [132].Renforth and Henderson [109] compared differ-
ent ocean biogeochemical model experiments and found that,
under certain hypothetical scenarios of pure alkalinity addition
and
ideal
(immediate)
dissolution
of
the
added
materials,
166 GtC can be sequestered by 2100 [88], or that 0.6 GtC can be
sequestered each year for every Gt of olivine added to the surface
ocean per year [110]. In the latter study, 57% of the sequestration
arose from alkalinity increase, and 37% and 6% from the addi-
tions of iron and silicon derived from the olivine, respectively; but
note that assuming ideal (immediate) dissolution is rather unre-
alistic in the case of olivine. A specific benefit of OAE is that it can
(regionally at least) help keep the ocean at a higher carbonate
(aragonite) saturation state, which will contribute to continued
Box 7. Silicate mineral weathering in essence follows reac-
tions similar to that for olivine: Mg2SiO4 þ 4CO2 þ 4H2O !
2Mg2þ þ 4HCO
3 þ H4SiO2. Other silicate minerals have dif-
ferent cations instead of Mg (e.g. Ca) and thus produce dif-
ferent ions (e.g. Ca2þ), and/or clay minerals instead of dis-
solved
silicic
acid
(H4SiO4).
CO2
sequestration
using
industrially produced lime uses the reverse calcination
reaction CaO þ CO2 ! CaCO3. The CaO would need to be
industrially produced with CO2 capture, to ensure a net CO2
sequestration effect. In a natural state, throughout Earth
history, CO2 levels changed because of minor imbalances
between removal of CO2 by weathering and addition by
volcanism, which over hundreds of thousands to millions of
years changed the carbon inventory enough to inﬂuence
climate (e.g. [30, 77, 109–113]). Reported natural global CO2
consumption ﬂuxes by chemical weathering of silicate rock
range from 0.22 to 0.29 GtC y1 [114, 115], so that an increase
of the weathering rate by a factor of 100 would contribute
signiﬁcantly to anthropogenic carbon removal on timescales
that are relevant to society. Therefore, the key challenge in
artiﬁcial
weathering
methods
for
anthropogenic
CO2
sequestration, such as OAE, is to achieve acceleration of this
process.
Box 8. The method of accelerated weathering of limestone
using CO2-rich industrial ﬂue-gas [116–119] focuses on
concentrated CO2 that is captured at source from industrial
emissions and is then fed through reactors with sea water
and ground carbonate (e.g. industrial limestone or shell
waste), to employ the CaCO3 dissolution reaction CaCO3 þ
H2O þ CO2 ! Ca2þ þ 2HCO
3 . The water containing the
reaction end products can then be distributed back into the
ocean, where it helps restore seawater alkalinity and
combat ocean acidiﬁcation
Marine methods for carbon dioxide removal
|
11
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
coral reef health [109]. The survival of corals is under threat be-
cause we are getting uncomfortably close to their tolerances for
thermal
stress
(þ2C)
and
carbonate-ion
concentrations
([CO2
3 ] ¼ 200 lmol
kg1,
approximate
aragonite
saturation
Xaragonite ¼ 3.3; [CO2]atm ¼ 480 ppm) [133].
Finally, Renforth and Henderson [109] discuss the longevity of
C sequestration through OAE, and conclude that it might be of
the order of hundreds to thousands of years. But—similar to Bach
et al. [106]—they argue that too many uncertainties remain about
potential feedback processes (including carbonate precipitation,
which removes alkalinity), casting doubt on the robustness of
this longevity range. This again emphasizes an urgent need for
targeted research into the feedback processes, where the urgency
arises from the fact that OAE seems to be a feasible, largely safe
and potentially long-lasting method for CO2 sequestration.
DEBUNKING FREQUENTLY ENCOUNTERED
STATEMENTS/ARGUMENTS
Based on the reviewed material, we can now evaluate the state-
ments or arguments that are frequently encountered in discus-
sion groups, as listed in the introduction.
Statement 1: ‘Oceanic CO2 uptake with changing temperature
may simply be calculated with physical solubility arguments’.
This is incorrect. Such simple calculations may produce results
that are off by as much as a factor 3–5. The complete suite of pro-
cesses involved was found to be much more complicated, with
major roles for (changes in) the temperature-sensitive Revelle
factor (Box 1), the discrepancy between air–sea CO2 equilibration
timescales and circulation timescales (especially relevant if sur-
face waters become involved in deep-water formation), and out-
gassing
of
biological
pump-related
CO2
(DCgasx(bio))
from
subsurface waters upon upwelling. Changing temperatures will
therefore need to considered along with changing surface-water
residence times and changing rates of deep-water formation, bio-
logical pump activity and upwelling (Box 3).
Statement 2: ‘Carbonate formation should be promoted be-
cause it causes carbon drawdown’. This is incorrect. Carbonate
precipitation causes a decrease in alkalinity and DIC, and an in-
crease in pCOw
2
(Fig. 4), which is opposite to the expectation
expressed in this statement. Organisms with carbonate hard
body parts only cause net carbon drawdown because organic car-
bon is also formed and the soft tissue pump dominates following
the 4:1 to 5:1 rain rate. Organisms with non-carbonate hard body
parts (opal or organic compounds) are more effective at carbon
drawdown. If, for some reason, approaches are desired that must
only work with carbonate, then the focus for CO2 removal must
be on carbonate dissolution reactions (the exact opposite of the
often proposed carbonate formation).
Statement 3: ‘Ocean iron fertilization will draw down carbon
and store it in increased fish populations (which are commer-
cially interesting)’. This may be the case, but the impact on car-
bon drawdown is very limited. Expansion of fish stocks would be
a one-time change only. Once the expansion has stabilized, a
new steady state will exist where flux in equals flux out.
Moreover, even under extreme assumptions of fish-stock expan-
sion to 2 or 3 times the present-day global stock, such a one-time
change would only represent a few percent of the oceanic C
sequestration that is desired. The heavy lifting in productivity-
based oceanic C sequestration must be done by continuous ac-
tion of the soft tissue pump, driven by rapidly overturning single-
celled plankton (Box 5).
Statement 4: ‘Ocean iron fertilization has only positive (enrich-
ing) side-effects’. This is incorrect. Nutrients are used/depleted
from surface waters and transported into deep water within or-
ganic matter sinking from successful iron fertilization regions.
This causes surface waters downstream of these regions to be-
come nutrient-depleted, with impacts on ecosystems that used
to rely on the imported nutrients. Also, the nutrients in sinking
organic matter will be released at depth through remineraliza-
tion, and then remain absent from surface waters until upwelling
circulation brings them back up (along with CO2). Furthermore,
oxygen is utilized during remineralization, and deep-water de-ox-
ygenation underneath and downstream of iron fertilization
regions poses a threat to communities that used to rely on the
presence of sufficient oxygen. Finally, a host of insufficiently un-
derstood feedbacks can lead to production of other powerful
greenhouse gases, as well as a rebound effect when iron fertiliza-
tion is stopped, which would severely diminish the net benefits of
the initial iron fertilization (Section ‘Using the soft-tissue pump’).
Statement 5: ‘Enhanced primary production will be buried in
sediments without major detrimental impacts’. This is a highly
simplified view. First, only a fraction of productivity ever gets
buried in the sediments, due to highly efficient remineralization
in the water column, at the sea floor and within sediments.
Second, organic carbon burial potential decreases greatly with in-
creasing water depth, so that most of the burial occurs in shallow
marine environments, and only a tiny fraction in the deep sea.
Stimulating phytoplankton (or seaweed) growth therefore is only
one critical part of the problem; the other critical part is how to
ensure that this new production will actually reach the sea floor
to stand a chance of being buried, rather than being remineral-
ized within the water column. Third, the fraction of productivity
lost to the sediments depends strongly on the type of ecosystem;
some ecosystems (e.g. the Red Sea) have much lower proportions
of carbon burial relative to new production than other ecosys-
tems, so that not all regions are suitable for carbon removal
through productivity enhancement. Moreover, in all cases, the in-
crease in carbon burial that might be realized is only a small frac-
tion of the additional productivity driven by fertilization, so that
very large-scale fertilization is needed to trigger substantial in-
crease in carbon burial fluxes. Optimization strategies may focus
on: (i) fertilization in areas with anoxic waters/sediments because
this promotes preservation of the organic flux to the sea floor
and (ii) implementation in relatively shallow environments, given
the great reduction in organic burial potential with increasing
water depth. With respect to iron fertilization, this is problematic
because hardly any sizeable HNLC regions overlie relatively shal-
low waters that are already anoxic or severely de-oxygenated be-
cause HNLC regions are by their very nature characterized by
limited subsurface oxygen demand for remineralization, given
their normally low organic matter flux. Creating anoxia in such
regions poses a major threat to communities that used to rely on
the presence of sufficient oxygen, and leads to feedbacks that
can cause the release of other powerful greenhouse gases
(Section ‘Using the soft-tissue pump’).
Statement 6: ‘Impacts of regionally applied methods in the
ocean can be confined to that region’. This is a complete miscon-
ception. The ocean is not a stationary body. It has both large-
scale circulation that covers multi-centennial to millennial time-
scales, and medium to small-scale circulation (currents, eddies
and turbulence) over all spatial scales and with typical timescales
of seconds to centuries. All ocean properties get transported
along in this dynamic environment. While being transported,
both chemical and biological processes interact with many of
12
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
these properties (especially carbon, nutrients and oxygen). No re-
gionally applied method can be contained to only regional
impacts. This complex of lateral transport and mixing is also
what makes it so difficult to verify the carbon drawdown effi-
ciency of any method. Enrichment of one region may lead to eco-
system change (e.g. different communities/species), and there
are potential downstream impacts in terms of environmental
conditions (e.g. nutrient robbing, de-oxygenation and inorganic
carbonate precipitation) and even foreign species invasion. The
dynamic ocean environment also generates potential problems
in CO2-drawdown credit attribution (as well as further legal and
societal implications), where one country’s intervention (e.g. al-
kalinity enhancement) can lead to CO2 drawdown in a down-
stream country’s economic zone.
CONCLUSIONS
• The alkalinity of the ocean creates a massive increase in the
ocean’s capacity to store carbon, relative to a scenario with-
out ocean alkalinity.
• Ocean warming causes decreases in both CO2 solubility and
the Revelle factor (B), which make the ocean less efﬁcient at
absorbing CO2. Moreover, opposing inﬂuences of the two key
air–sea gas exchange terms cause simple solubility-based
arguments about carbon storage in the interior of the ocean
to produce overestimates by a factor of 3–5.
• Surface-water production of CaCO3 drives an increase rather
than a decrease in surface-water pCOw
2 , but carbonate-
bearing productivity remains of interest for carbon drawdown
because the soft tissue pump component outperforms the
carbonate pump component.
• Carbonate compensation (dissolution of sedimentary carbon-
ate) is nature’s ultimate mechanism for ’cleaning up’ a major
CO2 perturbation, but it requires many tens of thousands of
years and cannot conceivably be accelerated to timescales
relevant to society. Hence, research concentrates on carbon
storage (a) in the vast oceanic DIC reservoir with multi-
centennial timescales and/or (b) through burial in sea-ﬂoor
sediments with timescales up to millions of years. To achieve
this, proposals focus on manipulation of either the soft tissue
pump or ocean alkalinity.
• Many uncertainties remain with respect to soft tissue pump
manipulation (notably, through ocean iron fertilization).
These include: (i) feedbacks that partly or entirely offset the
CO2 sequestration gains, including production of N2O or
methane that would quickly erode the net greenhouse gas
beneﬁt (and cost efﬁciency) of iron fertilization; (ii) the likeli-
hood of toxic algal bloom development; (iii) the potential for
water-column de-oxygenation and (iv) side-effects to critical
ecosystem services over a wider spatial domain due to, e.g.,
nutrient robbing.
• A key challenge in ocean alkalinity enhancement (OAE) is to
develop the required mineral processing and distribution/dis-
solution mechanisms at volumes and timescales that are rel-
evant to society. Estimates for the longevity (hundreds to
thousands of years) and potential mass (tens to more than a
hundred GtC by 2100) of C sequestration through OAE are
highly relevant to the problem of anthropogenic CO2 removal,
but many uncertainties remain about feedback processes.
There is speciﬁc urgency in accelerating research into these
feedbacks for OAE because it seems to be a feasible, largely
safe and potentially long-lasting method for CO2 sequestra-
tion.
• As yet, the data and process understanding remain insufﬁ-
cient for predicting the plethora of underpinning processes,
feedbacks and downstream impacts involved in oceanic
methods for atmospheric carbon removal. Major interna-
tional research investment is needed to address this gap in
fundamental understanding, before well-intentioned, but po-
tentially harmful, large-scale implementations are under-
taken with insufﬁcient scientiﬁc oversight.
• Finally, given the broad scope and potentially large spatial
scales of feedbacks and impacts, it is imperative that large-
scale oceanic methods for atmospheric carbon removal, once
implemented, remain subject to ongoing and entirely inde-
pendent, multi-national scientiﬁc monitoring, oversight and
validation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Lennart Bach, Jelle Bijma and Jack Middelburg for feed-
back on earlier drafts and formal review comments, and Lennart
Bach, Jelle Bijma, Phil Boyd, Wally Broecker and Jimin Yu for
stimulating carbon-cycle discussions over the years.
FUNDING
This study contributes to the Climate Recovery Institute, a broad
collaboration on climate solutions (https://climaterecoveryinsti
tute.com.au).
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The author is an Editor of the journal and the article was there-
fore entirely handled and edited by another Associate Editor
through peer review.
AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONS
Eelco Rohling (Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding ac-
quisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration,
Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing—original draft and
Writing—review & editing [equal]).
References
1.
Meinshausen M, Lewis J, McGlade C et al. Realization of Paris
Agreement pledges may limit warming just below 2C. Nature
2022;604:304–9.
2.
GESAMP. High level review of a wide range of proposed marine
geoengineering techniques. GESAMP Rep Stud 2019;98:143.
3.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
Negative Emissions Technologies and Reliable Sequestration: A
Research Agenda. Washington, DC: The National Academies
Press, 2019.
4.
Rohling EJ. Rebalancing Our Climate: The Future Starts Today. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2021, 303.
5.
Broecker WS, Peng TH. Tracers in the Sea. Palisades, NY:
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, Columbia University,
1982, 690.
6.
Dickson AG. The carbon dioxide system in seawater: equilib-
rium chemistry and measurements. In: Riebesell U, Fabry VJ,
Hansson L et al. (eds.), Guide to Best Practices for Ocean
Marine methods for carbon dioxide removal
|
13
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
Acidiﬁcation Research and Data Reporting, Vol. 1. Luxembourg:
Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union; 2010, 17–40.
7.
Gieskes JM. The alkalinity-total carbon dioxide system in sea-
water. In: Goldberg ED (ed.), The Sea, Vol. 5. New York, NY:
Wiley, 1974, 123–51.
8.
Gruber NI, Sarmiento JL. Large-scale biogeochemical–physical
interactions in elemental cycles. The Sea 2002;12:337–99.
9.
Middelburg JJ. Marine Carbon Biogeochemistry. Springer Briefs in
Earth System Sciences. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019,
57–75.
10.
Middelburg JJ, Soetaert K, Hagens M. Ocean alkalinity, buffer-
ing
and
biogeochemical
processes.
Rev
Geophys
2020;58:
e2019RG000681.
11.
Williams RG, Follows MJ. Ocean Dynamics and the Carbon Cycle:
Principles and Mechanisms. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2011, 404.
12.
Zeebe RE, Wolf-Gladrow D. CO2 in seawater: equilibrium, ki-
netics, isotopes. In: Halpern D (ed.), Elsevier Oceanography Series,
Vol. 65. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2001, 346.
13.
Henry, W. Experiments on the quantity of gases absorbed by
water, at different temperatures, and under different pres-
sures. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond 1803:93;29–43.
14.
Bailey N, Papakyriakou TN, Bartels C et al. Henry’s Law con-
stant for CO2 in aqueous sodium chloride solutions at 1 atm
and sub-zero (Celsius) temperatures. Mar Chem 2018;207:
26–32.
15.
Orr JC, Najjar RG, Aumont O, Bopp L, Bullister JL, Danabasoglu
G, Doney SC, Dunne JP, Dutay JC, Graven H, Grifﬁes SM.
Biogeochemical protocols and diagnostics for the CMIP6 Ocean
Model
Intercomparison
Project
(OMIP).
Geoscientiﬁc
Model
Development 2017 Jun 9;10(6):2169–99.
16.
Weiss R. Carbon dioxide in water and seawater: the solubility
of a non-ideal gas. Mar Chem 1974;2:203–15.
17.
Ja¨hne B, Haußecker H. Air–water gas exchange. Ann Rev Fluid
Mech 1998;30:443–68.
18.
Broecker WS, Peng TH. Gas exchange rates between air and
sea. Tellus 1974;26:21–35.
19.
Takahashi T, Feely RA, Weiss RF et al. Global air-sea ﬂux of
CO2: an estimate based on measurements of sea–air pCO2 dif-
ference. Proc Nat Acad Sci 1997;94:8292–9.
20.
Takahashi T, Wanninkhof RH, Feely, RA et al. Net sea–air CO2
ﬂux over the global oceans: an improved estimate based on the
sea–air pCO2 difference. In: Nojiri Y (ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd
International Symposium on CO2 in the Oceans. Tsukuba, Japan:
Center for Global Environmental Research, National Institute
for Environmental Studies, Environmental Agency of Japan,
1999, 9–15.
21.
Revelle R, Suess HE. Carbon dioxide exchange between atmo-
sphere and ocean and the question of an increase of atmo-
spheric CO2 during the past decades. Tellus 1957:9;18–27.
22.
Anderson LA. On the hydrogen and oxygen content of marine
phytoplankton. Deep-Sea Res I 1995;42;1675–80.
23.
Anderson LA, Sarmiento JL. Redﬁeld ratios of remineralization
determined by nutrient data analysis. Glob Biogeochem Cycles
1994;8;65–80.
24.
Redﬁeld AC, Ketchum BH, Richards FA. The inﬂuence of organ-
isms on the composition of sea-water. In: Hill MN (ed.), The Sea:
Composition of Sea Water, Vol. 2. New York, NY: Wiley-
Interscience, 1963, 26–77.
25.
Takahashi T, Broecker WS, Langer S. Redﬁeld ratio based on
chemical data from isopycnal surfaces. J Geophys Res Oceans
1985;90:6907–24.
26.
Bar-On YM, Phillips R, Milo R. The biomass distribution on
Earth. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018;115:6506–11.
27.
IPCC AR4. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. AR4 Climate
Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. 2007. https://www.ipcc.
ch/report/ar4/wg1/ (15 March 2023, last accessed).
28.
Rohling EJ. The Oceans: A Deep History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2017, 272.
29.
Sabine CL, Feely RA. The oceanic sink for carbon dioxide. In:
Reay D, Hewitt N, Grace J et al. (eds). Greenhouse Gas Sinks, 2007,
31–49.
30.
Rohling EJ. The Climate Question: Natural Cycles, Human Impact,
Future Outlook. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2019,
162.
31.
Hales
B.
Respiration,
dissolution,
and
the
lysocline.
Paleoceanography 2003:18;1099.
32.
Wagner S, Schubotz F, Kaiser K et al. Soothsaying DOM: a cur-
rent perspective on the future of oceanic dissolved organic car-
bon. Front Mar Sci 2020;7:341.
33.
Berner RA. Burial of organic carbon and pyrite sulfur in the
modern ocean; its geochemical and environmental signiﬁ-
cance. Am J Sci 1982;282;451–73.
34.
Archer DE. An atlas of the distribution of calcium carbonate in
sediments of the deep sea. Glob Biogeochem Cycles 1996;10:
159–74.
35.
Yu J, Anderson RF, Rohling EJ. Deep ocean carbonate chemistry
and
glacial–interglacial
atmospheric
CO2
changes.
Oceanography 2014;27:16–25.
36.
Frankignoulle M, Canon C, Gattuso JP. Marine calciﬁcation as a
source of carbon dioxide: positive feedback of increasing atmo-
spheric CO2. Limnol Oceanogr 1994;39:458–46.
37.
Berger WH. Sedimentation of planktonic foraminifera. Mar Geol
1971;11:325–58.
38.
Broecker WS, Takahashi T. Calcium carbonate precipitation on
the Bahama Banks. J Geophys Res 1966;71:1575–602.
39.
Cloud PE. Carbonate precipitation and dissolution in the ma-
rine environment. Chem Oceanogr 1965;2:127–58.
40.
Mu€ller G, Bo€rker J, Sluijs A et al. Detrital carbonate minerals in
Earth’s
element
cycles.
Glob
Biogeochem
Cycles
2022;36:
e2021GB007231.
41.
Berger WH. Biogenous deep-sea sediments: fractionation by
deep-sea circulation. Geol Soc Am Bull 1970;81:1385–402.
42.
Li YH, Takahashi T, Broecker WS. Degree of saturation of
CaCO3 in the oceans. J Geophys Res 1969;74:5507–25.
43.
Milliman JD. Production and accumulation of calcium carbon-
ate in the ocean: budget of a nonsteady state. Glob Biogeochem
Cycles 1993;7:927–57.
44.
Milliman JD, Droxler AW. Neritic and pelagic carbonate sedi-
mentation in the marine environment: ignorance is not bliss.
Geol Rundsch 1996;85:496–504.
45.
Murnane RJ, Sarmiento JL, Le Que´re´ C. Spatial distribution of
air-sea CO2 ﬂuxes and the interhemispheric transport of car-
bon by the oceans. Glob Biogeochem Cycles 1999;13:287–305.
46.
Volk T, Hoffert MI. Ocean carbon pumps: analysis of relative
strengths and efﬁciencies in ocean-driven atmospheric CO2
changes. In: Sundquist ET, Broecker WS (eds.), The Carbon Cycle
and Atmospheric CO2: Natural Variations Archean to Present,
Geophysical Monograph Series, Vol. 32. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 1985;
99–110.
47.
Takahashi T, Olafsson J, Goddard JG et al. Seasonal variation of
CO2 and nutrients in the high-latitude surface oceans: a com-
parative study. Glob Biogeochem Cycles 1993;7:843–78.
48.
Armstrong RA, Lee C, Hedges JI et al. A new, mechanistic model
for
organic
carbon
ﬂuxes
in
the
ocean
based
on
the
14
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
quantitative association of POC with ballast minerals. Deep Sea
Res II: Top Stud Oceanogr 2001;49:219–36.
49.
Klaas C, Archer DE. Association of sinking organic matter with
various types of mineral ballast in the deep sea: implications
for the rain ratio. Glob Biogeochem Cycles 2002:16;1116.
50.
Sabine CL, Tanhua T. Estimation of anthropogenic CO2 inven-
tories in the ocean. Ann Rev Mar Sci 2010;2:269–92.
51.
Hauck J, Zeising M, Le Que´re´ C et al. Consistency and chal-
lenges in the ocean carbon sink estimate for the global carbon
budget. Front Mar Sci 2020;7:571720.
52.
Barker S, Ridgwell A. Ocean acidiﬁcation. Nat Educ Knowl 2012;
3:21.
53.
Boudreau BP, Middelburg JJ, Meysman FJR. Carbonate compen-
sation dynamics. Geophys Res Lett 2010;37:L03603.
54.
He H, Li Y, Wang S, Ma Q et al. A high precision method for cal-
cium determination in seawater using ion chromatography.
Front Mar Sci 2020;7:231.
55.
Zeebe RE, Westbroek PA. A simple model for the CaCO3 satura-
tion state of the ocean: the “Strangelove,” the “Neritan,” and
the “Cretan” ocean. Geochem Geophys Geosyst 2003;4:1104.
56.
Wolf-Gladrow DA, Zeebe RE, Klaas C et al. Total alkalinity: the
explicit conservative expression and its application to biogeo-
chemical processes. Mar Chem 2007;106:287–300.
57.
Schink DR, Guinasso NL Jr. Modeling the inﬂuence of bioturba-
tion and other processes on carbonate dissolution on the sea
ﬂoor. In: Anderson NR, Malahoff A (eds.), The Fate of Fossil Fuel
CO2 in the Oceans. New York, NY: Plenum, 1977, 375–99.
58.
Takahashi T, Broecker WS. Mechanisms for calcite dissolution
on the sea ﬂoor. In: Anderson NR, Malahoff A (eds.), The Fate of
Fossil Fuel CO2 in the Oceans. New York, NY: Plenum, 1977, 455–77.
59.
Tyrrell T. Calcium carbonate cycling in future oceans and its
inﬂuence on future climates. J Plankton Res 2008;30:141–156.
60.
Broecker WS. A need to improve reconstructions of the ﬂuctua-
tions in the calcite compensation depth over the course of the
Cenozoic. Paleoceanography 2009;23:PA1204.
61.
Kennett JP. Marine Geology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: NJ Prentice
Hall, 1982, 813.
62.
Morse JM, Mackenzie FT. Geochemistry of sedimentary carbo-
nates. Developments in Sedimentology, Vol. 48. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Elsevier, 1990, 707.
63.
Goodwin P, Ridgwell A. Ocean-atmosphere partitioning of an-
thropogenic carbon dioxide on multimillennial timescales.
Glob Biogeochem Cycles 2010;24:GB2014.
64.
Lord NS, Ridgwell A, Thorne MC et al. An impulse response
function for the “long tail” of excess atmospheric CO2 in an
Earth system model. Glob Biogeochem Cycles 2016;30:2–17.
65.
Ridgwell A, Hargreaves JC. Regulation of atmospheric CO2 by
deep-sea sediments in an Earth system model. Glob Biogeochem
Cycles 2007;21:GB2008.
66.
Sulpis O, Boudreau BP, Mucci A et al. Current CaCO3 dissolution
at the seaﬂoor caused by anthropogenic CO2. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2018;115:11700–5.
67.
Ho TY, Quigg A, Finkel ZV et al. The elemental composition of
some marine phytoplankton 1. J Phycol 2003:39;1145–59.
68.
Horner TJ, Little SH, Conway TM et al. Bioactive trace metals
and their isotopes as paleoproductivity proxies: an assessment
using GEOTRACES-era data. Glob Biogeochem Cycles 2021;35:
e2020GB006814.
69.
Lauderdale JM, Braakman R, Forget G et al. Microbial feedbacks
optimize ocean iron availability. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2020;
117:4842–9.
70.
Martin JH. Glacial–interglacial CO2 change: the iron hypothe-
sis. Paleoceanography 1990;5:1–3.
71.
Martin JH, Fitzwater SE. Iron deﬁciency limits phytoplankton
growth in the north-east Paciﬁc subarctic. Nature 1988;331:341–3.
72.
Raven JA, Falkowski PG. Oceanic sinks for atmospheric CO2.
Plant Cell Environ 1999;22:741–55.
73.
Wallace D, Law C, Boyd P et al. Ocean Fertilization: A Scientiﬁc
Summary for Policy Makers. Paris: IOC/UNESCO (IOC/BRO/2010/
2), 2010, 18.
74.
Williamson P, Wallace DW, Law CS et al. Ocean fertilization for
geoengineering:
a review
of effectiveness, environmental
impacts and emerging governance. Process Saf Environ Prot
2012;90:475–88.
75.
Yoon JE, Yoo KC, Macdonald AM et al. Reviews and syntheses:
ocean iron fertilization experiments–past, present, and future
looking to a future Korean Iron Fertilization Experiment in the
Southern Ocean (KIFES) project. Biogeosciences 2018;15:5847–89.
76.
Moore CM, Mills MM, Arrigo KR et al. Processes and patterns of
oceanic nutrient limitation. Nat Geosci 2013;6:701–10.
77.
Wallmann K, Aloisi G. The global carbon cycle: geological pro-
cesses. In: Knoll AH, Canﬁeld DE, Konhauser KO (eds.),
Fundamentals of Geobiology, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2012, 20–35.
78.
Hayes CT, Costa KM, Anderson RF et al. Global ocean sediment
composition and burial ﬂux in the deep sea. Glob Biogeochem
Cycles 2021;35:e2020GB006769.
79.
Boscolo-Galazzo F, Crichton KA, Barker S et al. Temperature de-
pendency of metabolic rates in the upper ocean: a positive
feedback to global climate change? Glob Planet Change 2018;
170:201–12.
80.
Ruvalcaba Baroni I, Palastanga V, Slomp CP. Enhanced organic
carbon burial in sediments of oxygen minimum zones upon
ocean deoxygenation. Front Mar Sci 2020;6:839.
81.
Rogelj J, Den Elzen M, Ho¨hne N et al. Paris agreement climate
proposals need a boost to keep warming well below 2C. Nature
2016;534:631–9.
82.
Hansen J, Kharecha P, Sato M et al. Assessing “dangerous cli-
mate change”: required reduction of carbon emissions to pro-
tect young people, future generations and nature. PLoS ONE
2013;8:e81648.
83.
Hansen J, Sato M, Kharecha P et al. Young people’s burden: re-
quirement of negative CO2 emissions. Earth Syst Dyn 2017;8:
577–616.
84.
Buss W, Yeates K, Rohling EJ et al. Enhancing natural cycles in
agro-ecosystems to boost plant carbon capture and soil stor-
age. Oxf Open Clim Change 2021;1:kgab006.
85.
Buss W, Wurzer C, Manning DA et al. Mineral-enriched biochar
delivers enhanced nutrient recovery and carbon dioxide re-
moval. Commun Earth Environ 2022;3:67.
86.
Oschlies A, Koeve W, Rickels W et al. Side effects and account-
ing aspects of hypothetical large-scale Southern Ocean iron
fertilization. Biogeosciences 2010;7:4017–35.
87.
Fuhrman JA, Capone DG. Possible biogeochemical consequen-
ces of ocean fertilization. Limnol Oceanogr 1991;36:1951–9.
88.
Keller DP, Feng EY, Oschlies A. Potential climate engineering
effectiveness and side effects during a high carbon dioxide-
emission scenario. Nat Commun 2014;5:3304.
89.
Sarmiento JL, Orr JC. Three-dimensional simulations of the im-
pact of Southern Ocean nutrient depletion on atmospheric CO2
and ocean chemistry. Limnol Oceanogr 1991;36:1928–0.
90.
Gnanadesikan A, Sarmiento JL, Slater RD. Effects of patchy
ocean fertilization on atmospheric carbon dioxide and biologi-
cal production. Glob Biogeochem Cycles 2003;17:1050.
91.
Iversen MH, Ploug H. Ballast minerals and the sinking carbon
ﬂux in the ocean: carbon-speciﬁc respiration rates and sinking
Marine methods for carbon dioxide removal
|
15
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
velocity of marine snow aggregates. Biogeosciences 2010;7:
2613–24.
92.
Ploug H, Iversen MH, Fischer G. Ballast, sinking velocity, and
apparent diffusivity within marine snow and zooplankton fe-
cal pellets: implications for substrate turnover by attached
bacteria. Limnol Oceanogr 2008;53:1878–86.
93.
Ploug H, Iversen MH, Koski M et al. Production, oxygen respira-
tion rates, and sinking velocity of copepod fecal pellets: direct
measurements
of
ballasting
by
opal and
calcite.
Limnol
Oceanogr 2008;53:469–76.
94.
van der Jagt H. The role of zooplankton and mineral ballasting in
the biological carbon pump. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Bremen,
2019. doi:10.26092/elib/63 (15 March 2023, last accessed).
95.
Sarmiento JL, Slater RD, Dunne J et al. Efﬁciency of small scale
carbon mitigation by patch iron fertilization. Biogeosciences
2010;7:3593–624.
96.
Xie Y, Tamsitt V, Bach LT. Localizing the southern ocean bio-
geochemical divide. Geophys Res Lett 2022;49:e2022GL098260.
97.
Evans M. Climate ﬁx? ‘Fertilizing’ oceans with iron unlikely to
sequester more carbon. Mongabay Series: Sea Change 2020, 4
March. https://news.mongabay.com/2020/03/climate-ﬁx-fertil
izing-oceans-with-iron-unlikely-to-sequester-more-carbon/
(15 March 2023, last accessed)
98.
Chalk TB, Hain MP, Foster GL et al. Causes of ice age intensiﬁca-
tion across the Mid-Pleistocene Transition. Proc Nat Acad Sci
2017;114:13114–9.
99.
Yu J, Menviel L, Jin ZD et al. Sequestration of carbon in the deep
Atlantic during the last glaciation. Nat Geosci 2016;9:319–24.
100.
Dutkiewicz S, Follows MJ, Parekh P. Interactions of the iron and
phosphorus cycles: a three-dimensional model study. Glob
Biogeochem Cycles 2005;19:GB1021.
101.
NIWA. 2010. Iron Fertilisation. https://niwa.co.nz/iron-fertilisa
tion (15 March 2023, last accessed).
102.
Royal Society. Geoengineering the Climate: Science, Governance and
Uncertainty. London: The Royal Society, 2009, 84.
103.
Jin X, Gruber N. Offsetting the radiative beneﬁt of ocean iron
fertilization by enhancing N2O emissions. Geophys Res Lett
2003;30:2249.
104.
Silver MW, Bargu S, Coale SL et al. Toxic diatoms and domoic
acid in natural and iron enriched waters of the oceanic Paciﬁc.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:20762–7.
105.
Trick CG, Bill BD, Cochlan WP et al. Iron enrichment stimulates
toxic diatom production in high-nitrate, low-chlorophyll areas.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:5887–92.
106.
Bach LT, Gill SJ, Rickaby RE et al. CO2 removal with enhanced
weathering and ocean alkalinity enhancement: potential risks and
co-beneﬁts for marine pelagic ecosystems. Front Clim 2019;1:7.
107.
Kheshgi HS. Sequestering atmospheric carbon dioxide by in-
creasing ocean alkalinity. Energy 1995;20:915–22.
108.
Ko€hler P, Hartmann J, Wolf-Gladrow DA. Geoengineering po-
tential of artiﬁcially enhanced silicate weathering of olivine.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:20228–33.
109.
Renforth P, Henderson G. Assessing ocean alkalinity for carbon
sequestration. Rev Geophys 2017;55:636–74.
110.
Hauck J, Ko¨hler P, Wolf-Gladrow D, Vo¨lker C. Iron fertilisation
and century-scale effects of open ocean dissolution of olivine
in a simulated CO2 removal experiment. Environmental
Research Letters 2016;11(2):024007.
111.
Berner RA, Lasaga AC, Garrels RM. Carbonate-silicate geo-
chemical cycle and its effect on atmospheric carbon dioxide
over the past 100 million years. Am J Sci 1983;283:641–83.
112.
Garrels RM, Perry EA. Cycling of carbon, sulphur, and oxygen
through geologic time. In: Goldberg ED (ed.), The Sea, Vol. 5.
New York, NY: Wiley, 1974, 303–36.
113.
Gernon TM, Hincks TK, Merdith AS et al. Global chemical
weathering dominated by continental arcs since the mid-
Palaeozoic. Nat Geosci 2021;14:690–6.
114.
Gaillardet J, Dupre´ B, Louvat P et al. Global silicate weathering
and CO2 consumption rates deduced from the chemistry of
large rivers. Chem Geol 1999; 159: 3–30.
115.
Hartmann J, Jansen N, Du¨ rr HH et al. Global CO2-consumption
by chemical weathering: what is the contribution of highly ac-
tive weathering regions? Glob Planet Change 2009;69:185–94.
116.
Langer WH, Juan CA, Rau GH et al. Accelerated weathering of
limestone for CO2 mitigation opportunities for the stone and
cement industries. In: SME Annual Meeting and Exhibit and
CMA’s 111th National Western Mining Conference, Denver, CO, Vol.
1. United States Geological Survey Publications Warehouse.
2009, 310–5.
117.
Rau GH. CO2 mitigation via capture and chemical conversion
in seawater. Environ Sci Technol 2011;45:1088–92.
118.
Rau GH, Caldeira K. Enhanced carbonate dissolution: a means
of sequestering waste CO2 as ocean bicarbonate. Energy Convers
Manag 1999;40:1803–13.
119.
Rau GH, Knauss KG, Langer WH et al. Reducing energy-related
CO2 emissions using accelerated weathering of limestone.
Energy 2007;32:1471–7.
120.
House KZ, House CH, Schrag DP et al. Electrochemical accelera-
tion of chemical weathering as an energetically feasible ap-
proach to mitigating anthropogenic climate change. Environ Sci
Technol 2007;41:8464–70.
121.
Rau GH. Electrochemical splitting of calcium carbonate to
increase solution alkalinity: implications for mitigation of
carbon dioxide and ocean acidity. Environ Sci Technol 2008;42:
8935–40.
122.
Rau GH, Carroll SA, Bourcier WL et al. Direct electrolytic dissolution
of silicate minerals for air CO2 mitigation and carbon-negative H2
production. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:10095–100.
123.
de Lannoy CF, Eisaman MD, Jose A et al. Indirect ocean capture
of atmospheric CO2: part I. prototype of a negative emissions
technology. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2018;70:243–53.
124.
Eisaman MD, Rivest JL, Karnitz SD et al. Indirect ocean capture
of atmospheric CO2: part II. Understanding the cost of negative
emissions. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2018;70:254–61.
125.
Doney SC, Fabry VJ, Feely RA et al. Ocean acidiﬁcation: the
other CO2 problem. Ann Rev Mar Sci 2009;1;169–92.
126.
Gattuso JP, Magnan A, Bille´ R et al. Contrasting futures for
ocean and society from different anthropogenic CO2 emissions
scenarios. Science 2015;349:aac4722.
127.
Bach LT, Riebesell U, Schulz KG. Distinguishing between the
effects of ocean acidiﬁcation and ocean carbonation in the
coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi. Limnol Oceanogr 2011;56:
2040–50.
128.
Goldman JC. Inorganic carbon availability and the growth of
large marine diatoms. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 1999;180:81–91.
129.
Hansen PJ. Effect of high pH on the growth and survival of ma-
rine phytoplankton: implications for species succession. Aqua
Microb Ecol 2002;28:279–88.
130.
Riebesell U, Wolf-Gladrow DA, Smetacek V. Carbon dioxide
limitation of marine phytoplankton growth rates. Nature 1993;
361:249–51.
16
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
131.
Sett S, Bach LT, Schulz KG et al. Temperature modulates cocco-
lithophorid sensitivity of growth, photosynthesis and calciﬁca-
tion to increasing seawater pCO2. PLoS ONE 2014;9:e88308.
132.
Moras CA, Bach LT, Cyronak T et al. Ocean alkalinity enhance-
ment–avoiding runaway CaCO3 precipitation during quick and
hydrated lime dissolution. Biogeosciences 2022;19:3537–57.
133.
Hoegh-Guldberg O, Poloczanska ES, Skirving W et al. Coral reef
ecosystems under climate change and ocean acidiﬁcation.
Front Mar Sci 2017;4:158.
134.
Iversen MH, Robert ML. Ballasting effects of smectite on aggre-
gate formation and export from a natural plankton commu-
nity. Mar Chem 2015;175:18–27.
Marine methods for carbon dioxide removal
|
17
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad004/7135823 by guest on 26 August 2024
