Practitioner perspectives on climate mobilities in 
South Florida
Katharine J. Mach1,2,, Jennifer Niemann1,2, Rosalind Donald3, Jessica Owley1,2,4, Nadia A. Seeteram5, A.R. Siders6,7,  
Xavier I. Cortada2,4,8,9, Alex Nyburg10, Adam Roberti11, Ian A. Wright12 
1Department of Environmental Science and Policy, Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Science, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA 
2Leonard and Jayne Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA 
3School of Communication, American University, Washington, DC, USA 
4University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, FL, USA 
5Columbia Climate School, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 
6Disaster Research Center, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA 
7Biden School of Public Policy and Administration and Geography and Spatial Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA 
8Department of Art and Art History, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA 
9Department of Pediatrics, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA 
10Department of Biology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA 
11Xavier Cortada Foundation, Pinecrest Gardens, FL, USA 
12Department of Economics, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA
Correspondence address. Department of Environmental Science and Policy, Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Science, University of Miami, 
4600 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149, USA. Tel: þ1-650-561-5640, E-mail: kmach@miami.edu
Abstract 
Moving away from hazardous areas may be an important adaptive response under intensifying climate change, but to date such 
movement has been controversial and conducted with limited government or private-sector support. Research has emphasized resi­
dent perspectives on mobility, but understanding how professionals view it may open new avenues to shape future outcomes. Based 
on 76 interviews with professionals involved in climate responses in South Florida, we evaluate perceptions of adaptation goals, the 
potential role of climate mobilities in pathways supporting those goals, and associated constraints and enablers. The practitioners 
interviewed anticipate multiple types of climate mobilities will occur in the region, at increasing scales. Interviewees perceive cli­
mate mobilities at present, especially migration and gentrification where climate plays some role, as causing distributional inequities 
and financial and sociocultural disruptions, and they view existing adaptive strategies as best serving those who already have ade­
quate resources, despite practitioners’ personal commitments to social justice goals. Although many practitioners feel prepared for 
their own, limited roles related to climate mobilities, they judge the region as a whole as being unprepared to support the retreat 
they see as inevitable, with a need for a more ambitious long-term transition plan. Achieving this need will be difficult, as practi­
tioners indicate that climate mobilities remain hard to talk about politically. Nevertheless, interviewees believe some households are 
already considering moving in response to climate risks. Discussions of climate mobilities, through interviews and far beyond, may 
encourage more mindful choices about and engagement in climate-driven transformations.
Keywords: climate mobility; climate migration; climate gentrification; retreat; climate risks; climate adaptation
Introduction
Estimates of people who may be displaced by sea level rise over 
the course of this century range from 88 million for those perma­
nently inundated to 1.4 billion for overall exposure in low- 
elevation coastal zones [1]. Some people and communities are al­
ready relocating or moving away from highly hazardous coasts, 
and this number is expected to rise [2–4]. The ways people move 
(i.e. climate mobilities) will manifest in many ways, both reactive 
and proactive, as influenced by intersection of climate hazards 
and other factors [5–7]. Climate mobilities will emerge from the 
limits and failures of other adaptive responses, such as in the 
case of post-disaster dislocation [8, 9], as well as from deliberate, 
collective attempts to promote broader social goals, as in the 
case of planned relocations [10].
The simultaneous harms and benefits of climate mobilities 
pose major challenges for governments, civil society, and the 
private sector—whether in preventing losses, such as from dis­
placement, or in supporting improved safety, as in planned reset­
tlement. 
For 
instance, 
post-disaster 
displacement 
has 
disproportionately affected those with the least resources and 
those marginalized within government decision-making pro­
cesses [11, 12]. Migrants who are moving at least in part due to 
climate factors are often the least responsible for global emis­
sions of heat-trapping gases, and the lack of institutional support 
for these individuals is creating acute problem [13, 14]. Processes 
of managed retreat, despite positive aims such as moving out of 
hazardous locations, have raised concerns of procedural, distrib­
utive, and recognition justice among others [4, 15–17]. Climate 
mobilities often involve political, financial and economic, and so­
ciocultural challenges ranging from loss of municipal tax base to 
loss of culture [18, 19]. To improve the ability of governments, 
civil society, and the private sector to engage with climate 
Received: September 17, 2023. Revised: November 25, 2023. Accepted: November 29, 2023 
# The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, 3(1), kgad015  
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgad015 
Advance Access Publication Date: 4 December 2023 
Research Article   
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
mobilities, a first step is to understand how professionals view 
climate mobilities, their roles as individuals and organizations in 
preventing or supporting climate mobilities, and the barriers and 
enablers they perceive in doing so.
This paper presents such an analysis in South Florida, USA, a 
region grappling with and actively preparing for severe and in­
creasing climate-related risks and already experiencing several 
types of climate mobility. South Florida is low lying with im­
mense exposure of people and assets to storm-driven flooding 
and winds, inundation, and chronic humid heat among other 
climate-related hazards at present and under future climate 
change [20–22]. Its sociocultural, political, and economic context 
creates tremendous disparities in levels of social vulnerabilities 
and climate-related risks, linked to high income inequality, racial 
injustice, and histories of migration driven by economic and po­
litical factors [23–26]. Climate risks are substantial yet uneven, 
and to date, climate-related mobilities have figured into regional 
experiences and responses to these risks in multiple ways. First, 
post-disaster displacement to and from South Florida has oc­
curred following tropical cyclones in the United States and across 
the Caribbean Basin [27, 28]. Second, theories of ‘climate gentrifi­
cation’ have been developed to describe patterns of shifting real 
estate markets, demographics, and investments [29]. And third, 
there have been notable legal and political sensitivities surround­
ing considerations of climate-related retreat such as through 
home buyouts or road abandonment [30, 31]. Under higher mag­
nitudes of sea level rise especially, South Florida faces the poten­
tial for reactive, forced, or inequitable climate-related mobilities 
absent more deliberate, proactive planning. The combination of 
substantial 
climate 
risks, 
strong 
politization 
of 
climate 
responses, and high-profile climate mobilities makes South 
Florida an ideal place to assess practitioner perspectives on cli­
mate mobilities.
Materials and methods
We conducted semi-structured interviews with 76 adaptation- 
relevant practitioners who could provide deeply informed profes­
sional perspectives on climate responses and climate-related 
mobilities in South Florida.
Identification of interviewees
We identified over 420 adaptation-relevant practitioners in and 
relevant to South Florida using online searches and expert recom­
mendations (including balanced snowball extensions where inter­
viewees 
suggested 
experts 
who 
disagree 
with 
them; 
Supplementary Appendices 1 and 2 [32–34]). We iteratively se­
lected 112 of those 420 practitioners to achieve maximum diversity 
and comprehensiveness across categories of professional affilia­
tion: local government, state/regional government, federal govern­
ment, 
private 
sector, 
academic 
research, 
and 
nonprofit 
organizations (Supplementary Table 1) [35]. We invited those 112 
for interviews, and 76 accepted (67.9% acceptance rate). We 
stopped interview invitations within each category once adequate 
representation and saturation of perspectives were achieved.
Development of interview protocol
The University of Miami Institutional Review Board approved the 
interview protocol (IRB ID #20200038). The final interview proto­
col is available in Supplementary Appendix 1 (protocol version 
provided to interviewees) and Supplementary Appendix 2 (inter­
viewer version with notes). Using semi-structured questions, we 
asked interviewees about their roles, major concerns about 
climate risks and priorities for climate responses, and percep­
tions about climate mobilities. In particular, we asked them to 
identify and define different types of climate mobility, to discuss 
the degree to which they think climate mobilities are occurring 
now and will occur in the future, and to indicate what prepara­
tions they or the region might need to take regarding climate 
mobilities in the context of broader climate responses. 
Interviewees were not required to answer every question. For ex­
ample, they could skip questions outside of their expertise, com­
fort, or priorities.
Implementation of interviews
Our first interview was conducted in person in early March 2020. 
Subsequent scheduled interviews were then canceled due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Once University of Miami Institutional 
Review Boards allowed human-subjects research to proceed again, 
we conducted the remaining interviews by Zoom, and 75 inter­
views occurred between June and October 2021. Acknowledging 
the substantial burden on adaptation-relevant practitioners as 
well as residents in the region linked to climate research, we priori­
tized scheduling the Zoom interviews at times convenient for each 
interviewee and offered a $40 gift card as an incentive for inter­
viewees able to accept it [36, 37]. We audio-recorded interviews af­
ter informed consent occurred and later transcribed them with 
Zoom and Rev. The interviews were, on average—after introduc­
tions and informed consent—53 minutes long.
Analysis of data
We assembled responses to each question across interviewees, 
tracking interviewee number and associated professional affilia­
tion(s), but not name, for each response. Through directed con­
tent analysis, we coded interviewee transcript responses 
iteratively and inductively, informed by relevant literature, previ­
ous findings, and emergent themes [38]. A single coder (KJM) ana­
lyzed all interviewee responses, with codes checked by a second 
coder (JN). Discrepancies and errors were discussed and recon­
ciled. 
Coded, 
deidentified 
responses 
are 
available 
in 
Supplementary Appendix 3, and the codes applied are character­
ized in Supplementary Tables 2–16 with example quotes. We sta­
tistically analyzed responses by code categories and interviewee 
professional affiliation(s) through Cochran’s Q and odds ratios 
tests [39–41].
Results and discussion
Adaptation-relevant practitioners and their goals
Practitioners interviewed come from a wide range of professional 
contexts relevant to climate adaptation in South Florida (Fig. 1 
and Supplementary Table 1). Many interviewees (32 of the 76 
interviewees, 42.1%) have multiple affiliations across local to fe­
deral government, the private sector, academia, and nonprofit 
organizations. For example, some private-sector actors such as 
developers may also serve on the boards of nonprofit organiza­
tions, and some government officials are also associated with ac­
ademic institutions. In such cases, we designate a primary 
affiliation based on the practitioner’s most visible role in the re­
gion related to climate adaptation and the topic of climate mobil­
ity, while also noting all professional affiliations of each 
interviewee (Fig. 1) and evaluating responses accordingly. Likely 
because of the frequency of multiple affiliations, interviewee 
responses across categories of professional affiliation often do 
not differ significantly (Figs 2, 4–6 and Supplementary Figs 1–5). 
Although 
climate 
adaptation 
measures 
are 
frequently 
2 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
distinguished across levels of government, the private sector, 
and categories of civil society (e.g. [42, 43]), the overlap across in­
terviewee professional affiliations also implies a potential for cli­
mate responses to interact in their motivations and negotiations 
across the social contexts and scales of South Florida, as part of 
evolving adaptation governance [44, 45].
The practitioners view infrastructure improvements and finance 
as the highest priorities in current climate responses in South 
Florida (cumulatively 52.4% of weighted total; Fig. 2B, bottom). 
They express a desire for a broader range of priorities to motivate 
responses in the future, especially including social equity and jus­
tice and disaster risk reduction (cumulatively 53.7% of weighted to­
tal; Fig. 2B, top). In other words, the practitioners personally desire 
an emphasis on more diverse climate-response priorities that go be­
yond those they perceive as dominant at present in the region. 
Such an emphasis may link with increasing recognition of the de­
gree to which equity, priorities beyond those readily expressed in 
monetary terms, and adverse side-effects of responses themselves 
have been challenging to incorporate into climate adaptation plan­
ning and implementation to date [11, 45–47].
The climate hazards of most concern to interviewees are 
flooding, hurricanes, sea level rise, and extreme heat (Fig. 2A). 
Concern about sea level rise and extreme heat in South Florida 
increases for the long term, compared to the next 1–3 decades 
(Fig. 2A, top versus bottom), perhaps because sea level rise is 
viewed as a long-term threat (e.g. as found in [48]) and extreme 
heat as a threat that will increasingly affect all residents in the 
region. Indeed, South Florida is particularly flood prone given its 
low-lying topography, permeable substratum, and multiple flood 
drivers [49]; gravity-based regional stormwater management sys­
tems face reduced discharge capacities as seas and groundwater 
rise [50]; and the exposure of people and assets to intensifying 
flooding and inundation is stark, including potential inundation 
of 647,000 acres, 103,000 residents, and billions of dollars of 
property and asset value already by 2040 [20, 50, 51]. These haz­
ards pose major challenges in part because practitioners express 
doubts in the ability of seawalls (25.7% of the 35 interviewees 
responding), pumps (25.7%), and stormwater management sys­
tems (22.9%) to address flooding, storm surge, and sea level rise 
(Supplementary Fig. 5B). For instance, Interviewee 6 (primary af­
filiation: local government) notes, ‘There’s about four different 
ways we can get flooded out and [a seawall] only addresses one 
of the four … that’s the biggest piece of policy myopia I’ve seen 
so far,’ and Interviewee 23 (nonprofit organization) says, 
‘Pumping is like a temporary band aid … it’s not going to take 
you into the next century as a solution, and it’s extremely pollut­
ing’ (Supplementary Table 14).
Interviewees from nonprofit organizations particularly em­
phasized concerns about extreme heat, related to personal priori­
ties for social equity and justice in climate responses, whereas 
those in the private sector downplayed heat hazards (Fig. 2A, 
top). For example, Interviewee 31 (local government) underscores 
that ‘social justice and equity are being raised in our conscious­
ness on a daily basis … when we start thinking about heat island 
impacts,’ and Interviewee 15 (academic research) describes the 
interconnections as follows: 
By not having universal health care, you have somebody that 
has effects of a heat stroke, of a heat event, and they can’t 
even go to the doctor. Not only do they not have the AC [air 
conditioning] or if they do, they can’t even pay for it, because 
they don’t have the money for it … everything is part of one gi­
ant problem, which is our lack of focus on taking care of our 
vulnerable populations (Supplementary Table 6).
In adaptation planning within the region and beyond, extreme 
heat has received increasing attention with understanding that 
heat risks and inadequate policy responses to date are associated 
with substantial and intersectional inequities, for example with 
Figure 1. Interviewees have wide-ranging and often several professional affiliations. The percent (y-axis) and number (top of bars) of interviewees are 
indicated for each professional-affiliation category, considering each interviewee’s professional affiliation most relevant to the climate-mobilities 
interview (primary) and all professional affiliations each of the 76 interviewees has (any level).
K. J. Mach et al. | 3  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
Figure 2. Practitioners have multiple climate hazards of concern and response priorities. (A) Interviewees specified the top-three climate hazards they 
are most worried about in South Florida in the next 1 to 3 decades (top, 73 interviewees responding) and in the long term around the end of the century 
(bottom, 65 interviewees). (B) For responses to climate change in South Florida, interviewees specified their top-three personal priorities (top, 73 
interviewees responding), compared to goals currently prioritized (bottom, 60 interviewees). Some interviewees listed more or fewer than their top 
three, so responses are weighted such that responses from each interviewee have a total weight of 3. Percent of the weighted total (number at end of 
bars) is given by category of professional affiliation (color shading). Statistically significant differences in response proportions across hazards and 
priorities categories are indicated ( for P < 0.05, Cochran’s Q test). Statistically significant odds ratios are also specified, where odds of a hazard or 
priority are greater or lower for a given professional affiliation (þ or – for P < 0.1, ‡ or k for P < 0.05).
4 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
heat exposure shaped by livelihoods, housing and energy insecu­
rity, and histories of discrimination and disinvestment [52–54]. 
As seen in such examples, climate concerns and priorities inter­
twine in shaping how interviewees perceive future needs for cli­
mate adaptation, including for climate mobilities expected to 
occur at greater scales across South Florida through time.
The role of climate mobilities in 
adaptation pathways
Practitioners interviewed distinguish different types of climate 
mobilities with distinct attributes and challenges for responses. 
They define climate mobilities as migration, gentrification, or 
permanent retreat where climate-related extremes or changes 
play some role (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 
2). The interviewees distinguish the degree to which each mobil­
ity type is influenced directly or indirectly by climate and the 
locations where people move after. They generally view climate 
migration as a direct response to climate change or climate- 
related impacts or risks (92.0% of the 50 interviewees respond­
ing), with some explicitly noting climate adding to existing 
migration drivers (20.0%) and some describing the destination lo­
cation as important (24.0%). By contrast, they perceive climate 
gentrification as an indirect, secondary, or cascading conse­
quence of climate change or climate-related impacts or risks 
(90.9% of the 55 interviewees responding), occurring at the same 
time as development continues and real estate prices rise in risky 
locations (Supplementary Table 4). Some explicitly note climate 
adding to ongoing gentrification drivers (29.1%; Supplementary 
Fig. 3) or relocation often being to areas of greater risk, for exam­
ple through displacement to lower-ground areas more prone to 
flooding that are also farther from livelihoods and social net­
works (20.0%). Interviewees largely view retreat as a permanent 
or definitive response to climate change or climate-related 
impacts or risks (97.6% of the 41 interviewees responding) that 
often involves dedicated government planning, policies, inter­
ventions, or finance, in contrast to individual- or household-scale 
climate migration. Some note that the destination has not been 
inherent in retreat, instead with more of a focus on the move 
away from a location (22.0%). The interviewees perceive climate 
migration and retreat as causing climate gentrification (59.4% of 
the 32 interviewees responding). For example, Interviewee 27 
(state/regional government) notes that, ‘Retreat or … climate mi­
gration does not always need to result in gentrification or dis­
placement, though certainly can, and it has (Supplementary 
Table 3).’
The academic literature has emphasized that climate mobili­
ties—and immobilities when people get stuck or do not want to 
move—take different forms that are important to disentangle 
given different drivers and impacts, as well as legal and financial 
dimensions (e.g. [55, 56]). The views of the interviewees may 
demonstrate more nuance and understanding of critical distinc­
tions across forms of climate mobilities than is often credited to 
practitioners.
Most interviewees believe climate mobilities are already oc­
curring in South Florida, and they expect that they will continue, 
increasingly, into the future (Figs 3 and 4, Supplementary Fig. 2, 
and Supplementary Table 4). Specifically, 70.9%, 67.8%, and 
59.3% of responses indicate that interviewees believe climate mi­
gration, climate gentrification, and retreat, respectively, are al­
ready occurring in South Florida (Fig. 3). By contrast, 98.0% of 
responses anticipate that these forms of climate mobilities will 
occur in the region in the future. In reflecting on how climate mi­
gration, gentrification, and retreat are occurring now in South 
Florida, interviewees note that the relative importance of climate 
as a causal driver compared to other factors is often unclear 
(41.7% of the 60 interviewees responding; Fig. 4; e.g. as in [57]), 
that development and real estate markets are starting to incorpo­
rate climate risks (33.3%; e.g. as in [58]), that political dynamics 
shape how climate mobilities are occurring now (31.7%), that cli­
mate mobilities are occurring now only at small scales (28.3%), 
and that public awareness of climate mobilities is increasing 
(26.7%). For instance, Interviewee 24 (local government) notes 
that at present, ‘It’s hard to define what is regular gentrification, 
regular migration, versus climate,’ and then continues further, 
saying, ‘ … how much does it matter what the causes are for us’ 
(Supplementary Table 4)—that is, the relative importance of cli­
mate versus other drivers may not be clear, but despite this lack 
of clarity, some policy responses might effectively address out­
comes of concern without needing to disentangle intersecting 
causal mechanisms and factors.
Interviewees indicate long-term transition plans are inade­
quate to avoid potentially chaotic adjustments. In reflecting on 
how climate mobilities will occur in the region in the future, 
interviewees note the potential need for long-term planning 
(60.6% of the 66 interviewees responding) and cooperation and 
coordination of responses (36.4%; Fig. 4). Given expected occur­
rence at increasing scales and the inevitability of retreat (36.4% 
and 33.3%, respectively, mentioned unprompted) (33.3%), they 
highlight that there is no transition plan to support adequate 
adaptations through time (33.3%), which may result in surprising 
or non-linear outcomes as has been found in other circumstan­
ces (e.g. [59]). As an example, Interviewee 37 (local government) 
reflects on inevitable climate-mobility increases into the future: 
There are areas where … you’d have to have a pump producing 
or operating at 6,000 cubic feet per second, in order to main­
tain the current groundwater table … even if you could do that, 
where would you discharge the water? … how long can you 
keep up with that? What does the decay of that community 
Figure 3. Practitioners largely perceive climate mobilities to occur now 
and more so in the future. Interviewees indicated whether they believe 
climate migration, gentrification, and retreat are occurring now (55, 59, 
and 54 interviewees responding for climate migration, gentrification, 
and retreat, respectively; left bars) or will occur in the future (50, 50, and 
51 interviewees responding; right bars) in South Florida. Statistically 
significant differences in response proportions across occurrence 
categories are indicated ( for P < 0.05, Cochran’s Q test).
K. J. Mach et al. | 5  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
look like with time? Maybe … we end up utilizing taxpayer dol­
lars to acquire those properties in order to create larger scale 
storm water management areas (Supplementary Table 4).
Interviewees perceive climate mobilities as effective in 
climate-related risk reduction when relocation destinations are 
less climate exposed and as potentially socioeconomically and 
environmentally beneficial (Fig. 5). In reflecting on potential posi­
tives, they especially invoke the potential for community-driven 
visions (39.7% of the 58 interviewees responding), innovations 
(25.9%), reduction of inequities across neighborhoods (25.9%), 
climate-related risk reduction (22.4%), and environmental resto­
ration (19.0%). For example, Interviewee 21 (state/regional gov­
ernment) underscores, ‘[I]nnovation and creativity, if we can 
harness that and work together to do it, I think that’s an amazing 
positive because, again, I think we need a pretty fundamental 
restructuring of how we conceive of the goals of our political and 
economic systems and if we can manage that, wow, that is—it’s 
a challenge and opportunity’ (Supplementary Table 5).
Figure 4. Practitioners view climate mobilities shifting in how they occur. Interviewee perceptions about how climate mobilities occur at present and in 
the future in South Florida (60 and 66 interviewees responding, respectively). Percent (x-axis) and number (end of bar) of total interviewees responding 
are specified for each response type. A response from any given interviewee could be coded under multiple categories. Statistically significant 
differences in response proportions across categories are indicated ( for P < 0.05, Cochran’s Q test). Statistically significant odds ratios are also 
specified, where odds of a response type are greater or lower for a given professional affiliation (þ or – for P < 0.1, ‡ or k for P < 0.05).
6 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
The interviewees are concerned that such movements will 
perpetuate inequities and create disruptions (Fig. 5). For potential 
negatives, they note distributional inequities (79.5% of the 73 
interviewees responding), financial (67.1%) and sociocultural 
(47.9%) implications, and ethical dimensions (27.4%) of climate 
mobilities. For example, Interviewee 29 (local government) says, 
‘We look at the Seminole tribe, we look at Little Haiti, we look at 
Overtown, we see historical communities of colors being pushed 
out … putting them in more vulnerable areas’ (Supplementary 
Table 5). And Interviewee 31 (local government) notes, ‘As soon 
as you put a location on a map saying we’re going to need to plan 
to retreat from this area, you have robbed those people of the 
property value’ because the future value of the property is no 
longer guaranteed and local municipalities ‘fear … devaluing 
those locations’ (Supplementary Table 5). In other words, con­
cerns about devaluing property and losing tax base may be more 
salient politically than the inverse: the potential for gentrification 
and displacement that may occur with increasing property val­
ues and development in a neighborhood.
In reflecting on how past and present injustices should be 
addressed, interviewees stress the need to prioritize equity in policy 
design (49.1% of the 55 interviewees responding), coordinate 
climate-resilient redevelopment (41.8%), and pursue affordable 
housing policy (30.9%; Fig. 5). For example, in considering areas cur­
rently flooding, Interviewee 46 (local government) reflects that: 
[E]xisting residents that are there today, that their families 
have been there for generations, they’re looking for sol­
utions … They understand that retreat is an option, but they 
want an understanding that that retreat will not mean to just 
completely shift out of the area that they know so well. If it 
means that maybe we’re transitioning to a more higher-land 
area … working with the community on what those strategies 
Figure 5. Practitioners perceive negatives and some positives of climate mobilities and identify options for addressing social injustices. (Top to bottom) 
Interviewee perspectives on the positives and negatives of climate mobilities, including social justice and equity dimensions and strategies for 
addressing them (58, 73, 32, and 55 interviewees responding for each respective topic, top to bottom). Percent (x-axis) and number (end of bar) of total 
interviewees responding are specified for each response type. A response from any given interviewee could be coded under multiple categories. 
Statistically significant differences in response proportions across categories are indicated ( for P < 0.05, Cochran’s Q test). Statistically significant 
odds ratios are also specified, where odds of a response type are greater or lower for a given professional affiliation (þ or – for P < 0.1, ‡ or k for P < 0.05).
K. J. Mach et al. | 7  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
are, there’s some positive ideas that are coming out, making 
sure that the people that have ownership in their land they’re 
getting an appropriate return on their investment for that re­
treat (Supplementary Table 6).
Although theories of justice are relevant in informing practi­
tioner actions, both the theories and associated guidance often 
struggle to resolve these types of core dilemmas articulated by 
the interviewees, including how to handle simultaneous harms 
and potential benefits and address the backdrops and legacies of 
historic injustices [17].
Regarding preparation, practitioners note a divide. Many of 
the interviewees feel prepared for their own, limited individual 
and institutional roles related to climate mobilities, and yet most 
interviewees responding also feel that the region as a whole is 
unprepared for increased climate mobilities (Supplementary Figs 
4 and 5). With respect to themselves, 66.7% of the 48 interviewees 
responding indicate they feel prepared for their role as it might 
relate to climate migration, gentrification, and retreat, whereas 
33.3% did not. For example, Interviewee 27 (state/regional gov­
ernment) says, ‘I feel prepared in the sense that I feel that I have 
the resources and knowledge, the ability to learn, network, and 
access those who are studying these issues … I have that ability 
to go out and find supporting information to do my job better,’ 
and Interviewee 42 (academic research) states, ‘I am prepared in 
the sense of being very well-connected in the university commu­
nity’ (Supplementary Table 7). Notably, 28 interviewees (36.8% of 
the 76 total interviewees) did not respond to this question. 93.5% 
of the 46 interviewees responding indicate they have received 
professional resources and support related to climate mobilities, 
especially scholarly and technical evidence (63.6% of the 44 inter­
viewees listing specific examples; Supplementary Fig. 4). 
However, when asked about their organizations or the region as a 
whole, and its preparation for increased levels of climate mobil­
ity, practitioners are less optimistic, perhaps because they judge 
that adaptation more broadly has been incremental [10, 42]. For 
instance, Interviewee 11 (local government) states, ‘I don’t think 
anybody can say that they’re prepared for this frankly … the 
incentives for local government to address climate migration are 
negative—there’s a lot of disincentives,’ while Interviewee 21 
(state/regional government) says, ‘I think my organization is 
completely incapable at this point of really confronting the politi­
cal situation in the state, and at all presenting these topics’ 
(Supplementary Table 7). In discussing types of preparation—or 
its absence—interviewees note the importance of collaboration 
(31.3% of the 48 interviewees responding), necessary policy inno­
vations (31.3%), representation (25.0%), self-directed learning 
(22.9%), and disincentives that must be overcome (20.8%; 
Supplementary Fig. 4).
Interviewees are actively preparing for climate mobilities 
through their work and professional capacities. They mention 
taking actions such as raising climate-mobilities awareness 
(41.3% of the 63 interviewees listing specific examples; 
Supplementary Fig. 4). For instance, Interviewee 2 (local govern­
ment) explains, ‘[T]here are some people who are in complete de­
nial [that climate gentrification is happening] or don’t 
necessarily believe that gentrification itself is a bad thing … And 
so yeah, step one was just literally being like, okay, this is actu­
ally a thing that residents in this city are experiencing, and this is 
not a thing that we should just let happen’ (Supplementary Table 
8). Interviewees also mention actions such as assessing climate- 
mobilities response options (28.6% of the 63 interviewees listing 
specific examples; Supplementary Fig. 4). Interviewee 43 (private 
sector) notes, ‘[I]n a local government that we’re looking at right 
now … what we have advised them is that road abandonment is 
probably going to be a tool that they need to consider … to be 
able to make those priority investments that are going to serve 
greater numbers of people’ (Supplementary Table 8).
The interviewees believe the inherent controversy and politi­
cal, financial, and social justice implications of climate mobilities 
substantially limit discussions at present (Fig. 6). Most interview­
ees indicate there are responses related to climate migration, 
gentrification, or retreat that are hard to talk about or hard to 
consider for both political and emotional reasons (95.2% of the 62 
interviewees responding). For example, Interviewee 76 (state/re­
gional government) explains: 
The sheer cost of it all. Where’s that money coming from? … 
and where do you move them? And how do you tell them, ‘I 
know you’re the high value waterfront property’, but as we re­
treat, that stuff’s already taken, because it’s the people that 
were behind you that are going to be the high value water­
front … And which of course leads to gentrification, right? 
Well, those people aren’t as wealthy as I am, so I’m going to 
buy them out, and shove them, and keep them in motion. And 
where do they go then? And so, I just think it trips everything 
from emotional to financial triggers. And I think it’s always 
hard to have conversations where there aren't winners. 
Everybody’s losing (Supplementary Table 9).
And Interviewee 11 (local government) emphasizes, ‘In terms of 
climate retreat and migration, the fears are loss. I mean it’s, like, 
loss of property value, it’s loss of community, it’s loss of tax 
base’, while Interviewee 34 (federal government) says, ‘I think 
that the potential to have a financial collapse driven by the 
impacts to the coastal real estate market and how that could cas­
cade to the mortgage industry, that is so scary for folks that it’s 
hard to talk about’ (Supplementary Table 9). Further, most inter­
viewees believe that climate migration, gentrification, and re­
treat are discussed too little (76.9% of the 52 interviewees 
responding), some believe they are discussed about enough 
(21.2%), and some believe they are discussed too much (7.7%). 
For instance, Interviewee 11 (local government) explains: 
When the city has outreached to [especially flood prone] area­
s … some of the property owners didn’t want us to talk about 
it … because it would result in reduction in their property 
value. And so the vulnerable people themselves didn’t want to 
talk about it … it really depends on who is most vocal and in­
fluential with the elected officials (Supplementary Table 9).
In reflecting on the nature of these discussions, interviewees 
note the lack of a transition plan (41.7% of the 60 interviewees 
responding), ethical dimensions (26.7%), inadequate resources 
(26.7%), inadequate nuance (25.0%), opportunities to connect 
dots (25.0%), a lack of understanding (23.3%), and siloed conver­
sations (23.3%; Fig. 6). For example, Interviewee 12 (local govern­
ment) says, ‘We don’t, as I say, right now have any sort of glide 
path or path forward. How will you transition a place that is in­
undated? … I don’t think we even have the visuals of how that 
will happen … once you get into lower levels of density … the 
math doesn’t support it’, and Interviewee 40 (local government) 
notes, ‘[O]ne of the things that we’ve been very steadfast on is 
approaching our climate change strategy, our resiliency strategy, 
through incremental adaptation. And so we have yet to identify 
areas that we would consider for retreat’ (Supplementary 
Table 9).
8 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
Most practitioners interviewed believe at least some people in 
South Florida are aware of or considering relocation related to 
climate change (72.1% of the 43 interviewees responding), 
whereas some thought they are not (23.3%) or they only do so if 
necessary reactively (7.0%). In discussing the nature of such con­
sideration, interviewees note both public awareness (41.0% of the 
39 interviewees responding) and professional awareness (33.3%;  
Fig. 6). For example, Interviewee 31 (local government) says, ‘I 
had someone who knew that I had some knowledge about some 
of this stuff and they asked me if I could help them understand 
the data of the long-term impacts in their neighborhood and I 
provided them with some … bathtub maps of flooding inunda­
tion and based on that information they sold their house’ 
(Supplementary Table 9). However, Interviewee 3 (private sector) 
underscores that ‘[I]t’s the same people talking about it in the 
same terms to the same people. We the environmentally aware 
Figure 6. Practitioners perceive increasing but inadequate consideration of climate mobilities. Interviewee perspectives on discussions and 
considerations of climate mobilities in South Florida (60, 39, and 65 interviewees responding, respectively). Percent (x-axis) and number (end of bar) of 
total interviewees responding are specified for each response type. A response from any given interviewee could be coded under multiple categories. 
Statistically significant differences in response proportions across categories are indicated ( for P < 0.05, Cochran’s Q test). Statistically significant 
odds ratios are also specified, where odds of a response type are greater or lower for a given professional affiliation (þ or – for P < 0.1, ‡ or k for P < 0.05).
K. J. Mach et al. | 9  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
speak to each other a lot and we don’t speak to the community 
that needs to hear these conversations in ways that they will un­
derstand and in the platforms and in the fora where they will be’, 
and Interviewee 52 (nonprofit organization) says, ‘I feel that we 
live in two different worlds. Some people who believe in it and 
see the writing on the wall and some people that continue to 
deny it’ (Supplementary Table 9).
Constraints and enablers for adaptation
For climate adaptation overall, practitioners interviewed priori­
tize wide-ranging responses for the next few decades in South 
Florida (Supplementary Fig. 5A). Desired responses especially in­
clude infrastructure adjustments (33.8% of the 68 interviewees 
responding), development of long-term vision (32.4%), financial 
mechanisms (32.4%), and resilient housing (32.4%). For example, 
Interviewee 19 (local government) indicates, ‘Septic to sewer is 
number one’, underscoring the importance of transitioning 
neighborhoods from septic tanks to sewer systems, whereas 
Interviewee 27 (state/regional government) says, ‘[T]here needs 
to be … a clarion call for much bigger thinking, action, and vision 
across all parts of our society in Southeast Florida to deal with 
these things’ (Supplementary Table 10). Given its low-lying to­
pography and permeable substratum, South Florida faces partic­
ularly large challenges and trade-offs in the joint management of 
flooding, water supply, and environmental conservation under 
continuing climate change [60].
Interviewees do not believe all residents are benefiting 
equally, though, from existing adaptation and resilience strate­
gies (Supplementary Fig. 5A). In thinking about their desired 
adaptive responses, they envision underserved communities 
(37.3% of the 59 interviewees responding), residents (33.9%), and 
the whole community, all of ‘us’ (27.1%), as their targeted benefi­
ciaries for resilience efforts. For instance, Interviewee 3 (private 
sector) reflects on the center of their individual vision as ‘[l]ow- 
income communities … This is one of the most unequal cities 
and counties in the country … low-to-middle-income communi­
ties that don’t have the resources and don’t know what’s about 
to happen’ (Supplementary Table 11). For urban climate adapta­
tion overall, concerns about equity indeed emerge from the dis­
tribution of climate-related harms, the capacities for and 
benefits from responses, and the social and political processes 
that govern urban spaces, development, and land use [61]. In 
considering existing adaptation and resilience strategies, inter­
viewees perceive those with adequate resources (62.1% of the 58 
interviewees responding) as best served, and those without ade­
quate resources (68.9% of the 45 interviewees responding) as 
least well served (Supplementary Fig. 5A). For example, 
Interviewee 29 (local government) indicates, ‘I feel affluent com­
munities are being best served. They’re the one who’re getting 
access to that information regularly [following government 
awareness campaigns] opposed to the folks who need to survive’, 
and Interviewee 10 (private sector) says, ‘The people well served 
are the people who don’t even need to be well served’ 
(Supplementary Table 11). In terms of those least well served, 
Interviewee 27 (state/regional government) explains: 
Our local electeds are going to prioritize investments and ad­
aptation responses in areas where we have highest property 
values and assets and that just keeps that cycle of underin­
vestment running … there is a huge disparity across the region, 
also in terms of … the capacity of governments to respond … a 
local government like the city of Miami versus, you know, a 
small municipality … right now most of this work has been on 
the backs of local governments through … bonds or … service 
fees, stormwater fees (Supplementary Table 11).
Across interviewees, there is focus on climate risks and adapta­
tion needs for those already living in South Florida, as compared 
to the potentially substantial number of residents projected to 
arrive in the region into the future [51].
In considering ongoing adaptation and resilience strategies in 
South Florida, the interviewees view some responses as relevant 
to climate mobilities, at least to some degree (Supplementary Fig. 
5B). In particular, they perceive more holistic climate responses 
(40.7% of the 54 interviewees responding) and early topic-specific 
policy discussions (40.7%) to encompass climate mobilities. For 
instance, Interviewee 10 (private sector) says: 
With Broward County … if you want to develop, you have to in­
corporate those groundwater modeling and future conditions, 
which I think is really good. And the adaptation action areas is 
a great tool, for … leveraging which areas you want to focus 
on … permitting problems … Honestly if it’s that hard to adapt 
it kind of makes it a case for retreat. Right, I think that’s the 
point, but nobody’s going to say that, except if it’s anonymous 
(Supplementary Table 12).
As in this statement, throughout the set of questions, multiple 
interviewees emphasize the importance of anonymity in en­
abling open reflections on a controversial topic and shared 
insights that might otherwise remain private. Our interview pro­
tocol and process of informed consent indeed underscored that 
interviewees would be identified only by category of professional 
affiliation, not by name. In this way, the interviews are an inter­
vention in themselves [62], supporting conversation and aware­
ness that can be difficult to surface otherwise.
The strengths and weaknesses of ongoing adaptation and re­
silience strategies may modulate the scales of and needs for 
climate-related mobilities (Supplementary Fig. 5B). Reflecting on 
the greatest strengths of regional climate responses overall, prac­
titioners interviewed note professional collaboration and coordi­
nation (44.3% of the 61 interviewees responding) and capacities 
(41.0%). For instance, Interviewee 11 (local government) indi­
cates, ‘I think our region is outstanding in terms of the level of 
cross-sector collaboration and cross-jurisdictional and corporate 
collaboration. The social capacity of people who are working on 
this issue … that’s truly one of our greatest strengths’ 
(Supplementary Table 13). As in other leading regions (e.g. [63]), 
South Florida has strongly emphasized collaboration and coordi­
nation, such as through the notable example of the Southeast 
Florida Regional Climate Change Compact that since 2010 has 
aimed to catalyze climate actions by governments, utilities, busi­
nesses, and civil society [64]. As a theme that appeared repeat­
edly in response to different interview questions, though, the 
interviewees view the greatest weaknesses to be the lack of a 
longer-term transition plan (45.8% of the 59 interviewees 
responding), as well as the dominance of short-term economic 
and political dynamics (30.5%; Supplementary Fig. 5B). For in­
stance, Interviewee 71 (federal government) reflects that, ‘[T]he 
institutions we have now won’t work, and there’s a general lack 
of creativity about thinking about designing things that don’t ex­
ist yet’ (Supplementary Table 13).
Into the future, effective adaptations to support climate mobi­
lities will likely combine high-quality deployments of existing le­
gal and regulatory options with policy innovations [65, 66]. 
However, practitioners in the region face intense constraints and 
limits on such adaptations. These barriers include designing legal 
10 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
and policy tools that are able to address the complex interactions 
inherent in climate risks and responses, the diversity of priorities 
across stakeholders, low consensus on framing both problems 
and solutions, difficulties in conflict resolution, and mismatched 
incentives across scales and actors through time [67, 68]. Moving 
towards more transformative climate adaptations relevant to cli­
mate mobilities and equitable, enduring well-being will also be 
complicated by uneven power dynamics and short-term eco­
nomic and political benefits for a few [69–73]. Possible avenues 
involve trialing and evaluating fundamental adjustments first at 
small scales, such as in adaptation action areas. Such pilot activi­
ties can test approaches for achieving coordination across levels 
and agencies of government, and they can involve monitoring 
and evaluation of metrics relevant to transformational climate 
risk reduction and social justice [74, 75]. Proactive preparations 
for market and institutional shifts, such as availability of insur­
ance or federal aid, as well as hurricane strikes that may force 
transformation also represent core opportunities to smooth tran­
sitions into futures outside the bounds of historical experiences.
Practitioners interviewed identify ways researchers could be 
contributing, related to climate mobilities in South Florida 
(Supplementary Fig. 5B). Such contributions especially involve 
co-production (50.0% of the 58 interviewees responding), provi­
sion of trusted relevant information (48.3%) and policy-relevant 
research (46.6%), and identification of policy and response 
options (48.3%). For example, Interviewee 36 (nonprofit organiza­
tion) asks, ‘When we think about research design, who do we in­
volve in the process? I think a critical component is building that 
relationship with communities so that we understand their his­
tory, we build that trust’, and Interviewee 75 (nonprofit organiza­
tion) similarly ponders: 
How do we marry up researchers with the actual execution of 
these projects so researchers aren’t scrambling around to try 
to cobble stuff together and figure out what happened after 
the fact? Like, how do you get a community when it’s doing a 
buyout program to bring researchers in on the front end to ac­
tually talk to people and understand what the experience looks 
like and find out where people go and who the hell were they? 
(Supplementary Table 16).
Examples and communities that could particularly inform 
approaches related to climate mobilities in South Florida include 
New York and New Jersey (23.2% of the 56 interviewees respond­
ing), other Florida communities (19.6%), Louisiana (19.6%), and 
the Netherlands (17.9%; Supplementary Table 15).
Conclusions
In this study, we assess the perspectives of diverse adaptation- 
relevant practitioners about many dimensions of climate mobil­
ity in the highly climate-exposed region of South Florida. The 
interviewees distinguish multiple types of climate mobilities that 
will occur in the region, anticipating increasing movement of 
people and assets away from hazardous areas and inevitability of 
retreat. These expected evolutions are concerning because inter­
viewees perceive climate mobilities already to cause distribu­
tional inequities and financial and sociocultural disruptions and 
climate adaptations to date as best serving those who already 
have adequate resources. Further, although the practitioners feel 
generally prepared for their own roles related to climate mobili­
ties and perceive tremendous professional regional capacities 
and coordination, they view the region as a whole as unready to 
support the climate mobilities and retreat they see as inevitable. 
This status quo may contribute to collective-action failures: 
there is a disconnect between practitioners’ incremental actions 
and household discussions about potential relocations, as com­
pared to more fundamental transformations that may be in store 
and overall lack of preparedness for them. The need for a more 
ambitious, long-term transition plan will be difficult to address, 
though, if climate mobilities remain hard to talk about.
This study is an intervention itself. First, the inherent contro­
versy of climate mobility has limited its proactive consideration 
to date. Therefore, the interviews with their anonymity foster 
insights and reflections that might otherwise remain private and 
limit the effectiveness of government, the private sector, and civil 
society in both preventing and supporting climate mobility into 
the future. Second, we as adaptation-science researchers and co- 
authors of this study ourselves represent different forms of mo­
bility—and climate mobility—into and out of the region, in some 
cases having moved into the region for jobs and education re­
lated to climate risk and adaptation. For the practitioners inter­
viewed, for us as co-authors, and for residents and practitioners 
more broadly, the findings of this study may inform, in diverse 
ways, the adaptation processes and policies we advocate for and 
support through our work. For example, we were surprised by 
the openness of interviewees in articulating concerns about 
collective-action failures and inadequate readiness for higher 
magnitudes of climate change despite the highly skilled and ded­
icated efforts of so many professionals in the region. Such find­
ings underscore the importance of enabling more transformative 
climate adaptation, as well as addressing known challenges of 
inequities in ongoing responses.
Climate mobilities—so clearly resulting in harms as well as 
benefits—are in many ways a litmus test for adaptation planning 
and policies more broadly: What are mechanisms for going be­
yond awareness, proactively, by a few, towards meaningful in­
corporation into policy planning? Where are fundamental 
innovations needed in laws, policies, and incentive systems, and 
what options should be tried and tested? When might we see 
shifts, potentially sudden or surprising, in the dynamics of real 
estate, wealth accumulation, and population flows? Where do 
entrenched structural factors, such as legacies of redlining and 
racism shaping housing inequities, need to be redressed in order 
to achieve more equitable outcomes from climate mobilities? 
South Florida, with its high-risk geography, rapid development, 
and large inequalities, creates near-term entry points for deliber­
ately supporting and preventing climate mobilities—and learning 
how to do so.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data are available at Oxford Open Climate 
Change online.
Data availability
The data underlying this article are available in the article and in 
its online supplementary material and data.
Authors’ contributions
Katharine Mach (Conceptualization [equal], Data curation 
[equal], Formal analysis [equal], Funding acquisition [equal], 
Investigation [equal], Methodology [equal], Project administra­
tion [equal], Supervision [equal], Validation [equal], Visualization 
[equal], Writing—original draft [equal]), Jennifer Niemann (Data 
K. J. Mach et al. | 11  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
curation [equal], Formal analysis [equal], Investigation [equal], 
Methodology [equal], Software [equal], Validation [equal], 
Visualization 
[equal], 
Writing—review 
& 
editing 
[equal]), 
Rosalind Donald (Methodology [equal], Writing—review & editing 
[equal]), Jessica Owley (Methodology [equal], Writing—review & 
editing [equal]), Nadia Seeteram (Methodology [equal], Writing— 
review & editing [Equal]), A.R. Siders (Methodology [equal], 
Writing—review & editing [equal]), Xavier Cortada (Writing—re­
view & editing [equal]), Alex Nyburg (Writing—review & editing 
[equal]), Adam Roberti (Writing—review & editing [equal]), and 
Ian Wright (Writing—review & editing [equal])
Funding
This work was supported by the University of Miami Laboratory 
for Integrative Knowledge (U-LINK), Leonard and Jayne Abess 
Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy, and Rosenstiel School 
of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Science. KJM and ARS ac­
knowledge funding from the U.S. National Science Foundation 
(award numbers 2034308 and 2034239).
Conflict of interest
KJM holds the position of Editorial Board Member for Oxford Open 
Climate Change and is blinded from reviewing or making decisions 
for the manuscript. The authors declare no other conflicts 
of interest.
References
1. Hauer ME, Fussell E, Mueller V et al. Sea-level rise and human mi­
gration. Nat Rev Earth Environ 2019;1:28–39.
2. Hino M, Field CB, Mach KJ. Managed retreat as a response to nat­
ural hazard risk. Nature Clim Change 2017;7:364–70.
3. Lincke D, Hinkel J. Coastal migration due to 21st century sea- 
level rise. Earth’s Future 2021;9:e2020EF001965.
4. Ajibade I, Sullivan M, Lower C et al. Are managed retreat pro­
grams successful and just? A global mapping of success typolo­
gies, justice dimensions, and trade-offs. Global Environ Change 
2022;76:102576.
5. Oppenheimer M, Glavovic BC, Hinkel J et al. Sea level rise and 
implications for low-lying islands, coasts and communities. In: 
P€ortner H-O, Roberts DC, Masson-Delmotte V et al. (eds), IPCC 
Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate. 
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University 
Press, 2019, 321–446.
6. Glavovic B, Dawson R, Chow W et al. Cross-Chapter Paper 2: 
Cities and settlements by the sea. In: P€ortner H-O, Roberts DC, 
Tignor M et al. (eds), Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University 
Press, 2022, 2163–94.
7. McNamara KE, Bronen R, Fernando N et al. The complex 
decision-making of climate-induced relocation: adaptation and 
loss and damage. Climate Policy 2016;18:111–7.
8. Hinkel J, Aerts JCJH, Brown S et al. The ability of societies to adapt 
to twenty-first-century sea-level rise. Nature Clim Change 2018; 
8:570–8.
9. McLeman R. Thresholds in climate migration. Popul Environ 2018; 
39:319–38.
10. Mach KJ, Siders AR. Reframing strategic, managed retreat for 
transformative climate adaptation. Science 2021;372:1294–9.
11. Bullard RD, Wright B. The Wrong Complexion for Protection: How 
the Government Response to Disaster Endangers African American 
Communities. New York: New York University Press, 2012.
12. Nguyen A-M, Kim Y, Abramson DM. Neighborhood socioeco­
nomic status and women’s mental health: a longitudinal study 
of Hurricane Katrina survivors, 2005–2015. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 2023;20:925.
13. Burkett M. Behind the veil: climate migration, regime shift, and 
a new theory of justice. Harv CR-CL L Rev 2018;53:445–93.
14. McAdam J. From the Nansen Initiative to the Platform on Disaster 
Displacement: Shaping International Approaches to Climate Change, 
Disasters and Displacement. Rochester, NY: Social Science 
Research Network, 2016.
15. Kraan CM, Hino M, Niemann J et al. Promoting equity in retreat 
through voluntary property buyout programs. J Environ Stud Sci 
2021;11:481–92.
16. Nagle Alverio G, Hoagland SH, Coughlan de Perez E et al. The 
role of international organizations in equitable and just 
planned relocation. J Environ Stud Sci 2021;11:511–22.
17. Siders AR. The administrator’s dilemma: Closing the gap be­
tween climate adaptation justice in theory and practice. 
Environmental Science & Policy 2022;137:280–9.
18. Shi L, Ahmad S, Shukla P et al. Shared injustice, splintered soli­
darity: water governance across urban-rural divides. Global 
Environ Change 2021;70:102354.
19. Maldonado J, Wang IFC, Eningowuk F et al. Addressing the chal­
lenges of climate-driven community-led resettlement and site 
expansion: knowledge sharing, storytelling, healing, and collab­
orative coalition building. J Environ Stud Sci 2021;11:294–304.
20. Urban Land Institute. The Business Case for Resilience in Southeast 
Florida: 
Regional 
Economic 
Benefits 
of 
Climate 
Adaptation. 
Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute, 2020.
21. First Street Foundation. The Cost of Climate: America’s Growing 
Flood Risk. Brooklyn, NY: First Street Foundation, 2021.
22. Carter LM, Terando A, Dow K et al. Southeast. In: Reidmiller D, 
Avery C, Easterling D et al. (eds), Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in 
the United States: The Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume 
II. Washington, DC, USA: U.S. Global Change Research Program, 
2018, 743–808.
23. Montgomery MC, Chakraborty J. Assessing the environmental 
justice consequences of flood risk: a case study in Miami, 
Florida. Environ Res Lett 2015;10:095010.
24. Grove K, Cox S, Barnett A. Racializing resilience: assemblage, 
critique, and contested futures in Greater Miami resilience 
planning. Ann Am Assoc Geogr 2020;110:1613–30.
25. Seeteram NA, Ash K, Sanders BF et al .. Modes of climate 
mobility under sea-level rise. Environ Res Lett 2023;18:114015. 
https:// doi. org/ 10.1088/1748-9326/acfe22
26. Tedesco M, Keenan JM, Hultquist C. Measuring, mapping, and 
anticipating climate gentrification in Florida: Miami and Tampa 
case studies. Cities 2022;131:103991.
27. Esnard A-M, Sapat A, Mitsova D. An index of relative displace­
ment risk to hurricanes. Nat Hazards 2011;59:833–59.
28. Aranda E, Blackwell R, Escue M et al. Cascading disasters: the 
impact of hurricane Maria and Covid-19 on post-disaster Puerto 
Rican migrants’ adaptation and integration in Florida. Lat Stud 
2022;1–24.
12 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
29.
Donald R, Young C, Mach KJ. The role of local narratives in 
emerging climate governance. Environ Res: Climate 2022; 
1:015003.
30.
Ruppert T, Deady EL, Evans JM et al. Legal issues when manag­
ing public roads affected by sea level rise: Florida. SSRN, 2019.
31.
Wakefield S. Miami Beach forever? Urbanism in the back loop. 
Geoforum 2019;107:34–44.
32.
Biernacki P, Waldorf D. Snowball sampling: problems and tech­
niques of chain referral sampling. Sociol Methods Res 1981; 
10:141–63.
33.
Atkinson R, Flint J. Snowball sampling. In: MS Lewis-Beck, A 
Bryman, TF Liao (eds), The SAGE Encyclopedia of Social Science 
Research Methods (Vol. 0, pp. 1044–1044). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications, Inc., 2004.
34.
Norstr€om AV, Cvitanovic C, L€of MF et al. Principles for knowl­
edge co-production in sustainability research. Nat Sustain 2020; 
3:182–90.
35.
Morgan MG. Theory and Practice in Policy Analysis: Including 
Applications in Science and Technology. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2017.
36.
Lemos MC, Arnott JC, Ardoin NM et al. To co-produce or not to 
co-produce. Nat Sustain 2018;1:722–4.
37.
Lemos MC, Wolske KS, Rasmussen LV et al. The closer, the bet­
ter? Untangling scientist–practitioner engagement, interaction, 
and knowledge use. Weather Clim Soc 2019;11:535–48.
38.
Hsieh H-F, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative con­
tent analysis. Qual Health Res 2005;15:1277–88.
39.
Kassambara A. Rstatix: pipe-friendly framework for basic sta­
tistical tests. R Package Version 0.7.2, 2023.
40.
Posit team. RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R. 
Boston, MA: Posit Software, PBC, 2022.
41.
Agresti A. Categorical Data Analysis. 3rd edn. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley, 2013.
42.
Berrang-Ford LEA, Siders A R, Lesnikowski A et al .. A systematic 
global stocktake of evidence on human adaptation to climate 
change. Nat Clim Chang 2021;11:989–1000. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1038/s41558-021-01170-y.
43.
Petzold JAN, Hawxwell TOM, Jantke K et al .. A global assess­
ment of actors and their roles in climate change adaptation. 
Nat Clim Chang 2023;13:1250–7. https:// doi. org/ 10.1038/ 
s41558-023-01824-z.
44.
Lubell M, Robbins M. Adapting to sea-level rise: centralization 
or decentralization in polycentric governance systems? Policy 
Stud J 2022;50:143–75.
45.
Mach KJ, Hino M, Siders AR et al. From flood control to flood 
adaptation. Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Environmental 
Science, 2022. https:// doi. org/ 10.1093/acrefore/9780199389414. 
013.819.
46.
Shi L. From progressive cities to resilient cities: lessons from his­
tory for new debates in equitable adaptation to climate change. 
Urban Aff Rev 2020;57:1442–79.
47.
Miller BM, Clancy N, Ligor DC et al. The Cost of Cost-Effectiveness: 
Expanding Equity in Federal Emergency Management Agency Hazard 
Mitigation Assistance Grants. Santa Monica, California: RAND 
Corporation, 2023.
48.
Shao W, Moftakhari H, Moradkhani H. Comparing public percep­
tions of sea level rise with scientific projections across five states 
of the U.S. Gulf Coast region. Clim Change 2020;163:317–35.
49.
Sukop MC, Rogers M, Guannel G et al. High temporal resolution 
modeling of the impact of rain, tides, and sea level rise on water 
table flooding in the Arch Creek basin, Miami-Dade County 
Florida USA. Sci Total Environ 2018;616-617:1668–88.
50. Groves DG, Knopman D, Berg N et al. Adapting Land Use and Water 
Management Plans to a Changing Climate in Miami-Dade and Broward 
Counties, Florida. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2018.
51. 1000 Friends of Florida, University of Florida Center for Landscape 
Conservation Planning. Florida’s Rising Seas: Mapping Our Future—Sea 
Level 2040. Tallahassee, FL: 1000 Friends of Florida, University of 
Florida Center for Landscape Conservation Planning, 2023.
52. Gronlund CJ. Racial and socioeconomic disparities in heat- 
related health effects and their mechanisms: a review. Curr 
Epidemiol Rep 2014;1:165–73.
53. Wilson B. Urban heat management and the legacy of redlining. J 
Am Plan Assoc 2020;86:443–57.
54. Cong S, Nock D, Qiu YL et al. Unveiling hidden energy poverty 
using the energy equity gap. Nat Commun 2022;13:2456.
55. Schewel K. Understanding immobility: moving beyond the mo­
bility bias in migration studies. Int Migr Rev 2020;54:328–55.
56. Ajibade I, Sullivan M, Haeffner M. Why climate migration is not 
managed retreat: six justifications. Glob Environ Change 2020; 
65:102187.
57. Kuru OD, Ganapati NE, Marr M. Perceptions of local leaders re­
garding postdisaster relocation of residents in the face of rising 
seas. Hous Policy Debate 2023;33:1124–45.
58. Graff Zivin J, Liao Y, Panassie Y. How hurricanes sweep up hous­
ing markets: evidence from Florida. J Environ Econ Manage 2023; 
118:102770.
59. Kreibich H, Van Loon AF, Schr€oter K et al. The challenge of un­
precedented floods and droughts in risk management. Nature 
2022;608:80–6.
60. Czajkowski J, Engel V, Martinez C et al. Economic impacts of ur­
ban flooding in South Florida: potential consequences of man­
aging groundwater to prevent salt water intrusion. Sci Total 
Environ 2018;621:465–78.
61. Eakin H, Keele S, Lueck V. Uncomfortable knowledge: mecha­
nisms of urban development in adaptation governance. World 
Dev 2022;159:106056.
62. Jagannathan K, Emmanuel G, Arnott J et al. A research agenda for 
the science of actionable knowledge: drawing from a review of the 
most misguided to the most enlightened claims in the science- 
policy interface literature. Environ Sci Policy 2023;144:174–86.
63. Materman L, Wong M, Boles E et al. Planning Policy Guidance: To 
Protect and Enhance Bay Shoreline Areas of San Mateo County. San 
Mateo, CA: OneShoreline, Good City Company, 2023.
64. Southeast Florida Regional Climate Change Compact. Regional 
Climate Action Plan 3.0. Broward, Miami-Dade , Monroe, and 
Palm Beach Counties, FL: Southeast Florida Regional Climate 
Change Compact, 2022.
65. Keeler AG, Mullin M, McNamara DE et al. Buyouts with rent­
backs: a policy proposal for managing coastal retreat. J Environ 
Stud Sci 2022;12:646–51.
66. Shi L, Fisher A, Brenner RM et al. Equitable buyouts? Learning 
from state, county, and local floodplain management programs. 
Clim Change 2022;174:29.
67. Rittel HWJ, Webber MM. Dilemmas in a general theory of plan­
ning. Policy Sci 1973;4:155–69.
68. Head BW. Evidence, uncertainty, and wicked problems in cli­
mate change decision making in Australia. Environ Plann C Gov 
Policy 2014;32:663–79.
69. Bertana A. The role of power in community participation: relo­
cation as climate change adaptation in Fiji. Environ Plan C: 
Politics Space 2020;38:902–19.
70. Bettini G. Where next? Climate change, migration, and the (bio) 
politics of adaptation. Global Policy 2017;8:33–9.
K. J. Mach et al. | 13  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
71.
Sipe N, Vella K. Relocating a flood-affected community: good 
planning or good politics? J Am Plan Assoc 2014;80:400–12.
72.
Shi L, Varuzzo AM. Surging seas, rising fiscal stress: exploring 
municipal fiscal vulnerability to climate change. Cities 2020; 
100:102658.
73.
BenDor TK, Salvesen D, Kamrath C et al. Floodplain buyouts and 
municipal finance. Nat Hazards Rev 2020;21:04020020.
74. Miami-Dade County. Little River Adaptation Action Area [Website]. 
(2022). https://adaptation-action-area-inlittle-river-mdc.hub.arc 
gis.com/ (3 January 2022, date last accessed).
75. GAO. Climate Change: A Climate Migration Pilot Program Could 
Enhance the Nation's Resilience and Reduce Federal Fiscal Exposure. Gao- 
20-488 United States Government Accountability Office Report to 
Congressional Requesters. Washington DC: GAO, 2020.
14 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad015/7458449 by guest on 26 August 2024
