What’s next after carbon accounting? Emissions liability
management
Marc Roston1,2*, Alicia Seiger1,2, Thomas Heller1,2
1Steyer-Taylor Center for Energy Policy and Finance, Stanford Law School, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94305, USA
2Sustainable Finance Initiative, Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94305, USA
*Correspondence address. Stanford Steyer-Taylor Center for Energy Policy and Finance, Stanford University, 559 Nathan Abbott Way, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
Tel: 650-723-2300; E-mail: mroston@stanford.edu
Abstract
We propose a method to internalize the externality of greenhouse gas emissions built on the foundation of greenhouse gas emissions
accounting, whereby ﬁrms match long-duration emissions liabilities with duration-matched removal assets. This method drives a simple
decision rule: only emit greenhouse gases if the value created exceeds the cost of reversing the emissions. This approach will drive capital
allocation to enhance at-risk natural capital, expand investment in technology-based carbon dioxide removals and reductions, rationalize
fraught carbon markets and provide auditable and transparent net zero claims and guidance for transition pathways.
Keywords: emissions; climate; carbon accounting; climate risk; ﬁnancial innovation; carbon markets; sustainable ﬁnance
Introduction
Anthropogenic emissions have contributed to the rise of atmo-
spheric carbon dioxide from under 300 parts per million pre-
industrialization to over 420 ppm today.1 Targets set based on
difficult to measure temperature thresholds, uncertain tipping
points and catastrophic outcomes obscure the goal: climate ac-
tion should focus on halting this trend, then reversing it.
Breaking and then reversing this trend provides insurance
against highly uncertain but potentially devasting outcomes.
This article proposes a method to internalize the externality of
carbon emissions as a direct means to stop the seemingly
inevitable rise of atmospheric carbon and other greenhouse
gases.
Brander [1] demands from the academic community norma-
tive research on carbon accounting. For more than 20 years, the
Greenhouse Gas Protocol has functioned as the de facto account-
ing solution, supplemented by an ongoing patchwork of updates
and fixes that continues to this day. The rhetorical success of the
GHG Protocol scopes masks implementation flaws. Scope 1 covers
direct emissions. Scope 2 covers purchased energy. Scope 3 cov-
ers up- and downstream emissions. However, only Scope 1 emis-
sions enter the atmosphere. Scopes 2 and 3 count and report
another entity’s emissions—repeatedly yet indeterminately. The
GHG Protocol counts carbon, it does not account for carbon.
Effective action to reduce, halt and reverse emissions requires
fair and accurate accounting for actual (versus estimated)
emissions. In the language of the GHG Protocol, this requires
aggregating actual Scope 1, Scope 2 and upstream Scope 3
emissions.
Suppose firms and nations begin correctly accounting for car-
bon. What happens next? This article takes a step beyond
Brander’s mandate and proposes a normative approach to carbon
management—the set of activities that link carbon accounting,
legal frameworks, removals and trading. We propose emissions
liability management (ELM), akin to traditional balance sheet man-
agement, as an approach to managing a segregated account of
emissions liabilities and removals. Financial accounting reports
cash flows. Carbon accounting reports carbon flows. Corporate
balance sheets cumulate cash flows into stocks of assets and lia-
bilities and thus document corporate solvency and shareholder
equity. ELM cumulates emissions flows into stocks of carbon
liabilities, carbon assets and measures of emissions solvency.
The end state of ELM provides simple, coherent guidance for
climate action: Burning fossil fuels must generate greater value
than the cost of reversing the emissions in question. By causing
emitters to internalize this cost, ELM (i) imposes a cost that will
incentivize firms to reduce embodied emissions by changing pro-
cesses and suppliers; (ii) drives immediate demand for removal
assets, providing both cash for nature-based solutions today,
thereby expanding ecosystem protection, and also investment
capital for technology-based removals tomorrow, as the only le-
gitimate means to match long-duration liabilities; (iii) supports
efficient carbon removal price discovery as markets develop
methods
to
correctly
trade-off
temporary
and
permanent
removals
and
(iv)
informs
verifiable
net
zero
claims
and
transition pathways.
ELM provides a path to solutions while avoiding fraught
debates over the social cost of carbon, systemic risks and
attempts to predict transition pathways. Most importantly, this
approach can support meaningful climate progress by climate
action leaders, without depending on uniform global adoption.
1
https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/climate-change-data-green/carbon-
clock.html
Received: January 19, 2023. Received (in revised form): June 01, 2023. Accepted: July 01, 2023
V
C The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, 3(1), kgad006
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgad006
Advance Access Publication Date: 21 July 2023
Perspective Article
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad006/7227721 by guest on 26 August 2024
Carbon accounting
Roston [2] notes that formal carbon accounting fell outside the
original mission of the GHG Protocol. The GHG Protocol began as
a risk disclosure tool: carbon prices lay just around the corner—
companies needed to understand their risks. Yet for more than
20 years, GHG Protocol adherents have applied a series of
patches, revisions and expansions to construct a functioning ac-
counting system. Unfortunately, this has led to an array of ser-
vice providers becoming rhetorically or financially tied to the
maintenance of the GHG Protocol with low likelihood of fixing a
system not purpose-built for accounting. Jia et al. [3] provide a
structured analysis of GHG Protocol methods, noting that they
fall short with respect to comparability across accounting, engi-
neering and social science metrics. Roston et al. (2022) detail a
particular set of GHG Protocol inconsistencies. Kaplan et al. [4]
(KRR) further highlight problems that arise because the GHG
Protocol conflates upstream known emissions and downstream
hypothetical emissions.
Kaplan and Ramanna [5, 6] close the gap between the GHG
Protocol and a functional accounting system with E-liability ac-
counting. E-liability accounting applies cost accounting to carbon
emissions. Each product in a supply chain has embodied carbon
emissions, passed from seller to buyer at each exchange. In this
way, any reporting entity need only track carbon emissions
passed from their direct supplier, whether that supplier provides
physical
goods,
electrons
or
services.
The
reporting
entity
combines its direct emissions with supply chain emissions to
pass E-liabilities to customers.
In the debate over carbon accounting methods using the lan-
guage of the GHG Protocol, E-liability accounting meets the crite-
ria of Jia et al. [3] by passing to customers allocated reported
(versus estimated) Scope 1 emissions combined with reported up-
stream Scope 3 emissions. Scope 2 emissions logically collapse
into a special case of reported upstream Scope 3.
In the context of this article, E-liability accounting is a suffi-
cient but not necessary condition for ELM. Any emissions ac-
counting method, including variations on the GHG Protocol, that
allocates emissions in a mutually exclusive and comprehensively
exhaustive way would suffice.
Emissions liability management
An effective policy to eliminate an externality requires internaliz-
ing the cost of the externality. Carbon emissions accounting may
formalize emissions allocation, but accounting alone does not
provide a normative pathway for emissions reductions. Current
practice neither holds firms accountable for their emissions nor
drives up the cost of capital to high emitters fast enough to en-
courage reductions. Current policy discussions focus more atten-
tion on reducing costs of low-emissions activities (tax breaks and
subsidies) than raising the cost of high-emissions ones.
ELM implies a simple rule to internalize the externality: A firm
that generates a ton of greenhouse gas emissions creates a long-
duration liability that must be contemporaneously balanced with
a duration-matched removal asset. Consider what this approach
does not require. This approach does not require a Pigouvian tax
on carbon. This approach does not require knowing the social
cost of carbon. Finally, this method requires neither long-term
forecasts of climate-induced damage to the global economy to
compel action nor does it focus on catastrophic predictions of fi-
nancial market risk to realign investments. The only requirement
imposed on firms, governments and even households is that
emitters reverse the externality. Reversing the externality would
place an endogenous price on carbon determined by supply and
demand for nettable E-assets.
Liability duration
Whether E-liabilities2 accumulate on a firm’s carbon balance
sheet or they ultimately pass to end-customers with goods and
services, they persist as liabilities of unprecedented duration.
With high probability, these obligations outlive a firm. With abso-
lute certainty they outlive a household. Determining just how
long they persist depends on complicated carbon cycle details [7].
Measurement complexity led the IPCC to drop ranges of CO2
atmospheric lifetime from its reporting. The shortest persistence
measures proposed (under a century) rely on ocean absorption of
atmospheric CO2. From a firm liability and global emissions-
budgeting perspective, this assumption exchanges one negative
externality (atmospheric carbon emissions) for another (atmo-
spheric emissions consuming ocean absorption capacity, driving
up ocean acidity). Scientific evidence indicates CO2 persistence
for thousands of years. For (arbitrary) specificity, and consistency
with Frontier Climate,3 we will assume 1000 years, within the
range NASA estimates [8].
Financial markets have little experience with such long-
duration risks. Select companies and governments have issued
100-year bonds. In 1752, the UK issued consol bonds that paid
coupons in perpetuity, without principal [9]. Such long-dated se-
curities pose serious credit concerns for bondholders. At the most
basic level, scarce legal regimes manage to survive more than a
few hundred years. And while defaults on such securities may be
costly for holders, defaults on long-duration carbon obligations
would reverse the collective attempt to resolve emissions exter-
nalities and climate change. In the case of carbon emissions and
climate, humanity is the investor concerned about the quality and
veracity of the assets held against the liability. A successful sys-
tem matching E-liabilities must resolve permanence in a globally
meaningful way with little room for failure.
At the planetary level, the only means to extinguish one ton of
E-liability requires definitive removal—an irreversible sequestra-
tion of a ton of carbon, e.g. converting CO2 into rock via minerali-
zation. Given current technology, this conversion cost likely
exceeds $500/ton.4 Virtually all other offset purchases fall short
with respect to permanence. Carton et al. [10] raise equivalence
concerns between carbon held in the ground as hydrocarbons
and carbon captured in trees, noting the reversibility and limited
capacity of trees.
KRR address equivalence concerns by establishing accounting
principles that apply to GHG removals. GHG removal rights may
trade as an E-Asset when the timing and magnitude of removals
are both estimable and probable. However, an E-Asset may only net
against an E-liability when the GHG has been removed and se-
questered indefinitely.
In the remainder of this article, we suggest market-development
pathways, financial implications and emissions reductions that
would result from layering ELM onto E-liability accounting.
2
For the remainder of the article, we use E-liability or simply liability as a
shorthand for ‘valid greenhouse gas emissions liability accounting methodol-
ogy.’
3
https://frontierclimate.com/
4
For example, Climeworks [11] follows this approach. We point to this
price as one publicly disclosed. However, Climeworks [11] does not claim to de-
liver title to one ton of carbon in rocks. In fact, Climeworks [11] has not re-
solved a number of important legal details, based on our understanding of
their terms of service.
2
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad006/7227721 by guest on 26 August 2024
ELM trusts
ELM implementation would be managed through a purpose-built
trust. The ELM trust would hold removal assets and funds to
ensure removal asset performance indefinitely to meet asset-
liability netting criteria, which implies the trust would likely out-
last the sponsoring firm. The ELM trust, legally distinct from a
sponsoring firm would drive emissions outcomes without global,
mandatory compliance, providing a pathway to reform voluntary
carbon markets. In a legal sense, an ELM trust would look nearly
identical to an employee benefit trust.5
Emissions liability accounting provides fair and accurate in-
curred liabilities for firm, product and supply chain emissions.
Therefore,
ELM
trust
liabilities
have
minimal
uncertainty.
Similarly, if the ELM trust holds legitimate removal assets (dis-
cussed below) then asset risk is minimal. The ELM trust, while de-
pendent on the sponsor firm for future funding to match future
liabilities, has minimal exposure to firm profitability for solvency.
In other words, the risk of ELM trust insolvency compares more
closely to a defined contribution (DC) plan than a defined benefit
(DB) plan.
While ELM might allow for business-as-usual emissions, few
firms implementing ELM would consider that a logical path. For
most firms, the cost to remove emissions exceeds the cost of not
emitting in the first place for the foreseeable future. As a result,
firms would pair ELM with aggressive efforts to realign produc-
tion processes and supply chains to reduce emissions, thereby
avoiding the accumulation of liabilities for lower cost abatement
activities. Activities that lower supply chain emissions (e.g. fuel
switching, flaring, lower-carbon materials, etc.) reduce E-liabili-
ties before they become obligations of the ELM trust. Rather than trad-
ing
avoided
emissions
in
voluntary
exchanges
against
counterfactuals, where incentives force a race to the bottom and
quantities must be measured in hypothetical counterfactuals, E-
liability accounting and ELM create clear incentives and obliga-
tions for investment in avoided emissions.
Removal assets
By current practice, purchasers of carbon credits treat them as
something like advertising expenses or charitable contributions
rather than assets on a carbon balance sheet. In this section, we
describe the current state of carbon market securities and the
role each of these securities would play under ELM and ELM
trusts.
Greenhouse gas trading falls into two broad categories: com-
pliance markets and voluntary markets. Compliance markets
trade government issued permission slips to emit greenhouse
gases—they do not represent physical carbon.6 Compliance cer-
tificates impose a tax on GHG emissions, they do not absolve a
firm of emissions liabilities.7
Voluntary markets trade certificates issued by various agen-
cies that claim to represent a ton of CO2 either removed or avoided.
KRR explains that tradeable avoidance offsets, while well-
meaning, cannot reconcile with accounting principles, leading to
emissions reduction misallocation. For example, consider meth-
ane from cows. A firm that pays a farmer to capture methane
claims emissions avoidance for its own use. However, the farmer
then sells low methane cheese to customers. That sale would vio-
late Jia et al. [3]. The farmer could sell more expensive, low E-lia-
bility cheese. Or, the farmer could sell the same E-liability
cheese, and sell methane, either as “low E-liability methane” or
as a stand-alone removal asset. The former assumes cow meth-
ane has lower E-liabilities than extracted and refined methane.
The latter only holds if the farmer can sequester the gas to create
an E-Asset. The firm might still fund good deeds, like giving cash
to consumers who buy low-emissions cheese. Avoidance activi-
ties ought to be accounted for as lower supply chain liabilities.
Therefore, under ELM we need only consider removal transac-
tions as assets.
Dramatic reductions in supply chain emissions will take time
and in the interim ELM implementation will drive immediate
demand for removal assets. Some purchased removals may
immediately qualify as nettable removal assets, for example,
direct-air-capture-and-mineralization
that
transfers
captured
carbon ownership from seller to buyer. However, few currently
available carbon market transactions meet the conditions of these
reference removal assets. Moreover, the simplicity of bilateral
transactions between a carbon buyer and seller do not reflect the
complexity of market practice.
Consider the role of intermediaries in a typical nature-based
solution. A project manager seeks carbon removal certification
by one of several agencies that issue tradeable certificates
(vaguely) representing a claim on a ton of allegedly permanent
and additional carbon. Buyers voluntarily match current-period
emissions with purchased certificates. The purchasers promptly
retire the certificates, permanently removing them from the mar-
ket. The firm that retired the certificate has no ongoing responsi-
bility for it. The firm faces no consequences for reversals. The
registry issuing the certificate, similarly, faces no direct financial
consequence to reversals. The only buyers that might treat these
certificates (and associated removals) as some sort of asset are
financial buyers intending to resell.
Verification agencies attempt to mitigate reversal risk through
buffer pools—the projects claim to capture more carbon than the
certification agency sells. This reserve may replace lost carbon.
Badgley et al. [12] closely examines one buffer pool and concludes
the buffer pool cannot absorb expected losses. Over the liability
time horizon, given the uncertainty of climate change itself, this
risk should be obvious.
Offset project verification might best be described as renting
the reputation of a third-party. While Verra, The Gold Standard
and others may have strong reputations for their certification
methods, they provide little protection for the certificate buyers
who wish to treat the certificate as a long-lived asset. Issuers pro-
vide buyers virtually no recourse in the event of errors or malfea-
sance at the project level.8 And, as noted above, buyers that
retire certificates shortly after purchase have no incentive to seek
out compensation for failed projects.
Consider a parallel from the capital markets: bond rating
agencies. If a mutual fund buys an S&P-rated bond issued by
Ford Motor Company, and S&P were to file for bankruptcy, Ford
remains obligated to repay the bond held by the mutual fund.
However, if a carbon certification agency determines it granted a
certificate in error, or even files for bankruptcy, even the tenuous
asset an offset buyer acquired suddenly evaporates.
5
In the Appendix, we provide an explanation of this risk, drawing on re-
tirement plan assets and liabilities.
6
For example, European Union ETS certificates or the California Air
Resources Board certificates.
7
See below. ETS certificates could be redesigned as an asset transaction
whereby the issuing government provides an asset guarantee in exchange for
the ETS payment.
8
Certification entities may require risk reporting and analysis, but neither
certification entities nor underlying projects meet reasonable criteria for cred-
itworthy counterparties. If a project has a catastrophic reversal, the likelihood
that the project manager could compensate buyers for the loss appears re-
mote. Similarly, if a certification entity filed for bankruptcy, those relying on
the ratings have limited, if any, protections.
Emissions liability management
|
3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad006/7227721 by guest on 26 August 2024
Permanence labels from certification agencies aside, nature-
based removals cannot match the emissions liability duration. A
timber offset, often labeled ‘permanent’ if structured to last 50–100
years, does not suffice. The cumulative probability of reversal risk
over 1000 years likely renders these certificates ineligible for netting
even if projects had legal structures defined for that term. More im-
portantly, this asset duration shortfall demonstrates that current
market practice may balance carbon emissions flows at a point in
time, and stocks for some period, but asset stocks inevitably fall
short of liability stocks.
Current market practice leads to subjective debates about
‘high-quality’ and ‘high-integrity’ offsets.9 For the ELM trust, im-
precise notions of quality fade and attention focuses on the KRR
principles of indefinite duration and asset impairment. A re-
moval asset nets against a liability only if the asset has an indefi-
nite
duration.
If
removal
asset
reverse,
the
trust
takes
impairments. Impaired assets cannot net against liabilities. The
ELM trust must replace the asset.
Neither risk of impermanence nor definite-lived removals de-
stroy the value of nature-based removals. In fact, accounting
clarity should make them more useful. ELM practitioners will
turn to more financially complex synthetic removal assets based
on ELM trust accounting principles or regulations. Turn to timber
again. Storing carbon in trees for 1000 years operates more like a
series of transactions: Say a buyer expects to store carbon in trees
for 50 years today—the expected life of the trees, including insur-
ance for fire, disease, verification and monitoring fees, etc. To
match the liability duration, buyers would have to repeat the bas-
ket of transactions every 50 years for 1000 years. An ELM trust,
therefore, could buy or construct a synthetic asset that can
match the liability via an endowment, insurance contract or
other similar structure. Logical ELM trust governance or regula-
tion might specify investment restrictions for such endowments,
ensuring netting criteria would be met.
Next, consider a buyer who pairs a finite-lived, nature-based
removal (say timber structured for 20 years) with a credible for-
ward purchase of a ton of irreversible mineralized carbon to-be-
delivered in 20 years. This synthetic removal asset might also be
nettable against liabilities, depending on the trading counter-
party quality, verification methods and certainty of property
rights.10
Price discovery
The obligation to immediately remove emissions would drive
massive demand for nature-based assets. Prices would rise, po-
tentially materially, generating greater revenue for more removal
projects. This dynamic provides a material incentive to voluntary
early actors: the sooner a firm adopts ELM, the lower the cost. By
extension, the relative price between nature- and technology-
based removals would make technology more attractive as a sub-
stitute and as a target for attractive investment returns.
More precisely, price dynamics would drive efficient price dis-
covery for removals, much like fixed income markets. U.S.
Treasury securities provide reference assets for (presumably)
riskless
lending
for
various
durations,
allowing
traders
to
construct a yield curve—the relationship between the term of a
loan and the interest rate for the loan.
Corporate bonds trade at spreads to the Treasury yield curve
due to default risk and other technical differences between U.S.
government debt and private debt. Carbon removal traders would
price nature-based-removal tons, or a series of time-sliced, na-
ture-based-removal tons, as an impairment-risk-adjusted spread
to irreversible-technology-based tons. Standard arbitrage pricing
concepts would link the prices between synthetic removal assets
(say, 10 sequential 100-year tree transactions) and the required
1000-year removal by direct air capture and mineralization.
Carbon markets that capture duration and impairment risk
would encourage forward and options pricing tied to expected fu-
ture reference asset prices, providing demand signals and capital to
technology-based removals. While direct-air-capture-to-rock may
be prohibitively expensive for many buyers today at $500/ton, the
expected price for a 10-year forward (buying the reference asset in
2033) might be $100/ton.
As a final implication of price discovery, consider policy
attempts to set a carbon price. Economists and policymakers de-
bate the social cost of carbon. The social cost of carbon remains
highly uncertain, almost unknowable. Logic dictates that the
price imposed on an emitter ought not exceed the lesser of the
social cost of carbon or the cost of permanent, irreversible re-
moval. Therefore, investment and policy efforts would focus on
reducing the cost of a nettable removal asset.
Net zero claims and transition pathways
Current net zero claims, both at the firm and product level, do
not hold up to scrutiny. Under the best circumstances, well-
meaning managers match current-period emissions flows and
current-period removal purchases. Matching only current period
flows falls short of internalizing emissions externalities. Without
accepting (or requiring) the obligation to duration-match emis-
sions liabilities and removal assets, firms demonstrably fall
short of net zero. ELM makes clear the criteria by which stake-
holders may evaluate net zero claims. A net zero firm has no
net liabilities. A net zero product passes no liabilities to custom-
ers. Under ELM, auditors can verify either of these claims, provid-
ing net zero transparency to investors, customers and other
stakeholders.
Today, investors and banks face increasing pressure to reduce
their financed emissions. In practice, much of this pressure
amounts to veiled demands for divestment which, according to
Berk and van Binsbergen [13], has minimal impact on cost of cap-
ital. Under ELM, the same metrics that align net zero claims with
a net zero reality also transform a firm’s cost of capital and in-
form its transition pathways. Firms with high liability stocks and
flows would require substantial current and expected future cap-
ital allocated to removal assets. Firms ineffective at emissions
reductions would look like highly leveraged firms—riskier invest-
ments that require greater funding. Firms maintaining ‘business-
as-usual’ would face ever-increasing cost of capital, because
their expanding carbon balance sheet would require greater
capital support. Partnership for carbon accounting financials
(PCAFs)
signatories,
for
example,
would
directly
penalize
firms for the risk implicit in their ELM rather than making
complex judgments about the sustainability merits of various
borrowers.
ELM implementation does not require mandatory adoption to
succeed. Firms that choose to take on their liabilities in this fash-
ion would provide strong signals to investors and customers with
audited, verifiable net zero commitments. Ideally, we would see
9
For
example,
see
https://icvcm.org/integrity-council-launches-global-
benchmark-for-high-integrity-carbon-credits/.
10
Current markets seem to underestimate property rights risks, specifically
mis-pricing likely increasing nationalization risk. A project that sells nature-
based removals, particularly in developing economies, will be subject to rising
risk as the nation requires its natural carbon sinks returned in the future to
meet its own carbon budgets. We propose that markets should shift to leases
or repurchase agreements to manage this risk.
4
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad006/7227721 by guest on 26 August 2024
significant capital commitments to ELM trusts by early adopters
funding risky pathways toward carbon removals. Successful
investments could result in material surplus capital or surplus
E-Assets that might be returned to shareholders.
National borders and global budgets
Carhart et al. [14] present a comprehensive account of the carbon
prices imposed by 25 countries representing 82% of CO2 emis-
sions based on 2019 analysis. The variation within this sample,
(ranging from negative $128/ton in Iran to $146/ton in Spain), pro-
vides some indication of the challenge faced by policymakers
seeking uniform, global carbon pricing at the nearly impossible-
to-estimate social cost of carbon. Debates over the EU carbon bor-
der adjustment mechanism, WTO regulations and concerns
about US/China trade relations bring to light the need to rational-
ize policy and pricing. Rationalizing and allocating remaining
global emissions budgets compound these challenges.
Current carbon tax and emissions trading systems (ETSs) do
not provide a policy path to align global pricing in a meaningful
and constructive way. Each of these policies operates in isolation,
with stakeholders negotiating over policies imposing costs on lo-
calized markets. California’s ETS market-clearing price cannot be
reconciled with the EU’s price.
Under regulated ELM regimes, governments could reframe
taxes and emissions allotments as removal asset purchases or
risk transfer transactions. Some nations might choose to treat
payments as a purchase of government-backed removal asset: if
an emitter pays the tax, the ultimate emissions removal becomes
a government obligation, either through a sovereign owned re-
moval asset or as an allocated ton out of a national emissions
budget.11 Others might treat payments as an insurance premium
in the event of firm failure and inadequate funding to cover liabil-
ities, like the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation insures re-
tirement plans or Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insures
bank deposits. In either case, such transactions formally align
firm emissions with national ledgers and budgets.
Finally, treating within-nation taxes or ETS schemes as risk
transfer would streamline Paris Agreement Article 6 compliance
and monitoring.
Conclusion
The current system of carbon counting following the GHG proto-
col has enabled leading firms to experiment with strategies that
may encourage better climate and business outcomes, while giv-
ing advocates a currency to use in service of shaming or divesting
from lagging companies. But it is time to move forward. ELM pro-
vides a straightforward calculation to evaluate and constrain
greenhouse gas emissions: Only generate emissions if the value
gained exceeds the cost of immediate removal. This decision cri-
teria halts the rise in atmospheric greenhouse gases.
The implications of this approach are clear. Firms modify sup-
ply chains and production processes to avoid creating costly
liabilities in the first place. Immediate demand for credible, fixed-
duration nature-based removals rises substantially, providing
greater funding to restore and enhance damaged ecosystems to-
day. The relative cost of technology-based removals falls and the
attractiveness of investments in technology-based solutions
rises. Markets develop to provide transparent and liquid carbon
removal term structures, efficiently trading-off risky, temporary
removals with truly permanent solutions. Emissions disclosures
and audits provide investors, customers, regulators and other
stakeholders with transparency into verifiable net zero claims
and transition pathways.
ELM implementation will require ongoing experimentation, in-
novation and compromise. If policymakers and leading firms lay
the foundations, financial firms will speed the process of reducing
atmospheric carbon dioxide and transforming the economy [15].
Author contributions
Marc Roston (Conceptualization [lead], Formal analysis [equal],
Methodology [equal]), Alicia Seiger (Conceptualization [support-
ing], Formal analysis [equal], Methodology [equal]) and Thomas
Heller (Conceptualization, Supervision, Validation [supporting])
Conflict of interest
None declared.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Stanford Business and Doerr
Sustainability School Masters student Abigail Mathieson for her
excellent research assistance and the thought leaders who par-
ticipated in workshops at Stanford University.
References
1.
Brander M. There should be more normative research on how so-
cial and environmental accounting should be done. Soc Environ
Account J 2022;42:11–7. https://doi.org/10.1080/0969160X.2022.
2066554.
2.
Roston M. The road from Scope 3 to net zero. In: T Heller, A Seiger
(eds) Settling Climate Accounts. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-83650-4_4
3.
Jia J, Ranger N, Chaudhury A. Designing for Comparability: A
Foundational Principle of Analysis Missing in Carbon Reporting Systems
(25 October 2022, date last accessed). https://ssrn.com/abstract=
4258460 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4258460
4.
Kaplan RS, Karthik R, Marc R. Accounting for Carbon Offsets.
Harvard Business Review 2023;101:126–137. https://dx.doi.org/10.
2139/ssrn.4362921.
5.
Kaplan R, Ramanna K. We need better carbon accounting. Here’s
how to get there. Harvard Business Review Digital Articles (12 April
2022, date last accessed).
6.
Kaplan R, Ramanna K. Accounting for climate change. Harv Bus
Rev 2021;99:120–31.
7.
Archer D, Eby M, Brovkin V et al. Atmospheric lifetime of fossil
fuel carbon dioxide. Annu Rev Earth Planet Sci 2009;37:117–134.
8.
Global Climate Change: NASA. The Atmosphere: Getting a Handle on
Carbon
Dioxide.
https://climate.nasa.gov/news/2915/the-atmo
sphere-getting-a-handle-on-carbon-dioxide/ (28 October 2022,
date last accessed).
9.
Kollewe J, Farrell S. UK bonds that ﬁnanced First World War to be
redeemed 100 years later. The Guardian (31 October 2014, date last
accessed). https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/31/
uk-ﬁrst-world-war-bonds-redeemed
11
ELM does not require global carbon budgets to function. ELM implemen-
tation halts net emissions. However, policy discussions that seek to link global
or national emissions budgets with current and future emissions require pre-
cise connections between private or subnational actions and national allo-
cated limits.
Emissions liability management
|
5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad006/7227721 by guest on 26 August 2024
10.
Carton W, Lund JF, Dooley K. Undoing equivalence: rethinking
carbon accounting for just carbon removal. Front Clim 2021;3:30.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fclim.2021.664130.
11.
Climeworks. https://climeworks.com/ (25 October 2022, date
last accessed).
12.
Badgley G, Chay F, Chegwidden O et al. California’s forest carbon
offsets buffer pool is severely undercapitalized. Front For Glob
Change 2022;5:930426.
13.
Berk JB, van Binsbergen JH. The Impact of Impact Investing.
Stanford University Graduate School of Business Research
Paper, Law & Economics Center at George Mason University
Scalia Law School Research Paper Series No. 22-008, August 21,
2021. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3909166.
14.
Carhart M, Litterman B, Munnings C et al. Measuring compre-
hensive carbon prices of national climate policies. Clim Policy
2022;22:198–207. doi:10.1080/14693062.2021.2014298.
15.
Kauffman RL, Roston M. Fixing the plumbing: asset management,
clean energy technology, and the valley of death. In: T Heller, A.
Seiger (eds.) Settling Climate Accounts. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan,
2021, 71–90.
Appendix: ELM Trust Failure Risk
An ELM trust exists independently of the sponsoring ﬁrm, and
presumably outlasts the sponsor. The trust provides for main-
tenance or replacement of impaired carbon removal assets out
of surplus capital or ongoing sponsor contributions. In this
Appendix, we address the concern that the trust could fall
short of its obligations after a sponsor failure—a common
problem experienced with DBs plans, but nearly impossible for
a DC plan.
DC plans have virtually zero risk to failure of the plan sponsor.
DB plan experience has shown substantial risk to sponsor failure.
We explain that ELM trust failure risk looks much more like a DC
plan than a DB plan. In other words, ELM trust sponsors may fail,
but the potential for unfunded liabilities would be minimal.
A DB plan promises beneﬁts to plan participants far in the fu-
ture the costs of which are unknowable at the time of the prom-
ise. Actual beneﬁts depend on future salaries, life expectancy,
medical costs, etc. Moreover, plan assets have risky future val-
ues. Actuaries estimate future liabilities and assets. Pension ac-
counting rules attempt to constrain the risk that ﬁrms cannot
meet obligations by establishing funding requirements, imposing
transparent investment rules and disclosure of expected invest-
ment performance. Because both liabilities and assets depend on
projections, plan solvency often depends on ﬁrm performance: if
liabilities exceed projections or assets perform poorly, the spon-
soring ﬁrm must make up the difference with contributions to
the trust. However, aggressive liability estimates, particularly
when combined with poor asset performance and weak economic
conditions,12 expose the plan to material risk of sponsor bank-
ruptcy.13
In contrast, DC plan contributions, either by employees or
employers, entitle a participant to the investment return on their
selected portfolio. The DC plan trust has the obligation to pay the
beneﬁciary the value of those assets in retirement or at the date a
beneﬁciary chooses to remove her assets from the trust. By deﬁ-
nition, trust assets match trust liabilities. If a participant allo-
cates her investments in an aggressive asset mix, she is entitled
to the outcome of her decisions, no more and no less. The beneﬁ-
ciary has no risk in the event her employer ﬁles for bankruptcy.
An ELM trust has certain liabilities. Removal assets provide
certainty on the asset side of the ELM balance sheet as well. To
the degree the trust uses synthetic removal assets, asset risk
enters the trust. Thus, counterparty quality, risk limitations and
regulations would be essential for ELM trusts. However, the trust
risk of insolvency due to the failure of the sponsoring ﬁrm does
not compare to DB plan risk.
12
As a general rule, management incentives encourage over-estimating as-
set returns and under-estimating pension liabilities.
13
For example, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, a U.S. govern-
ment sponsored insurer, provides limited guarantees to pension beneficiaries
in the event of a sponsor bankruptcy and funding shortfall.
6
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad006/7227721 by guest on 26 August 2024
