The Paradox Test in Climate Litigation
Adam Parr
1,*
1Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, Hertford College, University of Oxford, Catte Street, Oxford OX1 3BW, UK
*Correspondence address. Hertford College, Catte Street, Oxford OX1 3BW, UK. Tel: þ44 1865 589 918; E-mail: Jurisprudence@paradox.law
Abstract
The common law and natural law traditions have both sought authority in ‘reason’ and the ‘laws of nature’. Pollock applied this logic
in explaining judicial development of negligence: the application of reason to emerging science and technology. The equivalent to-
day is a growing body of scientiﬁc evidence that humans are destroying their own habitat through climate change, biodiversity de-
struction and pollution. Humanity depends on its habitat for survival and therefore each step in this direction increases the risk of
its extinction. The courts are already being asked to declare as unlawful governmental decisions that breach human rights and statu-
tory or constitutional protection of the environment. This perspective article proposes that when presented with scientiﬁc evidence
of habitat destruction in judicial review cases, the courts could examine whether a decision is unlawful and/or irrational. This
‘Paradox Test’ would ask: (1) will the decision contribute to the destruction of the human habitat and (2) if so, is it justiﬁed on the
ground of necessity? It is proposed that a decision that failed such a test would be unlawful and irrational as contrary to what is argu-
ably the most fundamental law of nature: species survival. The essay deﬁnes the Paradox Test, sets it in an historical context and
positions it as implicitly inside the boundaries of current English doctrine of judicial review, where it would need to be judicially rec-
ognized. Consequently, practitioners are invited to apply the test in court and to share their experience.
Keywords: climate change; climate litigation; habitat; common law; natural law
Introduction
Part I sets out a model test of irrationality and unlawfulness that
can be adapted and deployed by practitioners in litigation seeking
to prevent environmental damage such as global heating and bio-
diversity loss. The ‘Paradox Test’ can be applied in all jurisdic-
tions to challenge legislative and administrative decisions that
threaten the survival of our species.
It is both irrational and unlawful for a government to do some-
thing whose stated purpose is to benefit any individual or group
of people, but whose effect will be to cause or accelerate the ex-
tinction of the entire human species. The same applies where a
government fails to undertake legal duties that are necessary for
the survival of the species. It is ‘irrational’ in the sense that the
pursuit of a minor gain cannot be rational if such a pursuit would
deprive the beneficiary of that gain as well as much more.
‘Illegal’ in the sense that if the law does not protect the human
species, it fails in its most essential function.
Such actions, or failures to act, can only be justified on the
ground of necessity, which will be defined in relation to comparable
legal concepts. Necessity is an objective and strict test and, like the
tests of unlawfulness and irrationality, is based on scientific evi-
dence. Thus, the Paradox Test is a calculation derived exclusively
from the laws of nature—chemistry, physics and biology.
Part II sets out the logic and scientific evidence which inform
the test. The name reflects the paradox that homo sapiens has the
‘intelligence’ both to destroy itself and to do so knowingly and
that this intelligence includes the ability to create legal systems
that can promote or prevent such destruction. The ultimate para-
dox is that the courts should ever need to apply such a test.
Part III places the test in the context of English common law
and the related civil law tradition of natural law. English law is
an edge case as it has a stricter and more limited scope of judicial
review than most other jurisdictions, yet the Paradox Test falls
squarely within the strictest definition of judicial review in
English law.
The common law and natural law are founded on ‘the laws of
nature’, albeit that in this account of ‘nature’, humanity has been
divorced from the natural world. This has led to the perverse sit-
uation in which individual rights and obligations have expanded
while the species moves inexorably towards extinction. Common
good constitutionalism recognizes the dilemma but lacks the
grounding in the laws of nature to give it objectivity and legal ef-
fect. By re-affirming the historical identification of ‘natural law’
with ‘the laws of nature’, but now through the lens of modern sci-
ence, there is a solid legal foundation for promoting the common
good of humanity through judicial review.
The article concludes by asking practitioners to apply the
Paradox Test in their own litigation, adapted as they think fit to
their legal systems, and to share their experience so that the
Paradox Test can be developed as a universal principle of climate
and environmental litigation.
Part I—The Paradox Test
‘Some people think that all rules of justice are merely conven-
tional, because whereas a law of nature is immutable and has
the same validity everywhere, as fire burns both here and in
Persia, rules of justice are seen to vary.’—Aristotle [1].
Received: May 25, 2023. Revised: July 5, 2023. Accepted: July 10, 2023
V
C The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, 3(1), kgad005
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgad005
Advance Access Publication Date: 13 July 2023
Perspective Article
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad005/7223729 by guest on 26 August 2024
Environmental litigation can be conducted in public or private
law. This article is concerned with public law, where the subject
of the litigation is an act, decision or failure to act by a public
body. For the sake of simplicity, we will call these all ‘decisions’.
The respondent could be the legislature, the executive or the ju-
diciary itself. For the purposes of this article, we will take three
sample cases:
Case A—where the respondent is an agency granting a license
for the development of new fossil fuel resources.
Case B—where the respondent is a regulator who has declined
to carry out inspections and enforcement actions required to
protect land, water and air from pollution caused by the re-
lease of nitrogenous materials into the countryside.
Case C—where the respondent is the national or federal legisla-
ture which has passed a law that includes a provision giving lo-
cal communities the right to veto the permitting of onshore
wind power generation.
In each such case, let us assume that the respondent is acting in
line with policies of the UK government. In the first case, the pol-
icy is to increase the domestic production of fossil fuels so as to
reduce imports. In the second, the policy is to work with farmers
through voluntary efforts to reduce pollution and not to jeopar-
dize food production. In the third, the government is responding
to local communities who object to the visual effect of wind tur-
bines.
In each case, the applicant is challenging the decision on the
basis that it will have a material and negative effect on climate
change and the environment. The first case is that the decision
will not only increase the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions, it will
increase international emissions and will also undermine efforts
to reduce dependence on fossil fuels. The second case is that gov-
ernment inaction is causing excessive emissions of nitrous oxide
(a powerful greenhouse gas) as well as killing soil and causing se-
vere damage to river and sea life. The third case is that the ban
will limit the rate at which the country builds renewable energy,
leaving it more dependent on fossil fuels.
We will now examine the legal approach that would typically
take place under English law, but with a sufficient degree of ab-
straction such that the general principles emerge alongside the
peculiarities of the English legal system.
In the first and second cases, the decisions would be subject to
judicial review on grounds of (a) illegality, (b) irrationality and (c)
procedural impropriety. In the third case, the courts would enter-
tain judicial review if there were a prima facie case of a breach of
the Human Rights Act 1998, but in all three cases, the applicants
would rely on the Human Rights Act. In a case of statutory inter-
pretation, the applicants might rely on the principle of legality as
described by Warnock and Preston [2] in an article which draws
on the common law canon in the context of the climate emer-
gency.
In response, the government’s lawyers would argue in all
these cases that the decision in question is a matter of policy;
that it involves the balancing of different interests and that in the
English constitution, this balancing and decision-making is the
function of the government or Parliament, and not of the judi-
ciary. If a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights
(ECHR) was argued, then the Government would seek to show
that (a) there was no breach of a protected right and (b) that if
there were, it was justified on the grounds of derogation in the
ECHR. This, they would argue, is also a balancing exercise and
one
that
the
democratically
elected
government
is
constitutionally best-placed to decide, albeit that the courts have
a right of review.
So far, what has been described should not be contentious. It
is intended as a description of the lex lata, the law and procedure
as they exist. At this point, however, we move to the lex ferenda,
an imagination of how the law might develop. This would most
likely be through judicial law-making, although a government
concerned with the subject could enact the test through legisla-
tion. In either case, the Paradox Test can be deployed in three
ways: (1) inside a challenge on the ground of irrationality; (2) in-
side a challenge under the ECHR or (3) as a free-standing princi-
ple
of
common
law
in
England
(or
natural
law
in
civil
jurisdictions). The test has two legs:
1. Will the challenged decision, in its own right or in combina-
tion with other similar decisions (past, present and future),
contribute towards the destruction of the human habitat
through climate change, biodiversity loss, pollution or other
scientiﬁcally established mechanisms?
2. If so, is the decision necessary?
The burden of proof in the first leg would be on the applicant;
in the second leg, it would fall on the government. The standard
of proof would be the balance of probabilities.
The underlying principles of the test are set out in the next
section. From the perspective of its application, however, it
should be noted that:
1. The two legs are independent of one another.
2. The only evidence admissible under both legs would be sci-
entiﬁc. Political, social and economic arguments are irrele-
vant, as we shall see.
3. The tests are objective.
4. Procedurally, the court may decide to hear each side’s argu-
ments on both legs of the test or it might decide to address
the ﬁrst leg ﬁrst, hearing from both sides. In the latter case,
which is analogous to a criminal trial where the prosecution
must establish that the defendant has a case to answer, the
court would decide whether the applicant had established
its case on the balance of probabilities. If the judge so ﬁnds,
the respondent might decide not to seek to put forward a
justiﬁcation of necessity.
Part II—Logic and evidence
This part sets out the principles which underlie the Paradox Test.
These are not arguments from law or the history of law, but a
combination of logic, scientific laws and scientific evidence.
The first leg
The first leg of the test is ‘Will the challenged decision, in its own
right or in combination with other similar decisions (past, present
and future), contribute towards the destruction of the human
habitat through climate change, biodiversity loss, pollution or
other scientifically established mechanisms?’
This leg is a set of propositions supported by scientific evi-
dence. Before examining that evidence, as compelling as it may
be, it is important to note that the science tends towards conser-
vatism [3] and that there has been ‘a collective, and rather suc-
cessful,
attempt
to
ignore
the
scale
of
the
problem’
[4].
Nonetheless, the gravity of the situation cannot be overstated,
‘hundreds of millions of people are sadly already on the apoca-
lyptic frontline
of challenges
to their livelihoods’
[5]. The
2
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad005/7223729 by guest on 26 August 2024
following evidence is drawn from international organizations or
government-commissioned studies which, as exemplified by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), generally
add a further layer of caution as a result of their consensual pro-
cesses. Consequently, the evidence may be conservative but,
‘from a fact-finding perspective, this means that IPCC findings
should be considered irrefutable in court’ [6].
A. The earth’s biosphere is our habitat and as a species we de-
pend upon it for our existence. The UN Secretariat of the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) advises that all
food systems depend on biodiversity through pollination,
pest control and soil fertility. Healthy ecosystems also un-
derpin delivery of water supplies and water quality. The ca-
pacity of ecosystems to provide the essential services on
which we depend is in decline. The species responsible for
pollination are moving closer to extinction, as are species
used for food and medicine [7].
B. Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, pollution and other hu-
man impacts are degrading the biosphere. The CBD notes
that demand for resources is having impacts ‘well above
safe ecological limits’. Pollution from excess nutrients (in-
cluding fertilizers), pesticides, plastics and other waste is
causing biodiversity loss and damaging ecosystem function.
Plastics are severely impacting marine ecosystems [7].
The Stern Report concludes that ‘climate change threatens
the basic elements of life for people around the world—ac-
cess to water, food, health, and use of land and the environ-
ment’. The effects are wide-ranging. The melting of glaciers
will reduce water supplies to one-sixth of the world’s popu-
lation. Declining crop yields ‘are likely to leave hundreds of
millions without the ability to produce or purchase sufﬁ-
cient food’ [8].
C. Rapid and comprehensive system change is required in rela-
tion to food and land use, energy production and pollution
in order to prevent the worst scenarios occurring. The
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) describes a
‘triple planetary crisis of climate change, pollution and bio-
diversity loss’. Drastic cuts in emissions are required: ‘A
stepwise approach is no longer an option . . . Wide-ranging,
large-scale, rapid and systemic transformation is now essen-
tial to achieve the temperature goal of the Paris Agreement’.
‘This will require not just incremental sector-by-sector
change, but wide-ranging, large-scale, rapid and systemic
transformation’. This concerns ﬁnancial and food systems
as well as the more obvious energy and transport sectors.
‘Transforming food systems is not only important for
addressing climate change and environmental degradation,
but also essential for ensuring healthy diets and food secu-
rity for all’ [9].
D. Every action that degrades our habitat increases the risk and
every such action that is prevented reduces the risk.
Notwithstanding that negative change is occurring at the
system level and positive change needs to do the same, both
negative and positive changes consist of individual and spe-
ciﬁc activities. ‘Every fraction of a degree matters: to vulner-
able communities, to species and ecosystems, and to every
one of us’ [9].
E. Time is of the essence. Non-linear effects such as feedback
loops and tipping points mean that with each day that
passes risks increase while the time horizon comes closer. In
addition, looking at averages ignores the much larger
impacts that can occur locally but with global implications,
for example at the poles and in biodiversity centres like the
Amazon. The risk is now that there will be an existential
threat to humanity during the lifetime of people alive today.
The Stern Report identiﬁed nearly 20 years ago that ‘if an-
nual greenhouse gas emissions remained at the current
level,
concentrations
would
be
more than
treble pre-
industrial levels by 2100, committing the world to 3–10C
warming, based on the latest climate projections’. Emissions
have in fact risen since 2007. The implications are beyond
modelling: ‘A warming of 5C on a global scale would be far
outside the experience of human civilisation and compara-
ble to the difference between temperatures during the last
ice age and today’ [9].
Given these facts, it should be self-evident that the courts can-
not rely on the legislature or executive arms of government to
take the necessary action. Both in the UK and internationally,
governments have failed to meet even the targets they them-
selves have set. A recent assessment of progress over 40 indica-
tors of systems change found that none is on track to meet 2030
targets [10]. Reports by the UK government’s own bodies demon-
strate that in spite of numerous commitments and targets, per-
formance has deteriorated in almost every indicator of natural
capital [11]. The UK Office for Environmental Protection (OEP)
found that ‘Biodiversity is intrinsic to the health of the environ-
ment and yet we are witnessing a chronic decline in species
abundance in this country. Government is required by law to halt
this decline by 2030. Species naturally depend on habitats, but
the condition of many areas of land so essential to threatened
species has continued to deteriorate’. The OEP’s chair noted that
the UK has ‘fallen far short of what is needed to meet
Government’s ambition to leave the environment in a better state
for future generations . . . many extremely worrying environmen-
tal trends remain unchecked, including a chronic decline in spe-
cies abundance’ [12].
In relation to climate change, the main challenge for the UK is
taking the actions necessary to deliver the UK’s Net Zero
Strategy, published in 2021. The Climate Change Committee con-
sidered that there are credible, funded plans in place for 39% of
the emissions cuts. These plans relate to the new rules for zero-
emission vehicles and the deployment of renewable energy.
There are, however, significant gaps including agriculture and
land use and buildings [13].
The seriousness of the threat has been recognized by the
courts. Lord Carnwath, a retired judge of the UK Supreme Court,
describes Juliana v United States as a case in which the US Court of
Appeals for the 9th Circuit accepted the existential threat that
climate change represents. The majority judgment stated that ‘A
substantial evidentiary record documents that the federal gov-
ernment has long promoted fossil fuel use despite knowing that
it can cause catastrophic climate change, and that failure to
change existing policy may hasten an environmental apocalypse
. . .’ [14].
In summary, the weight of scientific evidence and logic dem-
onstrates that any government action which contributes to the
further destruction of the human habitat is part of a trend that
will continue to cause grave and extensive damage and that this
damage puts the safety and existence of the species at risk, and
during the lifetime of people alive today. This is the logic and evi-
dence that underpin the first leg of the Paradox Test.
Paradox test in climate litigation
|
3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad005/7223729 by guest on 26 August 2024
The second leg
The second leg of the test is ‘If so, is the decision necessary?’ This
leg permits a broader range of considerations than the first, but
needs that could justify the destruction of the human habitat are
inevitably limited. They would include those basic provisions
that are objectively and universally necessary to support and pro-
tect life, but not those subjective needs that are better described
as desires or expectations. Something is necessary if not having it
would compromise the health and longevity of people. Critically,
however, the legal test is not whether food or energy is necessary,
but whether the decision in question is necessary to meet those
needs.
As the three cases show, the legal challenge may not be to the
government’s stated objective but to the means being pursued.
The stated objective in Case A is to produce energy, Case B con-
cerns food production and Case C the protection of the country-
side. However, the respondent in each case cannot simply
demonstrate that food, energy and countryside are necessary.
The respondent must show, given the damage that will be caused
by the decision, that the UK needs more fossil fuel production or
that excessive nutrient run-off is necessary to produce food. In the
third case, the respondent must show that there is an objective
human need that can only be satisfied by banning onshore wind
turbines.
In the next section, we will examine the meaning of ‘need’ and
‘necessity’ but regardless of the definition, these three cases al-
ready illustrate how difficult it would be for the government to
demonstrate necessity. One challenge would be internal incon-
sistencies between government policies. In Case C, government
policy is to protect the countryside, while in Case B it is causing it
great harm. In Case A, the policy is to promote domestic energy
for reasons of security and cost, while in Case C it is refusing to
allow onshore wind generation.
Part III—Legal context
‘The only direct utility of legal history (I say nothing of its thrilling
interest) lies in the lesson that each generation has an enormous
power of shaping its own law’ [15].
The common and natural law traditions
Whereas the common law is recognized by the courts as positive
law, natural law is typically seen today as a theory of how the
law should be. Whether in its traditional or modern forms, natu-
ral law has been assumed to be incapable of promoting protec-
tion
of
the
environment
because
it
is
fundamentally
anthropocentric—and antagonistic to ideas of the collective good
[16]. It has been argued that traditional natural law could be ap-
plied in support of an ecocentric approach, that is, protection of
the environment for its own sake [17]. However, this essay is not
arguing for the law to subsume individual interests in favour of
ecocentrism or collectivism. The threat to human survival means
that any version of self-interested rationalism would have to ac-
knowledge that the self-interest of every single individual human
is to preserve the existence of the species. All other goods depend
on this one.
In fact, natural law has visited a version of this problem be-
fore. In 1987, at the end of the last Cold War, Finnis et al. [18] ar-
gued that nuclear deterrence could not be morally justified, even
though they acknowledged that it was necessary to deter Soviet
aggression and tyranny. They also recognized the harm that
would be caused to the common good if their proposal of
unilateral disarmament was adopted. Nonetheless, they held
that natural law dictates that a morally upright person must re-
pudiate even the intention to take innocent life: it is better to suf-
fer evil than to do evil. Finnis’ natural law appears therefore to
proscribe any action that would lead humanity towards the de-
struction of its habitat if, as we have seen, this would lead to the
large-scale loss of life. Further, it would not admit the possibility
that a cost–benefit analysis could justify any such action (p. 252).
While modern natural law may not be recognized by the
courts today, traditional natural law can be described as an im-
plicit principle of common law and a more explicit principle in
civil law jurisdictions. The common and natural law traditions
share the same fundamental principles, notably: (a) the recogni-
tion of higher principles of law than the positive laws enacted by
people; (b) accessing those principles through reason and due le-
gal process and (c) the judiciary as the body constitutionally
empowered to undertake this process. The UK, USA, India,
Canada and Australia are common law jurisdictions where a sub-
stantial part of the law has been made over the centuries by
judges.
The law follows the science in two senses. The first is that as
science and technology advance, people create new legal issues,
often because of unforeseen effects of new products (e.g. thalido-
mide). The second is that (usually after a time lag) people become
aware of the problem, giving rise to novel legal issues, and sci-
ence makes it possible for a court to assess the causes and effects
of these problems forensically. Both common law and statutory
law develop as a result. In this case, we are now at the point at
which courts can take judicial notice of the existential risk to hu-
manity caused by habitat destruction and climate change.
Armed with this knowledge, the courts may conduct judicial re-
view understanding the implications of governmental decisions
in a way that they did not previously. They could apply the
Paradox Test because it is the common and natural law response
to these facts: the application of reason and reasonableness to
this situation.
This fundamental principle of the common and natural law
demanding reason and reasonableness in the face of develop-
ments in science is the only aspect of legal history that need con-
cern us here. The purpose in referring to history is not to promote
an abstract theory of law, but the opposite: to show how legal
practice is already founded on this principle. To this end, no bet-
ter resource exists than the description of the philosophy of the
common law, its relationship to natural law, the laws of nature
and the advances of science and technology set out 120 years ago
by the jurist Sir Frederick Pollock (1845–1937). Given the natural
conservatism of courts, it is of significance that the authority for
our interpretation of both common and natural law derives from
over a century ago when the present facts were not known.
In The Expansion of the Common Law (1904), Pollock describes
how the law of negligence had developed in the nineteenth cen-
tury, owing little to precedent and everything to changing times.
‘In days when mechanical arts were few and simple, and the de-
termination of disputed facts was still a rude and uncertain pro-
cess’ the courts essentially held a man liable only for his positive
actions. ‘But the law was capable of growing to the demands of
new times and circumstances . . . [the application] of living and
still expanding principles. The knowledge and resources of a rea-
sonable man are far greater in the twentieth than in the sixteenth
or the eighteenth century, and accordingly so much the more is
required of him’.
4
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad005/7223729 by guest on 26 August 2024
Even more remarkable is the formation, dating from less than
forty years ago [of a] body of rules demanding a special and in-
tensified caution from the occupiers of [fixed property]. [These]
rules, which are still increasing in importance, [can be
grouped] under the rubric of ‘Duties of Insuring Safety’. The jus-
tification of their existence lies not in any ancient maxims or forms of
pleading, but in the intrinsic and indefensible competence of the law to
stand in the forefront of social morality. We have powers of controlling
the material world, and holding its various energies ready to be di-
rected to our ends, which were wholly unknown to our forefathers.
With those powers have come risks which were equally unknown to
them.
. . . In following and enlarging such rules we have really set
them on a new foundation. Responsibility to one’s neighbours
increases in proportion as one’s undertaking involves elements
of common danger; and there comes a point of risk at which
nothing short of ‘consummate care’ will serve, and no pru-
dence is allowed to count as such in law which has not proved
sufficient to avert disaster in fact. [emphasis added]
Pollock recognizes that the common law may even move too far,
but avers that ‘the zeal that devours is better, at any rate, than
sloth that rusts. There must be fluctuations and now and then a
false step in a secular process like that of our science’ [19].
In The History of the Law of Nature (1900), Pollock describes the
long tradition of natural law. Pollock traces what he calls ‘the law
of nature’ back to Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics and the passage
quoted at the head of this article, and forward through early
modern European and English law. Aristotle distinguishes be-
tween human customary law, which varies locally, and natural
law which is as universal as the (other) laws of nature—as fire
burns here and in Persia. Pollock not only describes the common
law as having the same roots and logic as natural law but as
bearing its influence. He quotes (The Expansion: 109) the passage
from Christopher St. German’s Doctor and Student (1523) in which
the Doctor explains that English lawyers do not use the term ‘nat-
ural law’ but mean the same:
As when anything is grounded upon the Law of Nature, they
say that Reason will that such a thing be done; and if it be pro-
hibited by the Law of Nature, they say it is against Reason, or
that Reason will not suffer that to be done.
Pollock notes that (like the common law) natural law ‘was a quite
living doctrine . . . What is more, it never ceased to be essentially
rationalist and progressive’. But he also notes how degraded nat-
ural law has become: ‘Modern aberrations have led to a wide-
spread belief that the Law of Nature is only a cloak for arbitrary
dogmas or fancies’ [20]. But Pollock does not accept this verdict
(The Expansion: 128):
I have endeavoured to show that the Law of Nature is not, as
the English utilitarians in their ignorance of its history sup-
posed, a synonym for arbitrary individual preference, but that
on the contrary it is a living embodiment of the collective rea-
son of civilized mankind, and as such is adopted by the
Common Law in substance though not always by name.
Both the positive and negative aspects of Pollock’s assessment of
natural law apply today. But the critical point here is that both
the common law and natural law appeal to a universal standard
of reason and reasonableness—pointing to objective tests at law.
Also, as Pollock observes in relation to negligence, reasonable-
ness develops with our understanding of the world around us. It
is the laws of nature that inform our ability to manipulate our
world and our understanding of the consequences of our actions.
As our power and understanding progress so does the standard
of what precautions it is reasonable for us to take to protect our-
selves. The laws of nature are not human laws, but predictable
rules of cause and effect. In the present case, the chain of cause
and effect is: human activity > climate change, loss of biodiver-
sity and pollution > habitat destruction > species extinction.
There is, however, common ground between at least one
strand of modern natural law theory and the science-based view
of Pollock. This lies in ‘common good constitutionalism’ which
proposes that classical law is the basis of all European legal sys-
tems and the US constitution. This approach rejects both pro-
gressive and conservative interpretations of the US constitution,
on the basis that both found themselves on individual rights and
freedoms. The common good is more than the sum of individual
goods; and personal rights and freedoms are the product of the
common good, not its source. The classical tradition is the natu-
ral law tradition, appealing to principles higher than positive law:
The classical tradition . . . openly embraces the view that law is
ordered to the common good, explains why it is law’s nature to
be so ordered, and claims that the positive law based on the
will of the civil lawmaker, while worthy of great respect in its
sphere, is contained within a larger objective order of legal
principles and can only be interpreted in accordance with
those principles [21].
Natural law has not been driven out of the law, it has simply
been driven underground—a view that echoes Fortescue and
Pollock. The prospect of humanity’s destroying itself at the spe-
cies level is the definitive infringement of the ‘common good’.
Consequently, Vermeule proposes (p. 69) that judicial review
should interpret the US constitution
to afford public authorities latitude to promote the flourishing
of political communities, by promoting the classical triptych of
peace, justice, and abundance, and their modern equivalents
and corollaries. These include health, safety, and a right rela-
tionship to the natural environment. In a globalized world that
relates to the natural and biological environment in a deeply
disordered way, a just state is a state that has ample authority
to protect the vulnerable from the ravages of pandemics, natu-
ral disasters, and climate change, and from the underlying
structures of corporate power that contribute to these events.
This description of humanity’s relationship with the natural
world and its implications for the common good—and therefore
law—is consistent with our analysis. However, Vermeule refers
to a ‘classical triptych of peace, justice, and abundance’. This
presents a potential conflict with the Paradox Test, which would
require governmental action to be justified on the ground of ne-
cessity not abundance. Abundance is a subjective matter while
necessity is not. A government charged with providing abundant
food and energy will have more latitude to degrade the environ-
ment than one whose duty is to meet the needs of its people.
Vermeule’s source for the triptych is the Reason of State (1589)
in which Botero defines abundance as when people ‘have the nec-
essary food at a good price’ while the duty of government is to
prevent ‘scarcity of provisions and shortage of bread’ [22].
Evidently, Botero is describing necessity not abundance. We will
speak more of necessity below, but the point here is simply that
the classical tradition and common good constitutionalism are
not inconsistent with the Paradox Test. A just government must
protect the environment and provide for people’s needs. Both can
be objectively assessed and there is no trade-off between them
Paradox test in climate litigation
|
5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad005/7223729 by guest on 26 August 2024
since humanity is perfectly capable of meeting its needs without
compromising the environment. The trade-off comes in the pur-
suit of abundance, as we see from the fact that 1% of the world’s
population is responsible for more GHG emissions than the poor-
est half of humanity [23]. Abundance is not part of the common
good, it is destroying it. The correct legal formulation, therefore,
under common law, natural law and common good constitution-
alism, is that humanity cannot lawfully destroy its own habitat
knowing that this will result in the extinction of our species. To do
so is irrational and therefore unlawful.
The test of reasonableness in English judicial
review
The Paradox Test could be applied in three dimensions of public
law: (1) in legislative functions including policy formation, pri-
mary and secondary legislation; (2) in the decisions of govern-
ment
officers
and
agencies
such
as
planning
and
other
permitting functions and (3) by tribunals and courts in appeals
and judicial review.
The Human Rights Act 1998 has changed the nature of judicial
review in England by establishing the rights of the courts to apply
the ECHR to all decisions of public bodies, including primary leg-
islation by the Houses of Parliament. Nonetheless, English public
law is the edge application of the Paradox Test as it has a stricter
and more limited scope of judicial review than most other juris-
dictions; England lacks either a written constitution or a constitu-
tional court and has a doctrine of Parliamentary supremacy. Yet,
in English law, as in any legal system, the rule of law prevails
over all other social, political and economic considerations.
In Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service,
Lord Diplock identified three grounds for judicial review: illegal-
ity, irrationality and procedural impropriety. He added, ‘That is
not to say that further development on a case by case basis may
not in course of time add further grounds’. The courts have been
consistent in their understanding of the ‘illegality’ and ‘proce-
dural impropriety’ tests although the former is now informed by
the application of human rights protections.
By ‘irrationality’ I mean what can by now be succinctly referred
to as ‘Wednesbury unreasonableness’ (Associated Provincial
Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 K.B. 223). It
applies to a decision which is so outrageous in its defiance of
logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person
who had applied his mind to the question to be decided could
have arrived at it. Whether a decision falls within this category
is a question that judges by their training and experience
should be well equipped to answer, or else there would be
something badly wrong with our judicial system [24].
‘Wednesbury unreasonableness’ is generally accepted to be the
strictest interpretation of the ‘irrationality’ test and, as Craig
observes, subsequent judgements have distanced themselves
from it:
This was judicially recognized most explicitly by Lord Cooke,
who regarded Wednesbury as a retrograde decision in terms of
the extremity that the claimant had to prove to succeed . . . It
has moreover been shown that the very narrow interpretation
of reasonableness currently used as the base point does not co-
here with historical usage of the term [25].
Craig was later quoted with approval by the House of Lords in
Kennedy v Charity Commission. Lord Mance described a flexible ap-
proach to judicial review based on the context. This determines
not only the questions that the court will ask in judicial review,
but also the intensity with which it will examine the decision.
The court will consider substance as well as procedure, and fact
as well as law—if the issues at stake justify intense scrutiny:
More recently, the same process was carried further by empha-
sising that the remedy of judicial review is in appropriate cases
apt to cover issues of fact as well as law—see the cases referred
to in para 38 above. As Professor Paul Craig has shown (see e.g.
‘The Nature of Reasonableness’ (2013) 66 CLP 131), both rea-
sonableness review and proportionality involve considerations
of weight and balance, with the intensity of the scrutiny and
the weight to be given to any primary decision maker’s view
depending on the context. The advantage of the terminology of
proportionality is that it introduces an element of structure
into the exercise, by directing attention to factors such as suit-
ability or appropriateness, necessity and the balance or imbal-
ance of benefits and disadvantages. There seems no reason
why such factors should not be relevant in judicial review even
outside the scope of Convention and EU law. Whatever the
context, the court deploying them must be aware that they
overlap potentially and that the intensity with which they are
applied is heavily dependent on the context. In the context of
fundamental rights, it is a truism that the scrutiny is likely to
be more intense than where other interests are involved [26].
Given that the Paradox Test would address the most profound
breach of human rights—species extinction—the most intense
scrutiny would be warranted. On the contextual understanding
of judicial review, the Paradox Test could be applied either as the
main test of irrationality or as part of a broader review of the
merits of the decision. For example, the decisions in our three
cases could all be challenged on the basis of proportionality as
described above by Lord Mance, considering ‘factors such as suit-
ability or appropriateness, necessity and the balance or imbal-
ance of benefits and disadvantages’. A court would struggle to
find any necessity or scientific evidence to justify a ban on on-
shore wind turbines when three UK governments of the same
party promoted three different policies on this within the same
year [27].
But the Paradox Test does not depend on such an analysis or
on a broad understanding of judicial review. It is a test of
Wednesbury unreasonableness applied to a certain category of
government decisions that threaten the species: if there is no ne-
cessity that would justify the scientifically demonstrated conse-
quences of these decisions, they are ‘decisions so outrageous in
their defiance of logic that no sensible person who had applied
their mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at
them’.
In conclusion, the Paradox Test would not be a progressive de-
velopment of the law dependent on the courts expanding the
scope or intensity of judicial review. It would be a conservative
application of common and natural law principles as they have
been understood for over a century and as they are practised as
positive law today. In judicial review, the Paradox Test would be
available on the narrowest not the widest interpretation of judi-
cial review.
Necessity
This section provides some legal context for the idea of necessity,
which would form the second leg of the Paradox Test. If the
Supreme Court was in due course to accept the logic premises of
the first leg of the test, then there would be very little debate
about its application in subsequent cases. It is likely to be on the
second leg where such cases would be fought.
6
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad005/7223729 by guest on 26 August 2024
Before turning to the law, there is one striking example in the
scholarship of the distinction we are seeking to make between
necessity and cost–benefit analysis, in which Wiggins distin-
guishes vital needs from more subjective desires in the context of
planning and development decisions. He questions the ‘pseudo-
science’ of cost–benefit analysis where on one side, there was the
‘“prize of leisure and affluence: mobility” (represented by minutes
or hours saved over various routes multiplied by the projected
number of motorized trips along those routes)’ and on the other
‘the annihilation or degradation of many times more than 20,000
established niches for ordinary citizens to inhabit’ [28]. Unlike a
desire, a need exists objectively: ‘What I need depends not on
thought or the working of my mind (or not only on these), as
wanting or desiring do, but depends on the way things really are’
[29].
There are numerous applications of necessity in law, of which
four are considered here because of their relevance to the present
subject-matter: the common law defence of necessity; necessity
in human rights law and international law and the absence of ne-
cessity in the statutory crime of bribery.
The common law recognizes necessity as a defence. One ex-
ample is where harm is done in the course of medical treatment.
In such cases, the defendant must show: (a) that the act is ‘neces-
sary to avoid inevitable and irreparable evil’; (b) that ‘no more
should be done than is reasonably necessary for the purpose to
be achieved’ and (c) that ‘the evil inflicted must not be dispropor-
tionate to the evil avoided’ [30].
In international law, which is derived from the same classical
tradition as natural law, wrongful conduct by a state may be jus-
tified in case of necessity. This requires the state to satisfy a set
of cumulative conditions including that ‘the act in question is the
only way for it to safeguard an essential interest against a grave
and imminent peril’ [31]. From the above, it is clear that in both
common and natural law traditions, a defence or justification of
necessity is a very strict test.
Several provisions of the ECHR refer to necessity in the context
of restrictions on human rights. The first category relates to the
fundamental rights set out in Articles 2 (Right to life), 5 (Right to
liberty and security) and 6 (Right to a fair trial); in each case there
are exceptions for circumstances, respectively, described as ‘ab-
solutely necessary’, ‘reasonably considered necessary’ or ‘to the
extent strictly necessary’.
In Articles 8 (Right to respect for private and family life), 9
(Freedom of thought, conscience and religion), 10 (Freedom of ex-
pression) and 11 (Freedom of assembly and association), the
ECHR acknowledges that the freedoms may be restricted if inter
alia the restrictions are ‘necessary in a democratic society’. This
phrase has been described as ‘arguably one of the most impor-
tant clauses in the entire Convention’. As with the Paradox Test,
it is necessity that determines when human rights can be re-
stricted. ‘One of the key tasks for the Court and Commission, and
one of the most difficult, is to test the persuasiveness of any such
defence to ensure that it complies with the genuine interests of
democracy and is not merely political expediency in disguise’ [32]
This formulation may be less strict than the way in which ne-
cessity is used in the ‘higher-level’ rights, but it is nonetheless a
strict test. The Court has made frequent statements about the
need to interpret these rules narrowly:
The Court has noted that, whilst the adjective ‘necessary’,
within the meaning of Article 10(2), is not synonymous with
‘indispensable’, neither has it the flexibility of such expres-
sions
as
‘admissible’,
‘ordinary’,
‘useful’,
‘reasonable’
or
‘desirable’ and that it implies the existence of a ‘pressing social
need’ [33].
On the meaning of a ‘pressing social need,’ the Court has stated
that it must
determine whether the reasons adduced by the national au-
thorities to justify the interference were ‘relevant and suffi-
cient’ and whether the measure taken was ‘proportionate to
the legitimate aims pursued’ . . . . In doing so, the Court has to
satisfy itself that the national authorities, basing themselves
on an acceptable assessment of the relevant facts, applied
standards which were in conformity with the principles em-
bodied in Article 10. [references omitted] [34].
In all of the above tests, as with the Paradox Test, the burden of
proof falls on the state (as defendant) to demonstrate that its
actions are necessary. In none of these examples does necessity
mean ‘useful’, ‘reasonable’ or ‘desirable’. In common law, the ac-
tion must also not be worse than the harm it causes and in inter-
national law, it must be the only way to avoid that harm.
Consequently, in any of these areas of law, the action must be
necessary in the sense that there is no better way of achieving the
same end. That will be crucial in many cases where the Paradox
Test would be applied since it would generally be the proposed
means rather than the stated ends that are being challenged.
Finally, there is the Bribery Act 2010. This Act is important not
because it has a defence of necessity, but because it does not. In
addition, the UK statute is based on a theory of change that is
also central to the Paradox Test and all law—which is that indi-
vidual decisions matter.
Bribes take two forms: payments to officials to act improperly
and bribes to officials to do their job—the latter known as facilita-
tion payments. There are many countries where facilitation pay-
ments are common—from securing a doctor’s appointment to
being granted an entry visa. Corruption of this nature is a sys-
temic problem and it could be argued that whether a British com-
pany or individual pays a bribe does not in itself changes the
system. In addition, it is quite likely that a company that does
not pay bribes will not be able to operate in some countries.
Nonetheless, there is no defence of necessity for facilitation
payments in the UK (unlike the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act).
As the UK government points out:
[The OECD)] recognises the corrosive effect of facilitation pay-
ments and asks adhering countries to discourage companies
from making such payments. Exemptions in this context cre-
ate artificial distinctions that are difficult to enforce, under-
mine corporate anti-bribery procedures, confuse anti-bribery
communication with employees and other associated persons,
perpetuate an existing ‘culture’ of bribery and have the poten-
tial to be abused [35].
Accordingly, the Crown Prosecution Service advises: ‘There is no
exemption in respect of facilitation payments. They were illegal
under the previous legislation and the common law and remain
so under the Act’ [36].
Just as it is argued that one new oil exploration license will not
in itself destroy the human species, so it is argued that one small
bribe does not corrupt a country. And just as there may be a
short-term argument for relaxing environmental standards to
promote national business and economic interests, so there
might be for turning a blind eye to bribery that wins business for
British companies. And yet, there is no defence of necessity in the
Bribery Act.
Paradox test in climate litigation
|
7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad005/7223729 by guest on 26 August 2024
The logic behind the Bribery Act 2010 is the logic behind the
Paradox Test. The courts can only review the cases that come be-
fore them. Every bribe—in fact every criminal act—when looked
at in isolation could be ignored. But the rule of law is built up of
one decision at a time. A healthy legal system is built on the indi-
vidual decisions of the courts. And the corruption of institutions
starts with one bribe and continues with each new one. So, as we
make decision after decision that individually and collectively de-
stroy our habitat the only option available to the courts is to
strike down those decisions, one at a time. This is how the law
works, whether it is to eliminate bribery or to protect the environ-
ment.
Conclusion
This article has argued that it is objectively irrational and con-
trary to the laws of nature that a species should knowingly de-
stroy its own habitat and thereby put its own survival at risk.
That humans are doing this, and the consequences of our
actions, can be demonstrated objectively through scientific evi-
dence. The only defence for governmental actions that take the
human species further down this path is necessity. This concept
is present in other areas of law and is a strict and objective test.
From these two principles, it follows that the common and natu-
ral law traditions, which base themselves on the application of
reason to the laws of nature, would declare such conduct irratio-
nal and unlawful. The Paradox Test is therefore proposed as a
statement of the law as it would apply to such cases.
We now invite legal practitioners to apply the Paradox Test in
their own litigation. To do this, they would need to assemble the
scientific evidence that the decision they are challenging will
contribute to the destruction of the human habitat and that there
is no necessity to justify it. They must avoid the trap of mistaking
good ends with bad means by focusing on whether the means are
the only way to achieve the proposed end. They will need to
adapt the Test to their jurisprudence and legal systems. They
may use the Test as an additional argument, as part of a test
such as ‘Wednesbury unreasonableness’ in the English courts, or
as an evidential structure for existing tests. Substantively, it
might sit within constitutional provisions that protect human
rights or as a separate layer of protection operating at the species
level. Some may wish to develop and apply it in private law.
Practitioners and jurists are invited to share their approach
and their experience in court with the corresponding author so
that we can collectively develop the Paradox Test as a global prin-
ciple of climate and environmental litigation. We hope that the
ingenuity of lawyers and the diversity of international jurispru-
dence will stimulate the evolution of this doctrine for the benefit
of all.
Conflict of interest
None declared.
Authors’ Contributions
Adam Parr (Conceptualization [lead], Writing—original draft [lead]).
References
1.
Aristotle. Nichomachean Ethics. 1134b. In: H. Rackham (ed.),
Aristotle in 23 Volumes. Vol. 19. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press (Perseus Digital Library: Tufts University), 1934. Accessed 1
February 2023.
2.
Warnock C, Preston BJ. Climate change, fundamental rights,
and statutory interpretation. J Environ Law 2023;35:47–64.
3.
Brysse K, Oreskes N, O’Reilly J et al. Climate change prediction:
erring on the side of least drama? Global Environ Change 2013;23:
327–37.
4.
Brown O. Migration and Climate Change. IOM Migration Research
Series No. 31, Geneva: International Organization for Migration,
2008.
5.
Bradshaw CJA, Ehrlich PR, Beattie A et al. Response: commen-
tary: underestimating the challenges of avoiding a ghastly fu-
ture. Front Conserv Sci 2021, p. 2.
6.
Cox R, Reij M. Defending the Danger Line: A Manual for Climate
Litigators. Amsterdam: Paulussen Advocaten and Milieudefensie,
2022, p. 11.
7.
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. Global
Biodiversity Outlook 5—Summary for Policy Makers. Montre´al, 2020,
p. 3, 8, 9, 10.
8.
Stern NH. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review.
Cambridge, 2007, p. 65, 3. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO978051
1817434.
9.
United Nations Environment Programme. Emissions Gap Report
2022:
The
Closing
Window—Climate
Crisis
Calls
for
Rapid
Transformation of Societies. Nairobi, 2022, p. xvi, xv, xxv, xxvi.
10.
Boehm S, Jeffery L, Levin K et al. State of Climate Action 2022.
United States of America: WRI: World Resources Institute, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.46830/wrirpt.22.00028.
11.
Natural Capital Committee. Final response to the 25 year environ-
ment plan progress report, London: Report to Parliament, 2020.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/sys
tem/uploads/attachment_data/ﬁle/933803/ncc-ﬁnal-response-25yr-
env-plan.pdf.
12.
Ofﬁce for Environmental Protection. Progress in improving the
natural environment in England, 2021/2022. London: Report to
Parliament, 2023.
13.
Climate Change Committee. Progress in reducing emissions
2022. London: Report to Parliament, 2022, pp. 21–22.
14.
Carnwath R. Climate Change and the Rule of Law. Bucerius School,
Germany, 2021 (citing Juliana v United States No. 18-36082 D.C.
No. 6:15-cv-01517-AA).
15.
Cosgrove RA. The Rule of Law: Albert Venn Dicey, Victorian Jurist.
1980, p. 177. (Quoted in Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for
the Civil Service [1985] AC 374, [1984] 3 All ER 935, [1985] IRLR 28,
per Lord Roskill at 417).
16.
George RP. Natural law. Harv J Law Public Policy 2008;31:171–96,
73.
17.
Donnelly B, Bishop P. Natural law and ecocentrism. J Environ
Law 2007;19:89–102.
18.
Finnis J, Boyle J, Grisez G. Nuclear Deterrence, Morality and Realism.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987.
19.
Pollock F. The Expansion of the Common Law. London: Stevens and
Sons, 1904, pp. 124–26.
20.
Pollock F. The history of the law of nature: a preliminary study. J
Soc Comp Legislation 1900;2:418–33, 418.
21.
Vermeule A. Common Good Constitutionalism. Kindle edition.
Polity Press, 2022, p. 12.
22.
Botero G. The Reason of State (R Bireley, transl.). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2017, 71–2.
23.
Chancel L, Bothe P, Voituriez T. Climate inequality report 2023,
World Inequality Lab Study, 2023/1. https://wid.world/docu
ment/climate-inequality-report-2023.
8
|
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2023, Vol. 3, No. 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad005/7223729 by guest on 26 August 2024
24.
Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service
[1985] AC 374, [1984] 3 All ER 935, [1985] IRLR 28, per Lord
Diplock; 407ff.
25.
Craig P. The Nature of Reasonableness Review. 66 CLP 2013, 131–67
(citing Lord Cooke in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department,
Exp Daly [2001] 2 AC 532, 549 and T Hickman, Public Law after the
Human Rights Act (Hart 2010) Ch 7).
26.
Kennedy v Charity Commission [2014] UKSC 20 at [54].
27.
Pickard J. Boris Johnson and Liz Truss join Tory rebellion over
onshore wind farms. Financial Times, 24 November, 2022.
28.
Wiggins D. An idea we cannot do without: What difference will it
make (e.g. to moral, political and environmental philosophy) to rec-
ognize and put to use a substantial conception of need? R Inst Philos
Suppl 2005;57:25–50, 27. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246100009139.
29.
Wiggins D, Dermen S. Needs, need, needing. J Med Ethics 1987;13:
62–8, 62.
30.
Halsbury’s Laws of England. Criminal Law Volume, Vol. 25,
London: Lexis Nexis, 2020, §51.
31.
Halsbury’s Laws of England. International Law and Foreign
Relations, Vol. 61, London: Lexis Nexis, 2018, §358.
32.
Greer SC. The Exceptions to Articles 8 to 11 of the European
Convention on Human Rights. Human Rights Files No. 15. Council of
Europe Publishing, 1997, 14. https://book.coe.int/en/human-
rights-ﬁles/717-the-exceptions-to-article-8-to-11-of-the-euro
pean-convention-on-human-rights-human-rights-ﬁles-no-15.
html.
33.
Sunday Times (No. 1) v. the United Kingdom, 1979, §59. (Cited in
Mendel T. A Guide to the Interpretation and Meaning of Article 10 of
the European Convention on Human Rights. Centre for Law and
Democracy, 2012, 39.)
34.
Cumpana and Mazare v. Romania, 2004, §90. (Cited in Mendel
(note 33); 39).
35.
Ministry of Justice, Bribery Act, 2010 (Guidance, 2011).
36.
Crown Prosecution Service. Bribery Act 2010: Joint Prosecution
Guidance of the Director of the Serious Fraud Ofﬁce and the Director of
Public Prosecutions, 2019.
Paradox test in climate litigation
|
9
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/3/1/kgad005/7223729 by guest on 26 August 2024
