Pathways versus incentives: climate activism to climate 
aligned portfolio management
Marc Roston 
1,, Julien Maire1, Alicia Seiger1, Thomas Heller1,2 
1Sustainable Finance Initiative, Precourt Institute for Energy, , Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United States 
2Stanford Law School, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United States
Corresponding author. Sustainable Finance Initiative, Precourt Institute for Energy, Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability, Stanford University, 473 Via Ortega, 
Stanford, CA 94305. USA. E-mail: mroston@stanford.edu
Abstract 
Climate activists have pressured financial institutions to accelerate global decarbonization by aligning portfolios with Paris 
Agreement transition pathways and targets. We trace the progression from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
and International Energy Agency (IEA) scenarios to corporate target setting via the Science-Based Targets Initiative (SBTi) and finan­
cial institutions’ portfolio alignment methods. We identify three critical weaknesses that will limit efficacy: the absence of rigorous 
GHG emissions accounting, reliance on centrally planned pathways, and tension with fiduciary duties. These issues undermine the 
theory of change behind activist and financial sector efforts. As an alternative, we propose Emissions Liability Management (ELM) 
which treats emissions as liabilities matched by removal assets, directing firms to maintain emissions solvency. Rather than chasing 
pathways, ELM provides incentives for emissions reductions and removals consistent with shareholder obligations derived from 
market prices. By reframing climate action in financial terms, ELM can engage financial markets as agents of change in a manner 
grounded in sound economics.
Keywords: carbon accounting, financed emissions, portfolio alignment, emissions liability management, transition finance, transi­
tion pathways 
Introduction
In late 2019, Bill McKibben, a leader of the fossil fuel divestment 
movement, challenged climate activists to follow the money [1]. 
Financial institutions quickly supplanted fossil fuel companies 
as the primary targets of a coordinated effort to accelerate decar­
bonization by applying stakeholder pressure and pursuing regu­
latory oversight. In less than 2 years, a global coalition of 
financial services firms announced the formation of the Glasgow 
Financial Alliance for Net Zero (“GFANZ”) at COP26. By 
September 2023, GFANZ had assembled more than 550 financial 
firms across fifty countries representing more than $150 trillion 
of assets committed to alignment with 2050 Paris Agreement tar­
gets. GFANZ advocates operate under a theory of change that fi­
nancial institutions can drive the global economy to net zero 
emissions in 2050 by harmonizing portfolios with Paris-aligned 
pathways, targets, and plans.
The practice of portfolio alignment builds on disclosures of 
emissions inventories and estimates of financed emissions to 
steer toward a series of target dates for reductions consistent 
with a global budget determined in the absence of government 
action and voluntarily agreed to by capital allocators. In theory, 
portfolio alignment with targets functions like a report card on 
transition progress.
This paper challenges the efficacy of portfolio alignment as a 
means either to drive, or even to evaluate, capital allocation in 
support of the economic transformation required by global 
climate ambitions. We identify foundational flaws, not idiosyn­
crasies of particular implementations. We propose emissions lia­
bility management (ELM) first described in Roston, Seiger and 
Heller as a fit-to-purpose course correction [2]. Coherent carbon 
accounting and the pursuit of carbon solvency uproot the disclo­
sure and divestment genealogy of portfolio alignment, clearing 
the path to investments favoring a low carbon economy.
In the first section, we describe the links from climate scenar­
ios to transition pathways and corresponding corporate climate 
targets at the sectoral level. We then describe the various tools 
used by financial institutions that attempt to measure portfolio 
alignment with sectoral transition pathways. We also review cur­
rent transition plan frameworks that provide guidance on the 
ways companies and financial institutions should disclose their 
strategy to reach climate targets.
In the second section, we identify three critical concerns that 
impede financial institutions as change agents under current 
practice. First, carbon emissions counting practices inherent to 
the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol distort emissions quantifica­
tion and attribution thereby undermining the information essen­
tial to capital allocation efforts. Second, the portfolio alignment 
process demands investors hew to exogenous prescriptive tech­
nological pathways. Third, portfolio managers and corporate 
executives will struggle to reconcile their fiduciary obligations 
with prescriptive pathways. These concerns conspire to under­
mine current practice, reducing the likelihood of significant 
emissions reductions.
Received: October 24, 2023. Revised: May 08, 2024. Accepted: June 03, 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, 4(1), kgae013  
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgae013 
Advance Access Publication Date: 29 July 2024 
Perspective Article   
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae013/7723598 by guest on 26 August 2024
In the third section, we discuss ELM as a parsimonious alter­
native to portfolio alignment tools. ELM treats GHG emissions 
as a liability that must be defeased by a carbon removal asset. 
A firm with carbon assets greater than or equal to emissions lia­
bilities is solvent. Firms decarbonize operations and supply 
chains because the price of carbon removal assets exceeds decar­
bonization costs. Portfolio managers allocate capital to optimize 
investment returns considering expected future carbon removal 
costs. A framework that flows from an endogenous carbon price 
ensures effective capital allocation consistently applied either by 
voluntary actors or agents under a compliance regime. We con­
clude with further implications for portfolio management prac­
tice in the context of well-established economic theory.
Corporate targets and portfolio alignment
All firms, financial and non-financial, engage in investment ac­
tivities. Applying pressure via investment activities to financial 
institutions, therefore, requires understanding non-financial 
firm alignment as a set of initial conditions. We begin with the 
basis for corporate (non-financial) target setting aligned with 
transition pathways and scenarios. We then turn to financial- 
institution-specific measures of target setting and alignment. We 
do not intend to exhaustively discuss all portfolio alignment 
methods. They share fundamental approaches and characteris­
tics that we will evaluate in the next section.
The Science-Based Targets Initiative (SBTi) provides primary 
guidance to the corporate sector on emissions reduction path­
ways informing company-specific emissions reduction targets at 
different time horizons (e.g. 2030, 2050). The Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the International Energy 
Agency (IEA) develop climate scenarios and sectoral pathways 
based on an IPCC Paris-Aligned global carbon budget. SBTi trans­
lates climate scenarios and sectoral pathways into methods by 
which a company sets its own targets. Finally, SBTi approves 
those 
targets. 
Complementarily, 
the 
Transition 
Pathway 
Initiative (TPI) provides a heuristic approach to evaluating corpo­
rate alignment with sectoral climate targets in the short-, me­
dium- and long-term.
We first review portfolio alignment approaches developed by 
SBTi and GFANZ, that subsumed earlier work by the Portfolio 
Alignment Team [3, 4]. Then, we turn to the Paris Agreement 
Capital Transition Assessment (PACTA) approach that aggregates 
physical assets at the security level to evaluate alignment. 
Finally, we review the recently announced Transition Plan 
Taskforce (TPT) framework. Figure 1 illustrates the relationships 
between the various organizations and approaches discussed in 
this section.
Corporate targets
SBTi sets standards for aligning companies’ targets with emis­
sions reduction pathways [5, 6]. SBTi strategy takes as given the 
global carbon budget (i.e. the aggregate net emissions allowable 
to limit temperature rise with some probability, e.g. 1.5C with 
50% probability) and an emissions scenario (i.e. the carbon bud­
get distribution through time and across sectors), then provides 
an allocation method (i.e. how a carbon budget is allocated 
across companies.)
SBTi-compliant firms then use one of two methods to set their 
own targets. The absolute contraction approach (ACA) requires com­
panies reduce their absolute emissions at the same rate, versus 
the sectoral decarbonization approach (SDA) (sometimes called 
the sector-specific intensity convergence approach) that requires 
each company within a sector reduce its emissions intensity to a 
sector-specific, target-date-specific level, based on market share. 
ACA applies to sectors lacking technological pathways for decar­
bonization; SDA to sectors with well-defined technological path­
ways, or homogenous carbon-intensive sectors described with a 
single physical indicator [7]. For instance, SBTi recommends us­
ing the ACA for the apparel and footwear sector because no ap­
parent technology drives reductions. In contrast, power sectors 
have demand-projected pathways dependent on feasible, if 
costly, technology.
Two-thirds of companies with SBTi-approved targets follow 
the ACA [8]. This method calculates minimum annual reduction 
rates to limit warming well-below 2C. SBTi aligns with an enve­
lope scenario aggregated from IPCC scenarios that differ by decar­
bonization rate, peak emissions year, and carbon offset-reliance. 
Additionally, the envelope scenario excludes ACA scenarios 
where emissions do not peak in the 2020 timestep and where an­
nual linear reduction (2020–2035) is in the least ambitious 20th 
percentile. According to the ACA, Paris Agreement alignment 
requires 4.2% annual reductions [8].
The SDA method relies on IEA sectoral mitigation pathways 
derived from Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) tailored to 
the specificities and constraints of each sector. Such pathways 
require assumptions about highly uncertain technology-specific 
future marginal abatement costs and economic growth inherent 
to all IAMs.
The Transition Pathway Initiative (TPI), overseen by the 
Grantham Research Institute at the London School of Economics 
and supported by asset owners and managers, provides a compli­
mentary approach to SBTi [9]. TPI’s carbon performance metric 
measures corporate alignment based on individual firm’s dis­
closed deviations from a sector-based carbon intensity measure 
for short-, medium- and long-term targets for 2025, 2030 and 
2050, respectively. TPI has several other climate assessment 
tools, including a pilot framework examining banks’ forward- 
looking preparedness for and support of a climate transition [10].
Portfolio alignment
Portfolio alignment for a financial institution requires metrics 
allowing aggregation of underlying corporate targets and prog­
ress toward such targets. With some implementation variation, 
financial institutions follow three steps to align their portfolios: 
climate metric choice (e.g. absolute emissions, emissions inten­
sity, implied temperature rise, attribution factor, inclusion of 
Scope 3 emissions, etc.), climate scenario choice, and climate tar­
get definition. SBTi is one instantiation of this three-step process.
SBTi for financial institutions
SBTi guidance for financial institutions parallels transition path­
ways defined for any other sector, adding the distinction between 
operational emissions and financed emissions (e.g. from invest­
ment and lending activities) [11]. Operational emissions targets 
for financial institutions function similarly to any other services 
firm. Tackling portfolio emissions involves multiple possible 
approaches, such that SBTi recommends one of three options: 
the sectoral decarbonization approach (SDA) applied at the port­
folio level, the portfolio coverage approach, or the temperature 
rating approach. (However, Roston notes that (a) the concept of 
aggregating financed emissions that include Scope 3 across firms 
violates the GHG Protocol guidance against aggregating down­
stream emissions across firms, and (b) financed emissions 
applies inconsistently across service sector firms, e.g. consulting 
and transportation [12].)
2 | Roston et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae013/7723598 by guest on 26 August 2024
Under portfolio-level SDA, financial institutions begin by cal­
culating baseline GHG Protocol emissions (Scopes 1, 2 and 3) for 
all portfolio companies. These measures serve as inputs into 
Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials (PCAF) attribution 
approaches based on the particular securities or investments 
held and PCAF’s role as the arbiter of financed emissions under 
Scope 3 Category 15 [13]. The financial institution seeks to avoid 
investments that drive deviations from SDA convergence.
Under the portfolio coverage approach, the share of portfolio 
firms with SBTi targets informs decision-making (e.g. an asset 
manager commits that 30% of its portfolio for an asset class or a 
specific sector will have targets by 2025.) Again, implementation 
drives an investor or bank to reduce exposure to non-compliant 
investments.
The temperature rating approach aims to translate portfolio 
companies’ climate targets into a long-term temperature score. 
First, a financial institution, following SBTi’s or their proprietary 
methods, estimates the relationship between companies’ targets 
and global temperature outcomes. Second, by portfolio level ag­
gregation (by various weighting schemes) the financial institution 
calculates an emissions impact measure. Finally, the emissions 
impact measure from the second step maps to a temperature 
outcome from the first step.
GFANZ
In parallel, GFANZ has proposed four tools to evaluate portfolio 
Paris-alignment with the stated goal of moving beyond divest­
ment and toward effective practitioner engagement [14]. 
GFANZ’s binary targets metric closely aligns with the SBTi 
portfolio coverage approach, encouraging increasing target set­
ting for a portfolio’s holdings. The implied temperature rise metric 
mirrors the SBTi temperature rating approach attempting to cal­
culate a portfolio-aligned temperature.
The novel benchmark divergence metric, with no SBTi analog, 
compares a company’s projected cumulative emissions with a 
sector specific benchmark to identify under- and over-shooting 
reductions at the portfolio level.
The final GFANZ tool assigns companies based on quantita­
tive and qualitative factors to performance categories (“aligned,” 
“aligning,” “committed to aligning,” or “not aligned”) including 
criteria 
of 
stated 
targets, 
past 
performance, 
disclosure, 
and governance.
PACTA
PACTA provides yet another method to measure portfolio align­
ment with transition pathways [15]. Unlike GFANZ and SBTi that 
focus on emissions, PACTA is technology focused and takes a 
bottom-up approach linking financial instruments to specific 
physical assets (e.g. a firm’s particular steel smelting technol­
ogy), then evaluating asset alignment with technological decar­
bonization 
pathways. 
This 
method 
more 
directly 
links 
technologies with Paris Agreement goals and favors engagement 
over divestment.
Importantly, PACTA departs from targeting financed emis­
sions and instead primarily focuses on deployment of technolo­
gies that could reach Paris Agreement goals, thereby avoiding 
direct reliance on the GHG Protocol.
Porolio Alignment Tools
SBTi Financial Sector and GFANZ
Corporate Sector Targets
SBTi
Global Carbon Budget
IPCC & IEA
Carbon Coun!ng
GHG Protocol
Scope 1
Scope 2
Scope 3 
PCAF
Progress Evalua!on
TPI
Planning Frameworks
GFANZ and TPT
Technology Alignment
PACTA
Technology
Sectors
Time
Alignment Measures
Figure 1. Corporate and financial transition: targets, pathways and tools. The IPCC defines a global carbon budget and the IPCC and IEA allocate 
emissions based on identified technologies across sectors and through time. SBTi and other target-setting organizations filter the global carbon budget 
through the GHG Protocol carbon counting practices. The corporate sector sets targets, typically approved by SBTi. GFANZ and TPT provide methods to 
define financial institution plans. SBTi and GFANZ tools evaluate portfolio alignment, and TPI assesses financial institutions alignment progress. 
GFANZ, TPT, TPI plans and tools interact with each other over time. PACTA bypasses emissions counting, relying on prescribed technologies to 
assess alignment.
Pathways versus incentives | 3  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae013/7723598 by guest on 26 August 2024
Transition Plan Taskforce
Setting targets is easy. Many companies have set climate targets 
following SBTi or other approaches. Few provide clarity into tran­
sition plans for achieving targets. Similarly, portfolios may set 
PACTA or GFANZ informed targets, but laying plans to meet 
those targets raises a different set of challenges discussed in the 
Conclusion of the paper. The Transition Plan Taskforce (TPT) has 
emerged as a leading force providing clarity and guidance into 
transition plans to meet targets [16].
TPT, launched by HM Treasury, aims to become the arbiter of 
transition plans. Unlike other frameworks and standards, TPT 
grew out of the need for the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), 
the UK financial regulator, to implement new climate disclosure 
rules [17]. TPT implementation requires firms to: disclose objec­
tives, priorities, and targets at various time horizons as well as 
impacts on their business models; prepare implementation strat­
egy and underlying assumptions supporting that strategy; de­
scribe stakeholder engagement approaches; and establish 
internal evaluation metrics and governance strategy.
Evaluating progress and potential
The corporate target-setting methods and portfolio alignment 
tools described in the previous section share core characteristics, 
in large part because they are successive tools attempting to 
build upon and improve earlier iterations. This patchwork ap­
proach does not solve the three fundamental weaknesses de­
scribed in this section: (i) faulty carbon accounting; (ii) inflexible, 
centrally planned pathways; and (iii) difficult-to-reconcile chal­
lenges with fiduciary obligations.
Faulty counting foundations
SBTi targets rely on GHG Protocol Scopes 1, 2 and 3, (direct emis­
sions, purchased-energy emissions, and value-chain emissions, 
respectively.) A company setting targets and forward commit­
ments, therefore, must estimate its own future direct emissions 
under ACA or SDA, its electricity provider’s future emissions un­
der SDA, and its entire future value chain under ACA or SDA, as 
appropriate, for the varied sectors of their suppliers and custom­
ers. This methodology raises serious credibility concerns. Only 
Scope 1 emissions enter the atmosphere. Scope 2 attempts to 
count another firm’s emissions attributed to purchased electric­
ity, heating, and cooling but in practice falls short, only counting 
a subset of combustion emissions [18]. Scope 3, due to ambiguous 
boundaries and implementation discretion, arbitrarily, inconsis­
tently, and unknowably overcounts emissions [12, 19]. A com­
pany cannot credibly commit to current or future targets tied to 
ambiguous boundaries or activities outside its control.
Rekker et al. also notes that SBTi allows firms to select favor­
able baseline measures [20]. SBTi transition pathways are un­
likely to add-up globally, as emerging markets and developing 
economies face technological and financial constraints to SDA 
alignment. Finally, recent empirical work has considered SBTi 
target-setting efficacy, finding limited support [21, 22].
The challenges compound for financial institutions as a 
change-agent. Roston observes the inherent contradiction in 
Scope 3 calculations: the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard spe­
cifically prohibits comparing emissions across firms yet financed 
emissions calculations (Scope 3 Category 15) require adding 
them—which only makes sense if they are comparable [12]. As 
Jia et al. and Roston, Seiger and Heller note a carbon accounting 
system must be mutually exclusive and comprehensively ex­
haustive [2, 23]. As more tools build on the GHG Protocol, it 
crumbles as a foundation for identifying and evaluating emis­
sions reductions.
The limits of central planning
Transition pathways fail reasonable tests of robustness because 
they depend on exogenously specified, deterministic technologi­
cal diffusion rather than endogenous investment decisions or 
capital allocation.
Climate scenarios
The IPCC proposes climate scenarios describing a representative 
outcome of aggregated uncertainty across underlying model var­
iants and risks. Thus, any particular climate scenario represents 
one possible path for emissions, economic activity, technological 
diffusion, and other risks and uncertainties. Investors have 
slowly repurposed climate scenarios as normative pathways de­
spite their origins as policy tools. SBTi treats scenarios as deter­
ministic, much like technological pathways—planned normative 
outcomes—not flexible drivers of incentives and investment.
Decarbonization approaches
Under SBTi’s SDA, firm carbon intensities converge to sector tar­
gets by 2050. Financial institutions might identify holdings devi­
ating from these pathways, but identifying deviations does not 
inform effective decision-making for investors. These rules tell 
investors which companies should enter a portfolio, and which 
should not, based on current characteristics. Nothing in this ap­
proach tells investors how to make tradeoffs between the two, or 
why investors might benefit. Indeed, any approach focused on 
current financed emissions more likely supports divestment (an­
other exogenous rule) rather than engagement or transforma­
tion. (See, e.g. [24]. We distinguish between absolute and relative 
divestment strategies. Absolute divestment rules likely hit other 
binding constraints on portfolio construction. Engagement and 
transformation require expectations of future costs, to which we 
return in the concluding section.) SBTi’s ACA takes a further 
step, constructing reduction pathways to which firms must hew, 
without a technological (or other) basis.
The global emissions budget allocation defining sectoral tran­
sition pathways does not allow for economic or financial varia­
tion. For example, developing economies likely cannot follow 
transition pathways of wealthier nations. SDA convergence 
around the globe demands more than a central authority point­
ing to identifiable technologies that exist. Failing to account for 
these limitations, especially in the short- and medium-run, 
undermines the relevance and efficacy of any sector allocation of 
the global carbon budget, sectoral transition pathways, or cli­
mate targets.
TPI’s carbon performance metric sidesteps the details of SBTi 
targets, presenting asset managers a simpler, potentially compli­
mentary approach. TPI jumps over the company specific initial 
conditions and approaches to sectoral pathways or evaluations 
of commitment intentions, instead relying entirely on alignment 
with general sectoral pathways. While TPI might remove judge­
ment from pathway deviations, it still ties firms most closely to 
central planning approaches.
Fiduciary obligations
Ostensibly committed to limiting global warming to 1.5C, Paris- 
aligned firms must confront their obligations to pursue climate 
goals while maximizing shareholder value over a given time hori­
zon. (Shareholder value may simply follow Friedman, focusing 
on shareholder returns, or broader measures with ethical or 
4 | Roston et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae013/7723598 by guest on 26 August 2024
external implications, following Hart and Zingales, among others 
[25, 26].) Similarly, asset managers must reconcile climate goals 
with obligations to serve their clients’ interests. And the apparent 
need for coordination absent legislative action must align with 
(real or imagined) anti-trust concerns.
Asset managers have many ways to justify the pursuit of net 
zero targets in the best interest of shareholders and clients. For 
example, Roston argues that climate change and carbon emis­
sions might logically indicate exposures to risk factors that could 
impact a firm or a portfolio in the future [27]. A manager’s pur­
suit of net zero therefore amounts to an insurance-like action 
taken considering an uncertain future. Corporate executives and 
boards regularly make risky investment decisions with share­
holder capital that might diverge from consensus. They do not 
exclusively focus on generally known risks or opportunities. In 
fact, those decisions describe executive “skill.” The reason a 
board employs a particular CEO is her unique perspective that 
deviates from competitors’ tactics or strategy.
The same holds for investment managers: disparate invest­
ment decisions driven by proprietary data or insights describe 
the elusive “alpha” or excess returns in investment portfolios. 
Shareholders and investors reconcile these differences within the 
framework of fiduciary expectations.
While supporting emissions reductions to ensure long-term 
sustainability of individual firms, portfolios, or even clients 
themselves supports global interests [28], firms and portfolio 
managers pursuing the transition should not hide the fact that 
emissions reductions, beyond a certain threshold, involve trade­
offs with fiduciary obligations [29]. If a company or portfolio 
manager significantly decreases its emissions (footprint or fi­
nancing) in the short-run, short-term performance may suffer 
even 
when 
shareholders 
or 
clients 
clearly 
understand 
the tradeoffs.
These tradeoffs are particularly salient in the case of current 
climate-target setting to the extent that companies and financial 
institutions have no legal or financial obligation to align with a 
1.5C trajectory. Current approaches to corporate and financial 
institution alignment ignore this entirely, limiting the scope of 
most actions to pre-emptive compliance functions, likely jeopar­
dizing success.
To overcome fiduciary concerns, companies and financial 
institutions must be clear about their approach to climate risks, 
explaining tradeoffs between climate risks, long-term opportuni­
ties, and near-term returns. Finally, stakeholders and regulators 
alike must understand that meaningful climate strategy provides 
competitive advantages, not a disclosure and compliance func­
tion. Figure 2 identifies, relative to Fig. 1, the incidence of the pre­
ceding weaknesses.
Incentive alignment
Climate target setting and transition pathway management have 
fundamental challenges that will continue to limit practitioners’ 
ability to achieve desired outcomes. This section presents a more 
robust and effective approach to accelerate decarbonization, 
building on the well-understood financial tools of cost account­
ing and asset-liability matching that provide managers and 
investors decision-useful incentives to align with a low car­
bon future.
Carbon accounting
To effectively transition our global economy from high- to low- 
carbon, a system of transparent and expedient information shar­
ing must emerge. A critical foundation is functional carbon 
accounting. The GHG Protocol—the system that underpins cur­
rent measurement—was not designed as an accounting system 
though it is being used for that purpose today [12].
Kaplan and Ramanna [19] developed the E-liability method as 
a functional carbon accounting system. This approach applies 
principles of cost accounting to carbon emissions, passing actual 
emissions from supplier to customer in a similar fashion to the 
transfer of goods and services. At each step in a supply chain, a 
firm inherits input goods and services from suppliers and the as­
sociated embodied emissions of those goods and services, adds 
its direct emissions to products or services, and passes those in­
cremental emissions to customers. Thus, any firm knows and 
reports its cradle-to-gate emissions simply by receiving E-Liabilities 
from direct suppliers and knowing its own direct emissions. No esti­
mates. No industry averages. (A detailed treatment of E-Liability 
accounting falls beyond the scope of this paper. Readers unfamil­
iar should review the source material.)
E-liability accounting is mutually exclusive and comprehen­
sively exhaustive—an essential characteristic of a valid account­
ing system [23]. E-liability accounting maintains consistency at 
any level of aggregation: across a supply chain, at a regional, na­
tional, or global level. Finally, E-liability accounting enables fi­
nancial institutions to accurately calculate financed emissions. 
The next section describes a method to coherently endogenize 
carbon pricing across a supply chain, financial portfolio, or the 
global economy in the absence of global regulation.
Emissions liability management
While accurate carbon accounting through the E-liability method 
is a necessary step to reduce emissions, it will not be sufficient to 
achieve climate goals defined by the Paris Agreement. Roston, 
Seiger and Heller propose Emissions Liability Management (ELM) 
as a method that equates a net zero claim with carbon balance 
sheet solvency: carbon emissions create long duration liabilities 
(E-liabilities) that a firm must defease with duration-matched 
carbon removal assets (E-Assets) [2]. (For a detailed discussion of 
E-assets, see [30].)
A firm accounts for cradle-to-gate embodied emissions—in 
GHG Protocol language, actual upstream Scope 3 (versus esti­
mates), actual emissions from purchased heat and electricity (not 
Scope 2 estimates [18]), and Scope 1 emissions. The firm may al­
locate those E-Liabilities appropriately to goods or services 
passed to customers. Or, the firm may retain those E-Liabilities, 
matching them with E-Assets on a solvent carbon balance sheet.
Under this approach, a “net zero” firm removes from the atmo­
sphere all the emissions it produces, from cradle to gate. As impor­
tantly, a net zero firm will reduce supply chain emissions directly 
because the cost of defeasing E-Liabilities with E-Assets typically 
will exceed the cost of avoiding E-Liabilities in the first place. 
Similarly, a firm produces a net zero product by passing zero E-li­
abilities to customers, retaining all supply chain E-liabilities.
In this framework, the market price of durable removals pro­
vides the price signal to internalize the externality of emissions. 
A firm would prefer spending to reduce emissions rather than 
paying the price to remove emissions. Thus, ELM defines a target 
outcome (“no additional atmospheric CO2,” or a meaningful defi­
nition of “net zero”) that leads to effective emissions reductions 
(“reductions cost less than removals.”) For ELM motivation and 
details, see [2].
Capital allocation
In contrast to SBTi and other frameworks, ELM does not tie firm 
risks to particular climate scenarios, requires no predictions of 
Pathways versus incentives | 5  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae013/7723598 by guest on 26 August 2024
technological pathways or assumptions about diffusion of such 
technologies, and builds on the way financial institutions already 
think about capital allocation and investment decisions.
For example, In the language of asset management, Roston 
[27] and Bolton, Kacperczyk and Samama [31] trade-off current 
period emissions with tracking error without incorporating dispa­
rate beliefs about strategy, credibility, or forward-looking goals in 
a single period optimization. Both simply set a current portfolio 
decarbonization target, optimize, and construct a portfolio. 
Portfolio alignment tools attempt the same exercise over longer 
horizons which violates rules of economic theory, discussed fur­
ther in the conclusion. Capital consumption attributed to 
expected costs of E-Assets under ELM would function as differen­
tiated signals based on public and private information.
Carbon solvency sets an unambiguous standard for firm net 
zero goals. Calculate liabilities. Calculate assets. If assets meet or 
exceed liabilities, carbon solvency holds. Absent carbon solvency, 
a firm cannot make net zero claims. While Kaplan, Ramanna and 
Roston [24] suggest the emissions liability duration ought to be 
one thousand years, in practice firms might simply set a duration 
liability and a plan to increase that duration. Investors and lend­
ers would see current and future expected capital consumption 
demanded by E-asset purchases, allowing them to evaluate emis­
sions reduction pathways of individual firms based on specific 
circumstances and actions. Whether a firm chooses its own lia­
bility duration, or policymakers impose one, the duration drives 
a market for the appropriate removals. Moreover, in the absence 
of legislative action, ELM relies on market prices for E-assets to 
drive decarbonization—rather than an arbitrary and potentially 
fraught consensus-driven exogenous price. (An explicit call for 
all firms to set an internal carbon price at someone’s estimate of 
the social cost of carbon, for example, might look like collusion. 
A call for all firms to declare a liability duration for their emis­
sions, and thereby derive a market price for their liabilities based 
on traded E-assets entirely avoids such concerns.)
ELM provides a sound and precise basis for stakeholder en­
gagement. Financial institutions might pressure firms on capital 
allocation toward emissions reductions because they would oth­
erwise consume more capital purchasing E-assets. Activists and 
aligned financial investors could pressure firms to increase their 
stated liability duration.
Conclusion
Climate activism has pursued ambitious goals to accelerate 
economy-wide decarbonization, but current approaches using 
transition pathways, targets, and financial institution portfolio 
alignment face fundamental challenges. The reliance on flawed 
carbon accounting methods, rigid and technologically prescribed 
pathways, and tension with fiduciary obligations limit the effi­
cacy of existing frameworks.
To overcome these weaknesses, ELM and carbon solvency pro­
vide a firm foundation for climate action. Treating greenhouse 
gas emissions as auditable liabilities that emitters must match 
with verifiable removal assets makes net zero claims unambigu­
ous. Accurate disclosures become a means to an end where emis­
sions accounting provides a quantity signal to a removals 
market. The market price of true carbon removals incentivizes 
emissions reductions, as abatement costs will likely be lower 
than removal costs. The demand for removal assets also signals 
the need for further development of carbon removal methods, in­
cluding nature-based solutions.
Porolio Alignment Tools
SBTi Financial Sector and GFANZ
Corporate Sector Targets
SBTi
Global Carbon Budget
IPCC & IEA
Carbon Coun!ng
GHG Protocol
Scope 1
Scope 2
Scope 3 
PCAF
Progress Evalua!on
TPI
Planning Frameworks
GFANZ and TPT
Technology Alignment
PACTA
Technology
Sectors
Time
Alignment Measures
Fiduciary Obligations
Invalid Accounting
Central Planning
Figure 2. Transition pathway challenges. The financial sector approach to portfolio alignment faces three challenges. First, the global carbon budget 
allocation relies on centrally planned technology diffusion. Second, the carbon budget allocation filters through the lens of the GHG Protocol so that 
emission counts are not mutually exclusive nor comprehensively exhaustive. Third, implementation must align with fiduciary obligations and avoid 
anti-trust concerns.
6 | Roston et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae013/7723598 by guest on 26 August 2024
The formal incorporation of expected future carbon removal 
prices is essential to resolving a cautionary criticism from macro­
economic policymaking known as the Lucas Critique [32]. 
Sargent explains that “Lucas (1976) criticized a range of econo­
metric policy evaluation procedures because they used models 
that assumed private agents’ decision rules to be invariant with 
respect to the laws of motion they faced” [33]. Kahn explains that 
“at the heart of the Lucas Critique is the idea that rational agents 
re-optimize as the ‘rules of the game change.’ While Lucas fo­
cused on how optimal consumption and investment behavior 
evolves as government policy changes, the same logic can be ap­
plied to ‘Mother Nature’ changing the rules of the game” [34]. An 
endogenous market price for carbon removals captures the es­
sential expectations-driven information aggregation essential for 
effective capital allocation. This price incorporates wide variation 
in “rules of the game” changes from emissions-to-temperature 
response functions to temperature-to-damage functions; from 
government policy changes and technological developments to 
effectiveness of climate activism.
Absent the incorporation of carbon price expectations into in­
vestment decisions, the only action investors take is relative di­
vestment. Roston [27] and Bolton, Kacperczyk and Samama [31] 
demonstrate this with straightforward portfolio construction 
methods. They construct portfolios with arbitrary levels of emis­
sions reductions based on the current period benchmark. They 
cannot possibly construct portfolios that include firms not in a 
benchmark. They cannot systematically overweight firms in a 
benchmark that investors expect to change their operations in 
favorable ways. So, they divest from high emitting firms and real­
locate toward lower emitting firms only based on tracking error 
“costs” subject to tracking error limits. Nothing in this structure 
provides information to invest in other firms. That problem per­
sists throughout the variants of portfolio alignment tools. An in­
vestor may align with a known benchmark or portfolio consisting 
of firms known today, engaged in business known today. When 
rules of the game change, incorporating future information 
through expectations is the only possible solution.
Recent attempts by GFANZ to describe portfolio management 
approaches fall short for identical reasons. Incorporating current 
metrics, characteristics, plans and pledges can only resolve today. 
An expected carbon price focuses attention on a future that cap­
tures all the changes to the rules of the game. In other words, to 
have positive impact, portfolio alignment requires aligning with 
a moving target that incorporates the collective expectations for 
the economy, political economy, and environment of the future.
For climate stakeholders, from activists to investors, and exec­
utives to customers, current and expected carbon prices and 
quantities are the most important decision-useful information 
for Paris-Alignment. Reframing climate risk in terms of capital 
requirements, cost of capital, and asset-liability management 
aligns with financial institution expertise. Rather than relying on 
rigid pathways detached from actual firm economics, ELM inte­
grates climate objectives into financial decision-making and 
challenges firms to reach meaningful net zero commitments in­
stead of vague promises. This market-driven, incentive-compati­
ble approach centered on positive climate outcomes has greater 
potential to drive meaningful emissions reductions across 
the economy.
At first blush, this approach may seem unsatisfying to climate 
activists. Pathways and targets look much easier and more direct. 
That is an illusion, which imagines capital allocators can predict 
a complex future over a long time-horizon. In reality, the future 
emissions budget is unknowable. Even if a total future emissions 
budget emerges, there is no globally acceptable allocation for 
that budget. Even if there were a globally acceptable allocation 
for that budget, there would be no enforcement mechanism.
Investor behavior changes when investor expectations 
change. Activists have successfully pressured regulators to man­
date disclosures and firms to pledge portfolio alignment with 
normative targets. This has shifted corporate and investor 
expectations 
about 
reporting 
and 
compliance 
costs. 
Unfortunately, this pressure has not shifted investor expecta­
tions of carbon prices. Climate action should focus on the 
expected price. What are activists to do? Pressure individual 
firms to acknowledge emissions liabilities and therefore invest in 
avoiding liabilities and acquiring removal assets. This strategy 
both solves for a firm’s obligations and raises the expectations of 
market participants that the future will demand emissions sol­
vency. At the same time, activist pressure to mandate emissions 
liabilities provides the strongest signal for the value of avoided 
emissions and the price of removal assets. Activism should not 
follow the money. Activism should drive the price.
Author contributions
Marc Roston (Conceptualization [lead], Formal analysis [equal], 
Methodology [equal]), Julien Maire (Conceptualization [support­
ing], Formal analysis [equal], Methodology [equal]), Alicia Seiger 
(Conceptualization 
[supporting], 
Formal 
analysis 
[equal], 
Methodology [equal]), and Thomas Heller (Conceptualization, 
Supervision, Validation [supporting])
Conflict of interest: None declared.
Funding
None declared.
References
01. McKibben B. Money is the oxygen on which the fire of global 
warming burns. The New Yorker, 17 September 2019.
02. Roston M, Seiger A, Heller T. What's next after carbon account­
ing? Emissions liability management. Oxford Open Climate 
Change 2023;3:1. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgad006.
03. Portfolio Alignment Team. Measuring Portfolio Alignment: 
Assessing the position of companies and portfolios on the path 
to 
Net 
Zero, 
2020. 
https://www.tcfdhub.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/2020/10/PAT-Report-20201109-Final.pdf (3 May 2024, 
date last accessed).
04. Portfolio Alignment Team. Measuring Portfolio Alignment: Technical 
Considerations, 
2021. 
https://www.tcfdhub.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/2021/10/PAT_Measuring_Portfolio_Alignment_Technical_ 
Considerations-9.8.pdf (3 May 2024, date last accessed).
05. Science-Based Target Initiative. Foundations of Science-Based Target 
Setting, 2019. https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/files/ 
foundations-of-SBT-setting.pdf (3 May 2024, date last accessed).
06. Science-Based Targets Initiative. Pathways to Net-Zero: SBTi 
Technical 
Summary, 
2021. 
https://sciencebasedtargets.org/ 
resources/files/Pathway-to-Net-Zero.pdf (4 May 2024, date 
last accessed).
07. Science Based Targets Initiative. Getting Started Guide For Science- 
Based Target Setting, 2024. https://sciencebasedtargets.org/ 
resources/files/Getting-Started-Guide.pdf (4 May 2024, date 
last accessed).
Pathways versus incentives | 7  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae013/7723598 by guest on 26 August 2024
08.
Science Based Targets Initiative. Understanding the Methods for 
Science-based Climate Action, 2021. https://sciencebasedtargets. 
org/news/understand-science-based-targets-methods-climate- 
action (4 May 2024, date last accessed).
09.
Transition Pathways Initiative. Methodology Report: Management 
Quality and Carbon Performance, 2021. https://www.transition 
pathwayinitiative.org/publications/90.pdf?type=Publication (4 
May 2024, date last accessed).
10.
Transition Pathways Initiative. Transition Pathways Initiative— 
Banks, 
2024. 
https://www.transitionpathwayinitiative.org/ 
banks (4 May 2024, date last accessed).
11.
Science-Based Targets Initiative. Financial Sector Science-Based 
Targets Guidance, 2022. https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resour 
ces/files/Financial-Sector-Science-Based-Targets-Guidance.pdf 
(4 May 2024, date last accessed).
12.
Roston, M. The road from scope 3 to net zero. In: Heller T, Seiger 
A (eds), Settling Carbon Accounts. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, 
Switzerland 2021, pp. 59–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030- 
83650-4_4
13.
Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials. The Global GHG 
Accounting and Reporting Standard Part A: Financed Emissions, 2022. 
https://carbonaccountingfinancials.com/files/downloads/PCAF- 
Global-GHG-Standard.pdf (4 May 2024, date last accessed).
14.
Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero. Measuring Portfolio 
Alignment: Driving Enhancement, Convergence, and Adoption, 2022. 
https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/63/2022/09/Measuring- 
Portfolio-Alignment-Enhancement-Convergence-and-Adoption- 
November-2022.pdf (4 May 2024, date last accessed).
15.
Two Degrees Investing Initiative. Credit Portfolio Alignment: An 
Application of the PACTA Methodology by Katowice Banks in 
Partnership with 2DII, 2020. https://2degrees-investing.org/wp- 
content/uploads/2020/09/Katowice-Banks-2020-Credit-Portfolio- 
Alignment.pdf (4 May 2024, date last accessed).
16.
Transition Plan Taskforce. The Transition Plan Taskforce Disclosure 
Framework, 2022. https://transitiontaskforce.net/wp-content/ 
uploads/2022/11/TPT-Disclosure-Framework.pdf (4 May 2024, 
date last accessed).
17.
Transition Plan Taskforce. Transition Plan Taskforce—About. https:// 
transitiontaskforce.net/about/ (4 May 2024, date last accessed).
18.
Roston M, Seiger A, Matheison A. What's scope 2 good for? 
Oxford Open Climate Change 2024. https://doi.org/10.1093/ 
oxfclm/kgae011
19. Kaplan R, Ramanna K. Accounting for Climate change. Harv Bus 
Rev 2021;99:120–31.
20. Rekker S, Ives MC, Wade B et al. Measuring corporate paris com­
pliance using a strict science-based approach. Nat Commun 
2022;13:4441.
21. Bolton P, Kacperczyk M. Firm commitments. Naional Bureau of 
Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 31244, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.3386/w31244
22. Comello S, Reichelstein J, Reichelstein, S. Corporte carbon 
pledges: an effective mitigation tool to mitigate climate 
change?, Working Paper, 2021.
23. Jia J, Chaudhury A, Ranger N. Designing for Comparability: A 
Foundational Principle of Analysis Missing In Carbon Reporting 
Systems, 
Oxford 
Smith 
School 
of 
Enterprise 
and 
the 
Environment, Working Paper No. 23-04, 2023. https://dx.doi. 
org/10.2139/ssrn.4258460.
24. Broccardo E, Hart O, Zingales L. "Exit versus voice. J Pol Econ 
2022;130:3101–45.
25. Friedman M. The social responsibility of business is to increase 
profits, New York Times, Magazine, 13 September 1970.
26. Hart O, Zingales L. Companies should maximize shareholder 
welfare not market value. LFA 2017;2:247–75.
27. Roston M. A portfolio approach to hedging climate risk. In: 
Heller T, Seiger A (eds), Setting Climate Accounts. Palgrave 
Macmillan, Cham, Switzerland, 2021, 15–38.
28. Lipton M. Understanding the Role of ESG and Stakeholder Governance 
Within the framework of Fiduciary Duties, 2022. https://corpgov. 
law.harvard.edu/2022/11/29/understanding-the-role-of-esg-and- 
stakeholder-governance-within-the-framework-of-fiduciary- 
duties/ (4 May 2024, date last accessed).
29. Gosling T. Trouble Ahead for GFANZ, 2022. https://www.tom- 
gosling.com/blog/trouble-ahead-for-gfanz (4 May 2024, date 
last accessed).
30. Kaplan R, Ramanna K, Roston M. Accounting for carbon offsets. 
Harvard Business Review 2023;101:126–37.
31. Bolton P, Kacperczyk M, Samama F. Net-zero carbon portfolio 
alignment. Financ Anal J 2022;78:19–33.
32. Lucas R. Econometric policy evaluation: a critique. Carn Roch 
Conf Serie Pub Pol 1976;1:19–46.
33. Sargent T. Dynamic Macroeconomic Theory. Cambrige: Harvard 
University Press, 1987.
34. Kahn M. Climate change adaptation: lessons from urban eco­
nomics. SBE 2015;5:1–30.
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, 4, 1–8
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgae013
Perspective Article
8 | Roston et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae013/7723598 by guest on 26 August 2024
