Pro-environmental behavior: the relationship with 
information literacy self-efficacy, climate knowledge 
and climate anxiety among students in Ghana
Martin Gameli Akakpo 
1,, Hayford Alufar Bokpin 
2 Sylvia Hagan 
3 
1Department of Psychology, Regent University College of Science and Technology, Accra, #1 Regent Avenue, Mendskrom, Accra, Greater Accra, DS 1636, Ghana 
2Centre for Migration Studies, University of Ghana, Legon, Accra, Greater Accra, P.O. Box. LG 59, Ghana 
3Department of Psychology, University of Ghana, Legon, Accra, Accra, P.O. Box LG 84, Ghana
Corresponding author. Department of Psychology, Regent University College of Science and Technology, #1 Regent Avenue, Macarthy Hill, Mendskrom, Accra- 
Winneba Road, P.O. Box DS 1636, Accra, Ghana. E-mail. martin.akakpo@regent.edu.gh; martingameli.akakpo@gmail.com
Abstract 
As environmental concerns escalate globally, understanding pro-environmental behavior is important. Using a cross-sectional sur­
vey of 265 university students from Accra, Ghana, the study hypothesized that pro-environmental behavior is related to climate 
change knowledge, information literacy self-efficacy and climate change anxiety. Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient 
and simple linear regression were used to test the hypothesis. Findings suggest that climate change knowledge was positively related 
to information literacy self-efficacy and climate change anxiety. Climate change knowledge and information literacy self-efficacy 
also positively predicted pro-environmental behavior. Findings imply that students should be trained to improve their climate 
change knowledge and acquire information literacy skills. Training these skills can contribute to the development of responsible 
environmental behavior in society.
Keywords: climate change knowledge; climate change anxiety; information literacy self-efficacy; pro-environmental behavior 
Introduction
Climate change has received extensive research attention in the 
last decade [1–3]. Studies have covered a wide range of perspectives 
including the causes, and effects of climate change [4–6]. Human 
activities have been identified as a major accelerator of climate 
change and its negative consequences [7]. Pro-environmental be­
havior can have a direct impact on activities driven by humans, 
and it contributes significantly to the mitigation and adaptation 
measures of climate change [8, 9]. Hence, there is a need for hu­
manity to adapt or change their behaviors because of the climate 
change impacts and the need to protect the environment for the 
unborn generations [9].
Many studies have considered climate change impact on 
humanity, especially farmers, vulnerable groups, and wildlife 
[10, 11]. Meanwhile, college students are worried about the 
climate crisis [12]. They recognize that the climate is changing, 
consider it a pressing issue, and believe it is predominantly 
caused by human activities [13–15]. For decades, college students 
have consistently acknowledged climate change and expressed 
concerns about its societal implications [16].
Individuals, particularly college or university students get ac­
cess to online information about climate change easily through 
social media, scientific journals, blogs, and other channels 
[15, 16]. University students’ intrinsic motivation to know is one 
of the most important predictors of Information literacy (IL) self- 
efficacy [17]. Information literacy self-efficacy entails the ability 
and competence to critically analyze all climate change mitiga­
tion and adaptation information. IL self-efficacy competency is 
essential for making informed decisions and adopting sustain­
able practices among students. According to Huang [18] individu­
als’ exposure and attention to global warming media coverage 
have positive direct effects on three types of pro-environmental 
behavior, including accommodating, promotional and proactive 
behavior. Yet, to the researcher’s knowledge, limited studies 
have examined the extent to which IL Self-Efficacy, climate change 
knowledge and climate anxiety predicts pro-environmental behav­
iors among students in Ghana. The studies conducted outside 
Ghana on climate change knowledge, pro-environment behaviors 
among university students [12, 15, 16], may be less relevant in un­
derstanding pro-environmental behavior of the Ghanaian local 
population. The structure and focus of environmental education in 
Ghanaian schools might emphasize different aspects of climate 
knowledge and information literacy compared to schools in the 
Global North. The localized knowledge could influence the level of 
climate change knowledge and pro-environmental behaviors com­
pared to their counterparts in other regions. Thus, studies con­
ducted with a Ghanaian sample may enable a more contextually 
relevant application. Hence, this study seeks to examine the extent 
of influence these factors have on pro-environmental behaviors 
among university students in Ghana.
In Ghana, a country vulnerable to climate-related issues [19–21], 
understanding the drivers of pro-environmental behavior among 
university students is paramount because they represent the future 
Received: March 26, 2024. Revised: July 28, 2024. Accepted: July 31, 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, 4(1), kgae015  
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgae015 
Advance Access Publication Date: 5 August 2024 
Research Article   
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae015/7727680 by guest on 26 August 2024
leaders, decision-makers, and influencers in their communities. 
They are also at the forefront of climate action and climate change 
activism, and easily get access to climate information which may 
create some urgency and serve as a motivation to engage in pro- 
environmental behavior. Young people seem to be particularly vul­
nerable to the psychological impacts of climate change [22]. By un­
derstanding the determinants of pro-environmental behavior, this 
study may contribute to more effective educational strategies and 
policies to cultivate a generation that is more environmentally con­
scious and active.
Objectives of the study
1. Investigate the relationship between information literacy 
self-efficacy and climate change knowledge. 
2. Investigate the relationship between climate change knowl­
edge and climate change anxiety. 
3. Examine the predictive role of information literacy self- 
efficacy, climate change knowledge and climate change 
anxiety on pro-environmental behavior. 
Hypothesis development
In 1989, information literacy was described by the American 
Library Association as the competence to recognize information 
needs, find, assess, use, and distribute it effectively [23]. The con­
cept of information literacy (IL) has evolved since its introduction in 
1974 by Paul Zurkowski, who first coined the term [24]. Zurkowski 
described information-literate individuals as those capable of utiliz­
ing information resources effectively within their workplace [24]. 
Since then, librarians have predominantly addressed the topic of IL. 
The American Library Association (ALA) in 1989 [25] and the 
Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) in 2000 [26] 
emphasized the critical importance of IL, identifying it as a vital 
skill set for society at large, and especially for students in higher ed­
ucation [27].
Some studies have focused on the topic of IL self-efficacy and 
found that IL self-efficacy was low during the first year of college, 
increased in the second year and then remained unchanged [28]. 
Similarly, Serap Kurbanoglu et al. [29] suggested that IL self- 
efficacy increased in the first and second levels of a student’s 
program, before decreasing in the research-intensive third level. 
Other researchers [30] concluded that IL self-efficacy is a signifi­
cant predictor of students’ academic achievement.
According to Bandura [31], success is not only based on the 
possession of necessary skills, it also requires the confidence to 
use these skills effectively. In other words, learning certain skills 
is not enough, individuals should also develop confidence in the 
skills that they are learning. Hence, besides possessing informa­
tion literacy skills individuals of today's societies must also feel 
competent and confident in the use of these skills. Self-efficacy 
refers to a belief in one's ability to successfully perform a particu­
lar behavior or task [32]. Bandura [33] defines self-efficacy as a 
belief in one's capabilities to organize and execute the course of 
action required to attain a goal. Therefore, the attainment of a 
high sense of self-efficacy beliefs is as important as possessing 
information literacy skills.
Another variable that may influence students’ IL self-efficacy 
is perceived information overload [34]. We live in an era in which 
information and communication technologies, especially the in­
ternet, have developed rapidly, producing vast amounts of infor­
mation. Individuals are inundated by huge quantities of different 
types of information that are accessible through various media 
[35, 36]. Climate change-related information is also abundant on 
the internet [37]. This information is disseminated with varied 
interests and even includes content from those denying climate 
change. Salem et al. [38] described climate change knowledge as 
a holistic understanding of the various processes, effects, causes, 
impacts, and possible mitigation strategies for the changes in 
global climate.
Informational self-efficacy promotes exposure to climate 
change communication in the media, improves knowledge about 
climate and increases the likelihood of climate protective behav­
iors [37]. Information literacy self-efficacy can be identified as a 
competence that can help people verify climate-change-related 
knowledge and make responsible decisions for themselves and 
their society. A lack of understanding by individuals can hinder 
actions by governments aimed at making the world more sus­
tainable. Individuals who do not understand climate change may 
resist government policies and negatively react towards policies, 
taxes and even advice. In a society where governments and busi­
nesses are setting climate targets, people need to know where to 
find climate-related information and how to use it. Therefore, we 
hypothesized that, 
There will be a positive relationship between information literacy self- 
efficacy and climate change knowledge
Schwartz et al. [22] suggested that climate change anxiety can 
affect human mental health. Clayton et al. [21] defined climate 
change anxiety as the continuous fear of possible doom emanating 
from the environment. Other scholars defined the concept as neg­
ative cognition which is driven by some level of emotions and be­
havioral attachments to issues of climate change [22]. Climate 
change anxiety hinges on distress, fear, and other negative emo­
tions from the various threats from climate change. The issue of 
climate change anxiety concerns the environment, psychological 
effects, and the response from society. This anxiety is an emo­
tional response in reaction to the threats posed by climate change.
Milfont [39] found that increased knowledge about climate 
change leads to greater concern. Some researchers also suggest 
that when individuals know the processes, effects, causes, 
impacts, and possible mitigation strategies for the changes in 
global climate coupled with the doom of the environment if cli­
mate change mitigation and adaptation strategies are not devel­
oped and implemented it may create anxiety. For instance, 
according to Fritze [40] understanding the full extent of the long- 
term social and environmental challenges posed by climate 
change has the potential to create emotional distress and anxi­
ety. Clayton [41] highlights the potential for climate change to 
cause emotional distress and anxiety. This synthesized review 
suggest that climate change knowledge can be positively related 
to climate change anxiety. Therefore, we hypothesized that, 
There will be a positive relationship between climate change knowl­
edge and climate change anxiety
Some scholars opined that climate change anxiety motivates 
climate actions in all endeavors serving as a powerful and direct 
emotional response [42] with the potential to drive positive actions, 
risk awareness, and facilitation of essential changes in addressing 
climate change issues [42]. Lange [43] describes pro-environmental 
behavior 
as 
actions 
that 
benefit 
the 
environment. 
Pro- 
environmental behavior involves the minimization of resource 
consumption and the promotion of more eco-friendly and sustain­
able practices. Yusliza et al. [44] found that pro-environmental be­
havior comprises diverse actions performed by persons with the 
main aim of implementing actionable measures geared toward en­
vironmental sustainability. The pro-environmental behavior 
2 | Akakpo et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae015/7727680 by guest on 26 August 2024
includes recycling, water conservation, mass transportation, safe 
disposal of waste, patronage of organic products and other behav­
iors aimed at improving environmental quality and conservation. 
A study by Yusliza et al. [44] on pro-environmental behavior and 
sustainability found a positive relationship between students’ level 
of environmental consciousness and pro-environmental behavior.
Pro-environmental behaviors are usually influenced by climate 
change knowledge and socio-demographical variables like gender, 
age, educational level, and socioeconomic status [45]. Individuals 
with a higher educational background are more likely to engage in 
more pro-environmental behavior [43]. This may suggest that 
individuals with higher levels of education may have high levels 
of climate change knowledge. University Students with a more 
advanced understanding of climate change, particularly those 
who can comprehend its complexities, are more likely to have 
confidence in the effectiveness of climate change mitigation 
efforts [46].
In a study by Rampedi and Ifegbesan [47] which used data from 
South Africa, pro-environmental behavior was predicted by climate 
anxiety. Masud et al. [35], climate change knowledge was found to 
influence pro-environmental behavior in Malaysia. Moreover, in 
Maran and Begotti [48], climate change information, anxiety and 
knowledge were found to influence pro-environmental self-efficacy 
of participants.
It is important to note that climate change anxiety does not al­
ways yield positive outcomes. There is evidence that climate 
change anxiety can lead to negative mental outcomes [42]. These 
may include depression and a feeling of helplessness which can 
lead people to concede and lose any belief in their ability to miti­
gate against climate change.
Results from Kim [49], indicate that one’s attitudes toward the 
prevention of climate change, perceived severity of climate 
change, response efficacy, and self-efficacy regarding climate 
change prevention were significant predictors of one’s intentions 
to engage in a series of pro-environmental behaviors. Therefore, 
we hypothesized that, 
Information literacy self-efficacy, climate change knowledge and cli­
mate change anxiety will predict pro-environmental behavior.
Materials and methods
Research approach and design
A cross-sectional survey design was deployed to collect data 
from university students.
Researchers sought the consent of students after lectures. 
Subsequently, those students who opted to take part stayed in 
the lecture hall. A time window of 5–10 min was allocated for the 
participants to finish the questionnaires.
Research setting
The study's surveys were handed out within the lecture halls of 
two educational institutions situated in Accra, Ghana. These 
institutions were the University of Ghana, Legon, and the 
University of Professional Studies (UPSA). These universities reg­
ularly host climate change-related discussions and have 
researchers who investigate environmental topics.
Sample size and sampling technique
The sample size was determined using version 3.1.9.4 of G
power software [50, 51]. The GPower software automatically 
provides the conventional effect size values suggested by Cohen 
[52]. Based on recommendations by Beck [53], a priori statistical 
power analysis for linear multiple regression was used. Fixed 
model, R2 deviation from zero was used. A function of power 
(1 −β error probability) ¼ 0.80, an alpha error probability 0.05, the 
effect size f2 ¼ 0.15 (medium), and three predictors computed 
gave an estimated 77 total sample size. An alpha level of 0.05 
was chosen to decrease the probability of a false positive result. 
The sample size of 265 was therefore adequate to determine a 
minimum effect. Participants were sampled using convenience 
sampling techniques because they were easily accessible, avail­
able, and willing to participate. Out of 275 distributed question­
naires, 265 were completed and included in the final analysis. 
Questionnaires were deemed incomplete if full responses were 
not provided for at least two scales.
Measures
The data was gathered using a questionnaire with five sections. 
The questionnaire was administered in English. Section 1 
assessed the students’ climate change knowledge using the cli­
mate change knowledge scale developed by Dijkstra and 
Goedhart [54]. It is an 11-item scale that was administered on a 
3-point Likert scale. The rating points started from do not know, 
false and true. Respondents could score a minimum of 0 and a 
maximum of 33 on this scale. In this study, the Cronbach alpha 
was 0.76.
Section 2 measured Information literacy self-efficacy with a 
scale developed by Sommer et al. [23]. The 23-item version in­
stead of the original 28 items was used because five items were 
not useful for this study because they focused on library literacy. 
This study reported a Cronbach alpha of 0.90. A 5-point Likert 
scale ranging from never (1) to almost always (5) was used with 
possible scores ranging from 23 to 115. Section 3 measured cli­
mate change anxiety with a 22-item scale developed by Clayton 
and Karazsia [55]. All items were measured on a point Likert scale 
ranging from never to almost always. The possible range of 
scores on this scale was a minimum of 22 and a maximum of 
110. This study reported a Cronbach alpha of 0.89.
Section 4 measured pro-environmental behavior with an 8- 
item instrument. The first part was taken from Dijkstra and 
Goedhart [54] and the second part from the ‘Environmental 
Citizenship’ dimension, developed by Stern, et al. [56]. All items 
were administered on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 
“strongly disagree” to “strongly agree.” The possible range of 
scores was a minimum of 8 to a maximum of 40. This study 
reported a Cronbach alpha of 0.80. Section 5 focused on demo­
graphic information specifically gender, age and name of the uni­
versity in which the student is enrolled.
Statistical treatment of data
The data is first presented in descriptive with means, standard 
deviations, 
Cronbach 
alpha 
reliabilities 
and 
correlations. 
Multivariate statistics were conducted using regression models. 
Simple linear regressions were deployed with climate change 
knowledge and climate change anxiety as outcomes. The final re­
search question was answered with a multiple linear regression 
using pro-environmental behavior as the outcome with climate 
change knowledge, Information literacy self-efficacy and climate 
change anxiety as predictors.
Ethical considerations
Ethical principles observed in this study include confidentiality, 
informed consent, and anonymity. Participants were assured 
that all data would be treated confidentially. All data were 
treated as anonymous, and personal details like names, contact 
Pro-environmental behavior in Ghana | 3  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae015/7727680 by guest on 26 August 2024
numbers, or email addresses were not gathered. The initial page 
of the survey included the segment on informed consent. 
Students who chose not to take part were free to exit the lecture 
hall with no repercussions. Involvement in the research was op­
tional, and participants were guaranteed that their answers 
would remain undisclosed. Due to the study being an anonymous 
survey of students, involving no introduction of harmful or ma­
nipulated variables, an ethical review was not required. 
Academic superiors of the researchers were informed at each 
major step of the study from conceptualization to data collection 
and finally analysis.
Results
Demographic information
There were 265 complete responses in this study comprising 195 
(73.6%) females and 63 males (23.8%) while 7 (2.6%) did not com­
plete the gender item. Participants were between the ages of 
16 years and 31 years with a mean age of 19 years and a standard 
deviation of 1.88.
Descriptive data
To further understand the relationships between variables, de­
scriptive statistics were computed. These include a range of 
scores, means, standard deviations and correlations between all 
variables (see Table 1).
Hypothesis testing
Is climate change knowledge related to information literacy 
self-efficacy and climate change anxiety?
The results from the correlation analysis show that climate 
change knowledge was weakly but positively related to 
Information literacy self-efficacy (r ¼ .20, P < 0.05) and climate 
change anxiety (r ¼ .25, P < 0.05) (see Table 1). However, climate 
change anxiety was not related to pro-environmental behavior 
(r ¼ .10, P > 0.05).
Predictors of pro-environmental behavior
The overall model was found to be significant (F¼ 9.03, P< 0.01), 
accounting for 9.03% variance (R2 ¼ 0.10). This indicates that 
Information literacy self-efficacy and climate change knowledge 
were weak predictors of pro-environmental behaviors (see Table 2).
Summary of results
From the statistical computations, firstly, scores on Information 
literacy self-efficacy were shown to be related slightly to scores on 
climate change knowledge. Secondly, scores on climate change 
knowledge were related slightly to scores on climate change anxi­
ety. Finally, climate change knowledge and Information literacy 
self-efficacy positively predicted scores on pro-environmental be­
havior. Scores on climate change anxiety were not related to 
scores on pro-environmental behavior. The meaning and implica­
tions of the results are discussed in the next section.
Discussion
The findings of the current study can be discussed in three main 
points. Firstly, Information literacy self-efficacy is related to climate 
change knowledge however the correlation is weak. Secondly, cli­
mate change knowledge is slightly related to climate change anxi­
ety. Finally, climate change knowledge and Information literacy 
self-efficacy are both related to pro-environmental behavior. These 
findings will now be explained in the next paragraphs.
Firstly, the suggested relationship between Information liter­
acy self-efficacy and climate change knowledge is supported by 
previous works [29, 37]. This relationship means individuals who 
are competent at finding and using information are more likely 
to be knowledgeable about climate change. In the current tech­
nology age, this means people who know how to use computers 
and the internet to find information can know more about cli­
mate change [35]. This is because there is abundant information 
about climate change on the internet, many interest groups pub­
lish papers, operate websites, and organize events about climate 
change [35, 36]. These groups widely distribute information on­
line to educate internet users and gather support for their cli­
mate mitigation objectives.
Secondly, the relationship between climate change knowledge 
and climate change anxiety was supported in the current study 
and has been previously supported by Fritze et al. [40] and 
Clayton [41]. This relationship means people who know more 
about climate change are more anxious about its possible effects. 
An understanding of climate change includes knowledge of its 
effects on the weather, temperature, agriculture, and natural 
environments. Knowing the consequences can lead to fear that 
such effects may be overwhelming for an individual to deal with.
The final finding of this paper, like those of Rampedi and 
Ifegbesan [47] and Yusliza et al. [44] shows that pro-environmental 
behavior is related to Information literacy self-efficacy and climate 
change knowledge. This means people who can find more infor­
mation about climate change and pro-environmental behavior are 
likely to be environmentally conscious. Information about how to 
be environmentally responsible can be found online. There are nu­
merous action-oriented groups online focused on energy conserva­
tion, safe agriculture, healthy eating, and other pro-environmental 
activities. This finding means that individual pro-environmental 
behavior increases with more Information literacy self-efficacy 
Table 1. Descriptive statistics and correlations of scores on 
climate change knowledge, climate change anxiety, information  
literacy and pro-environmental behavior
Variables
N
L/H
M
SD
1.
2.
3.
4.
1. Climate 
change 
knowledge
265
0/22
12.48
5.21
–
2. Climate 
change 
anxiety
264
22/92
48.64
14.23
0.25
–
3. Information  
literacy
264
23/115
75.58
13.97
0.20
0.14
–
4. Pro-envi­
ronmental 
behavior
259
9/40
31.12
5.39
0.21
0.10
0.27
–
N, sample size; L/H, lowest/highest scores recorded on scales; M, mean; SD, 
standard deviation.

P < .05.
Table 2. Coefficients of predictors of pro-environmental behavior
Variables
B
SE
β
Sig (P)
Climate change knowledge
0.16
0.07
0.15
.02
Climate change anxiety
0.01
0.02
0.03
.63
Information literacy
0.09
0.02
0.23
.00
B, unstandardized coefficient; SE, standard error; β, beta Sig (P), significance 
(P-value).
4 | Akakpo et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae015/7727680 by guest on 26 August 2024
and climate change knowledge. The relationship between climate 
change anxiety and pro-environmental behavior was not sup­
ported in this study. The lack of support for the relationship be­
tween climate change anxiety and pro-environmental behavior is 
not surprising as suggested by Ogunbode et al. [42]. This may be be­
cause climate change knowledge leads to a feeling of being over­
whelmed and helpless in the face of the enormous risks posed by 
climate change.
In summary, these findings show support for Information lit­
eracy self-efficacy and climate change knowledge in efforts to 
improve pro-environmental behavior. Many studies continue to 
support the role of pro-environmental behavior in dealing with 
the adverse effects of climate change. From this study, 
Information literacy self-efficacy has been identified as a starting 
point because it is a skill that promotes climate change knowl­
edge and pro-environmental behavior. The implications of these 
findings are explained in the next section.
Implications
The findings from this study have implications for academia and 
policymaking.
For academia, the findings imply the need for more 
Information literacy self-efficacy training as a basic skill. Firstly, 
this will help students learn more about climate change on their 
own even if they are not part of climate-related programs like 
Geography or Climate Science. Secondly, for researchers in these 
climate-related fields, the study implies that Information literacy 
self-efficacy is important to help their students navigate the in­
ternet and learn beyond classroom content [27]. Thirdly, climate 
change researchers can be guided by the findings of this study 
when they are formulating objectives for climate education. 
Their research designs should include how students can inde­
pendently find climate-related information and research content 
on the internet.
These findings suggest that policymakers should focus on pro­
viding comprehensive education and support for people. Firstly, 
this comprehensive education should include information liter­
acy self-efficacy and literacy regarding how to interpret climate 
change information. This is important because of the risk of po­
litically biased information about climate change. Individuals 
who have a high information literacy self-efficacy and climate 
change knowledge are more likely to respond better to mislead­
ing climate change information. Policy should therefore address 
literacy in and out of the classroom. Lastly, support for pro- 
environmental behavior can be provided through events that can 
be publicized online. Individuals with higher Information literacy 
self-efficacy are likely to find such events and participate.
In summary, the findings imply that Information literacy self- 
efficacy and climate change knowledge are important skills that 
should be trained to help improve pro-environmental behavior.
Limitations
There were two limitations in this work, namely, the possible 
sampling bias and the use of a cross-sectional design. Firstly, the 
sample used in the study was university students in Accra, 
Ghana. This sample was not diverse enough and this limits gen­
eralizability to university students and adults with similar demo­
graphic characteristics. A more diverse sample with different 
educational backgrounds studying in rural communities can en­
hance the diversity of the study. Secondly, the use of a cross- 
sectional design only captured Information literacy self-efficacy, 
climate change knowledge and pro-environmental behavior at a 
specific time. Future research can use other methods like a 
longitudinal design to track changes over time or an experiment 
to determine cause and effect. Further to this, an intervention 
study can be conducted to help students improve their 
Information literacy self-efficacy and climate change knowledge.
Conclusion
This study is a timely attempt to enrich literature about how peo­
ple find and use climate change information. In an era marked 
by heightened mitigation campaigns, laws, degree programs and 
community activism on climate change, it is crucial to conduct 
research about behavioral aspects [57–59]. Works like this will 
guide education, research and policy making.
In this study, Information literacy self-efficacy and climate 
change knowledge have been recommended as important skills 
for the promotion of pro-environmental behavior. This is rele­
vant for student training, research and policy making. Climate 
change is a phenomenon that affects all people on the planet and 
as researchers, we are called to contribute guidelines aimed at re­
ducing its negative impacts.
Acknowledgements
Authors thank students who volunteered to respond to our 
questionnaires.
Author contributions
Martin Gameli Akakpo (Conceptualization [equal], Data curation 
[equal], 
Formal 
analysis 
[equal], 
Investigation 
[equal], 
Methodology [equal], Project administration [lead], Supervision 
[lead], 
Validation 
[equal], 
Writing—original 
draft 
[equal], 
Writing—review & editing [equal]), Hayford Alufar Bokpin 
(Conceptualization [equal], Investigation, [equal], Methodology 
[equal], 
Supervision 
[supporting], 
Validation 
[supporting], 
Writing—original draft [equal], Writing—review & editing 
[equal]), Sylvia Hagan (Conceptualization [equal], Formal analy­
sis [equal], Investigation [equal], Methodology [equal], Writing— 
original draft [equal], Writing—review & editing [equal])
Funding
No external funding was secured for this project.
Conflict of interest
The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.
References
01. Monroe MC, Plate RR, Oxarart A et al. Identifying effective cli­
mate change education strategies: a systematic review of the 
research. Environ Educ Res 2019; 25:791–812.
02. Malla FA, Mushtaq A, Bandh SA et al. Understanding climate 
change: scientific opinion and public perspective. In: Bandh SA 
(eds), Climate Change, Cham: Springer, 2022, 1–20.
03. Radzi SNF, Osman K, Mohd Said MN. Progressing towards global 
citizenship and a sustainable nation: Pillars of climate change 
education and actions. Sustainability 2022;14:5163.
04. Hardy JT. Climate Change: causes, Effects, and Solutions. Hoboken, 
New Jersey, United States: John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
05. Crowley TJ. Causes of climate change over the past 1000 years. 
Science 2000;289:270–277.
Pro-environmental behavior in Ghana | 5  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae015/7727680 by guest on 26 August 2024
06.
Hegerl GC, Br€onnimann S, Cowan T et al. Causes of climate 
change over the historical record. Environ Res Lett 2019;14: 
123006.
07.
Lee H, Calvin K, Dasgupta D et al. Climate change 2023: synthe­
sis report, summary for policymakers. In: Core Writing Team, 
Lee H, Romero J (eds), Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to 
the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. Geneva, Switzerland: IPCC, 2023, 3–34
08.
Zulkepeli L, Fauzi MA, Suki NM et al. Pro-environmental behav­
ior and the theory of planned behavior: a state of the art science 
mapping. Manage Environ Qual Int J 2024 (ahead-of-print).
09.
Goyal S, Goyal P. The evolution of pro-environmental behavior 
research in three decades using bibliometric analysis. Corp Soc 
Resp Env Manage 2024. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/ 
10.1002/csr.2797
10.
Odame Appiah D, Akondoh AC, Tabiri RK, Donkor AA. 
Smallholder farmers’ insight on climate change in rural Ghana. 
Cogent Food & Agriculture 2018;4:1436211.11.
11.
Farrukh M, Raza A, Mansoor A et al. Trends and patterns in pro- 
environmental behaviour research: a bibliometric review and 
research agenda. BIJ 2023;30:681–696.
12.
Klapp J, Bouvier-Brown NC. Climate literacy among undergrad­
uate students who study science in Los Angeles. IJSHE 2021; 
22:1707–1727.
13.
Burkholder KC, Devereaux J, Grady C et al. Longitudinal study of 
the impacts of a climate change curriculum on undergraduate 
student learning: Initial results. Sustainability 2017;9:913.
14.
Cordero EC, Todd AM, Abellera D. Climate change education 
and the ecological footprint. Bull Amer Meteor Soc 2008;89: 
865–872.
15.
Wachholz S, Artz N, Chene D. Warming to the idea: university 
students' knowledge and attitudes about climate change. Int J 
Sustainability High Educ 2014;15:128–141.
16.
Morgan MD, Moran JM. Understanding the greenhouse effect 
and the ozone shield: an index of scientific literacy among 
university students. Bull Am Meteorol Soc 1995;76:1185–1190.
17.
Ross M, Perkins H, Bodey K. Academic motivation and informa­
tion literacy self-efficacy: the importance of a simple desire to 
know. Lib Info Sci Res 2016;38:2–9.
18.
Huang H. Media use, environmental beliefs, self-efficacy, and 
pro-environmental behavior. J Bus Res 2016;69:2206–2212.
19.
Stanturf JA, Warren ML, Charnley S et al. Ghana Climate Change 
Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment. Washington: United 
States Agency for International Development, 2011.
20.
Addo KA. Assessing coastal vulnerability index to climate 
change: the case of Accra–Ghana. J of Coast Res 2013;165: 
1892–1897.
21.
Owusu V, Ma W, Emuah D, Renwick A. Perceptions and vulnera­
bility of farming households to climate change in three agro- 
ecological zones of Ghana. J Cleaner Prod 2021;293:126154.
22.
Schwartz SE, Benoit L, Clayton S et al. Climate change anxiety 
and mental health: Environmental activism as buffer. Curr 
Psychol 2023;42:1– 21.
23.
Sommer 
M, 
Kohnen 
AM, 
Ritzhaupt 
AD, 
Hampton 
J. 
Investigation of the Validity Evidence of the Information 
Literacy Self-Efficacy Scale (ILSES) among undergraduate stu­
dents. Comm in Information Literacy 2021;15:1–23.
24.
Zurkowski 
PG. 
The 
Information 
Service 
Environment 
Relationships and Priorities, Related Paper No. 5, 1974.
25.
American Library Association. ACRL standards: information lit­
eracy compentency standards for higher education. C&RL News 
2000;61:207–215.
26. Association of College, Research Libraries, American Library 
Association. Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher 
Education. Chicago, IL, USA: ACRL, 2000.
27. Aharony N, Gazit T. Students’ information literacy self-efficacy: 
an exploratory study. J Lib Inf Sci 2020;52:224–236.
28. Serap Kurbanoglu S. Self-efficacy: a concept closely linked to in­
formation literacy and lifelong learning. J Doc 2003;59:635
29. Serap Kurbanoglu S, Akkoyunlu B, Umay A. Developing the in­
formation literacy self-efficacy scale. J Doc 2006;62:730
30. Stokes P, Urquhart C. Profiling information behaviour of nursing 
students: part 1: quantitative findings. J Doc 2011;67:908–932.
31. Bandura A. Self-efficacy: toward a unifying theory of behavioral 
change. Psychol Rev 1977;84:191–215.
32. Cassidy S, Eachus P. Developing the computer self-efficacy 
(CSE) scale: investigating the relationship between CSE, gender 
and experience with computers. J Edu Comp Res 2002;26: 
133–153.
33. Bandura A. Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York, NY: W. 
H. Freeman and Company, 1997.
34. Aharony N, Gazit T. Factors affecting students’ information 
literacy self-efficacy. LHT 2019;37:183– 196.
35. Feather J. The Information Society: A Study of Continuity and Change. 
London, WC1E 7AE, UK: Facet Publishing, 2013.
36. Webster F. Information society. In: McKemmish, S, Upward, F. 
H, Reed, B (eds), Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2009, 1–19
37. Loy LS, Hamann KR, Reese G. Navigating through the jungle of 
information. 
Informational 
self-efficacy 
predicts 
climate 
change-related media exposure, knowledge, and behaviour. 
Clim Change 2020;163:2097–2116.
38. Salem MR, Hegazy N, Thabet Mohammed AA et al. Climate 
change-related knowledge and attitudes among a sample of the 
general population in Egypt. Front Public Health 2022;10:1047301.
39. Milfont TL. The interplay between knowledge, perceived effi­
cacy, and concern about global warming and climate change: a 
one-year longitudinal study. Risk Anal 2012;32:1003
40. Fritze JG, Blashki GA, Burke S, Wiseman J. Hope, despair and 
transformation: Climate change and the promotion of mental 
health and wellbeing. Int J Mental Health Syst 2008;2:1–0.
41. Clayton S. Climate anxiety: psychological responses to climate 
change. J Anxiety Disord 2020;74:102263.
42. Ogunbode CA, Doran R, Hanss D et al. Climate anxiety, pro- 
environmental 
action 
and 
wellbeing: 
Antecedents 
and 
outcomes of negative emotional responses to climate change in 
28 countries. J of Env Psych 2022;84:1.
43. Lange F. Behavioral paradigms for studying pro-environmental 
behavior: a systematic review. Behav Res Methods 2023; 
55:600–622.
44. Yusliza MY, Amirudin A, Rahadi RA et al. An investigation of 
pro-environmental behaviour and sustainable development in 
Malaysia. Sustainability 2020;12:7083.
45. Treen KM, Williams HT, O'Neill SJ. Online misinformation about 
climate change. WIRES Clim Change 2020;11:e665.
46. Jurek M, Frajer J, Fiedor D et al. Knowledge of global climate 
change among Czech students and its influence on their beliefs 
in the efficacy of mitigation action. Env Educ Research 2022; 
28:1126–1143.
47. Rampedi IT, Ifegbesan AP. Understanding the determinants of 
pro-environmental behavior among South Africans: Evidence 
from a structural equation model. Sustainability 2022; 14:3218.
48. Maran DA, Begotti T. Media exposure to climate change, anxi­
ety, and efficacy beliefs in a sample of Italian university stu­
dents. IJERPH 2021;18:9358.
6 | Akakpo et al.  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae015/7727680 by guest on 26 August 2024
49.
Kim S, Jeong SH, Hwang Y. Predictors of pro-environmental 
behaviors of American and Korean students: the application of 
the theory of reasoned action and protection motivation theory. 
Sc Comm 2013;35:168–188.
50.
Faul F, Erdfelder E, Buchner A, Lang AG. Statistical power analy­
ses using GPower 3.1: tests for correlation and regression anal­
yses. Behav Res Methods 2009;41:1149–60.
51.
Kang H. Sample size determination and power analysis using the 
GPower software. J Educ Eval Health Profprofessions17.2021;18:
52.
Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. 2nd 
edn. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1988
53.
Beck TW. The importance of a priori sample size estimation in 
strength and conditioning research. J Strength Cond Res 2013; 
27:2323–2337.
54.
Dijkstra EM, Goedhart MJ. Development and validation of the 
ACSI: measuring students’ science attitudes, pro-environmental 
behaviour, climate change attitudes and knowledge. Env Educ 
Res 2012; 18:733–749.
55. Clayton S, Karazsia BT. Development and validation of a mea­
sure of climate change anxiety. J Env Psych 2020; 69:101434–11.
56. Stern MJ, Powell RB, Ardoin NM. What difference does it make? 
Assessing outcomes from participation in a residential environ­
mental education program. J Env Educ 2008; 39:31–43.
57. Abed F, Barzilai S. Can students evaluate scientific YouTube 
videos? Examining students' strategies and criteria for evaluat­
ing videos versus webpages on climate change. Comput Assist 
Learn 2023; 39:558–577.
58. Whitmarsh L, Poortinga W, Capstick S. Behaviour change to ad­
dress climate change. Curr Opin Psychol 2021;42:76–81.
59. Tang 
KH. 
A 
model 
of 
behavioral 
climate 
change 
education for higher educational institutions. Env Adv 2022; 
9:100305.
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, 4, 1–7
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgae015
Research Article
Pro-environmental behavior in Ghana | 7  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae015/7727680 by guest on 26 August 2024
