Divergences between mainstream and social media 
discourses after COP26, and why they matter
Mary Sanford 
1,2,3, and James Painter4,5
1CMCC Foundation—Euro-Mediterranean Center on Climate Change, Lecce, 73100, Italy 
2RFF-CMCC European Institute on Economics and the Environment, Milan, 20144, Italy 
3Oxford Internet Institute, Oxford University, Oxford, OX13JS, United Kingdom 
4Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, Oxford University, Oxford University, Oxford, OX26PS, United Kingdom 
5School of Geography and the Environment, Oxford University, Oxford, OX13QY, United Kingdom
Corresponding author. RFF-CMCC European Institute on Economics and the Environment, Via Bergognone 34, Milan, 20144, Italy E-mail: mary.sanford@cmcc.it
Abstract 
UN climate conferences (COPs) have become powerful opportunities for driving public attention to climate issues and raising aware­
ness via mainstream and social media coverage. While there is an abundance of studies examining various elements of the media 
arenas separately, there are currently no comparative analyses of how mainstream media outlets and social media opinion leaders 
react to and thereby shape discourses around COPs. Using Bourdieu’s field theory to conceptualize agents in the two arenas as 
‘adversaries’, we use manual content analysis to compare reactions to the 2021 Glasgow climate conference (COP26) across the five 
top English-language online newspapers in Australia, India, the UK and the USA with those of prominent users and organizations on 
Facebook and Instagram. We find entirely different appraisals of the conference between the two arenas: Where the mainstream me­
dia outlets highlighted the progress of the summit, social media leaders were eager to criticize its failures and those of world leaders 
to take sufficient action. We discuss the implications of this divergence, specifically (i) the extent to which it hinders the cultivation 
of cohesive narratives about critical climate issues, and (ii) how the failure frame advocated by social media opinion leaders may de- 
legitimize international policy initiatives and undercut public support for and engagement with these efforts.
Lay Summary 
Do news outlets and social media react the same way to international climate summits? In this paper, we compare the evaluations 
of the UN climate conference held in Glasgow, Scotland in 2021 (COP26) across a sample of English-language mainstream news out­
lets in four countries with those of prominent activists, politicians, international organizations, and celebrities on Facebook and 
Instagram. We find strong differences in the two media arenas, with news outlets presenting the summit as a moderate success and 
social media leaders characterizing it as a failure. We discuss the implications of this divergence on media effects and communica­
tion efforts, specifically the dangers they may pose to educating the public on key climate policy matters and mobilizing last­
ing support.
Keywords: COP26; comparative discourse analysis; news media; Facebook; Instagram; field theory; legitimization 
Introduction
Few events have the power to focus public and political attention 
to climate issues like the annual meeting of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), referred 
to as Conferences of the Parties (COPs). They are key moments in 
which stakeholders of climate politics use the summits to raise 
awareness and generate global dialogue about pressing climate 
issues [1–4].
The media system plays a critical role in this process. Since 
the first COP meeting in 2005, mainstream news outlets have op­
erated as the primary medium through which the public learns 
about conference discussions and outcomes [2]. They have there­
fore played a large role in determining the public’s perception of 
policymaking and the effectiveness of the conferences. With the 
advent of social media and the rise of the climate change 
activism movement on social media platforms, this new arena 
has become a parallel source of information about COPs, while 
also creating opportunities for global activism, opinion leader­
ship, and interactive public commentary and debate [6–7]. 
Environmental media scholars have long stressed the impor­
tance of intermedia cohesion in constructing narratives that 
stimulate public and political will [8–9], but scholars have yet to 
examine the extent to which the proliferation of mainstream and 
social media may (or may not) be facilitating this.
To date, studies of how the two arenas frame discourses 
around COPs—and most others related to climate and environ­
mental politics—have tended to focus on one or the other but 
rarely both simultaneously. They also tend to do so without de­
veloping theory for how the two arenas interact. To our knowl­
edge, this is the first paper to undertake such an analysis for a 
high-profile policy event since O’Neill et al.’s comparison of 
Received: October 24, 2023. Revised: May 21, 2024. Accepted: May 22, 2024 
# The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, 4(1), kgae006  
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgae006 
Advance Access Publication Date: 4 June 2024 
Research Article   
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
mainstream and social media in response to the IPCC’s Fifth 
Assessment Report in 2012–2013 [10] (The IPCC is the United 
Nations body for assessing the science related to climate 
change.). Therefore, the purpose of the present work is to demon­
strate the theoretical and empirical importance of comparing the 
two arenas in order to understand how the stakeholders acting 
within them generate competing narratives and attention diffu­
sion that may risk decreasing public and political will to engage 
with climate policy.
To do so, we compare the prevalent topic frames and senti­
ments in a sample of mainstream news articles from prominent 
outlets in four English-speaking countries—Australia, India, the 
UK, and the US—with a sample of posts from high-profile users 
on Facebook and Instagram following the close of the 2021 COP 
meeting in Glasgow, Scotland (referred to as COP26). We use an 
adaptation of Bourdieu’s field theory as the primary theoreti­
cal framework.
Research context
Conceptual framework
The conceptual framework of this study is Kunelius and Eide’s 
adaptation of Bourdieu’s field theory to climate-summit journal­
ism in their analysis of transnational newspaper coverage of 
COP13 and COP15 [2]. Bourdieu’s original field theory suggests 
that individuals construct social fields in which they interact and 
compete with one another in the pursuit of finite resources [11– 
12]. Kunelius and Eide [2] extend this to climate-summit journal­
ism by conceptualizing COP meetings as ‘momentary representa­
tions of a transnational field of climate politics’ (p. 268). The 
actors in this field include politicians, civil servants, lobbyists, 
activists, and other such stakeholders, but also mainstream me­
dia outlets and journalists, all competing for the ‘finite resource’ 
of influence over the audience’s time and attention. While the 
politicians debate and formulate agreements, journalists distil 
these proceedings into headlines and articles, inevitably condi­
tioned by the values, incentives, and political agenda of their 
host publications.
This reporting informs public understanding of and support 
for pro-climate policy objectives, as well as awareness of what 
leaders are doing to support (or hinder) them. As such it is critical 
to the ‘production, reproduction, and transformation of the 
meaning’ of climate issues and policies as they evolve through 
this coverage [13, p. 172]. It sets the public discourse agenda for 
weeks after and can have impactful consequences for mobilizing 
social, political, and civic action [5, 14]. Thus, while journalists 
may not be directly involved in the negotiations, they nonethe­
less impact the field of climate politics as it coalesces around 
COP proceedings.
We further extend this application of field theory as a concep­
tual framework to incorporate communication and activism on 
social media platforms. In the same way that Kunelius and Eide 
define mainstream media outlets as participants in this field, we 
propose to think of social media platforms similarly [2]. These 
platforms constitute spaces in which users encounter informa­
tion about climate issues and thereafter have the opportunity to 
discuss and mobilize around it [6–7, 15]. As such, they have been 
found to reduce barriers to collective action and influence politi­
cal decision-making [16–17]. They also give voice to a more di­
verse range of stakeholders in climate politics than mainstream 
media, many of whom have been marginalized by the latter [13, 
18–21]. Moreover, social media platforms allow for certain users 
to amass large audiences, often comparable with the readership 
of mainstream media outlets. In some contexts, these ‘opinion 
leaders’ become equally, if not more, influential than news out­
lets on many issues [22–24].
In the context of COP summits, individuals (activists, politi­
cians, journalists) and representatives of organizations can im­
mediately post information and commentary about the 
proceedings. Their audiences need not wait for the events to be 
digested and published long-form. This also applies to main­
stream news outlets themselves: Nearly all media companies op­
erate their own social media accounts to promote their content 
on users’ news feeds, thereby compensating for the decrease in 
visiting outlet homepages for news, and to share information 
more directly, spontaneously, and casually [25–29].
Thus, mainstream news outlets are no longer the sole conduit 
of information and commentary about COP meetings to the pub­
lic. They now interact with popular social media users and com­
pete with them for influence over how the public perceive 
climate issues. In the terminology of Bourdieu’s original theory, 
we can think of mainstream media outlets as the climate politics 
field’s incumbents and social media platforms as insurgents. That 
is not to say that social media platforms are inherently antago­
nistic to mainstream media outlets in the sense that the former 
are actively trying to force the latter out of the field. However, it 
is clear that the two compete for influence over the public, and 
that they use different modes and means to do so.
It is therefore pertinent to compare the narratives the two are­
nas present around major focus points in climate politics in order 
to assess how they contribute to the construction of unified dis­
courses around climate issues.
Analytical lens
To this end, we use framing as the primary analytical lens. 
Framing refers to how communicators calibrate their messages 
to convey an issue, who is responsible for it, and what should be 
done about it [30]. This can include thematic, moral, emotional, 
and normative appeals [31]. Framing has become an increasingly 
popular theoretical framework in environmental and climate 
communication research [32].
Yet there is little work explicitly comparing framing between 
the media arenas. Two exceptions include O’Neill et al.’s compar­
ison of frames in UK and USA mainstream media coverage of the 
IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report with those in the X (formerly 
known as Twitter) posts of fifty influential users [10]; Chen et al.’s 
comparison of tweet activity relating to climate change protests 
between 2018 and 2021 with articles in mainstream media out­
lets in Australia, Canada, the US, and the UK [33] (A third study, 
Wang et al., carries out a high-level framing comparison in 
climate-related discourses in a sample of tweets and major 
mainstream media outlets in the US and UK from 2016 to 2021 
[34]. They use keywords to extract topic frames and therefore 
lack detailed analysis of specific narratives and attribution to 
specific stakeholders. Their focus was also more targeted on the 
ways in which spikes in attention to different frames in the X 
sample may be related to spikes in the mainstream media sam­
ple, and vice-versa. For these reasons, in addition to the lack of 
focus on a specific event, but rather a sample of all tweets and 
articles mentioning climate-related keywords, we do not think it 
is similar in scope or intention to the present work.). Both studies 
identify differences between the framing strategies of main­
stream news media and social media users, primarily that the 
former tends to focus on political debates while the latter is more 
action-oriented. However, these studies focused on topic frames 
2 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
and did not include comparisons of more granular aspects of 
framing, such as sentiment.
Sentiment analysis is defined as the study of the opinions, 
attitudes, and emotions expressed towards an entity in commu­
nication [35]. Although there is no single sentiment that has been 
shown to consistently motivate engagement with climate issues, 
the sentiments expressed in climatecommunication have strong 
influence over how members of the public make sense of the in­
formation they encounter about climate issues [36–39]. Yet to 
date, few studies have explored how sentiment framing is used 
in discourses surrounding COPs or other high profile climate pol­
icy events.
Related work
Research on framing in COP discourses has mostly focused on 
discourse samples from mainstream media or social media sepa­
rately. Conclusions from research on the former suggest a focus 
on the consequences of climate change and government respon­
sibility for action, a lack of detailed coverage of climate science, a 
bias towards developed countries, vilification of China and India, 
political polarization within US media, and a divide between the 
reporting practices of traditional media and digitally native out­
lets [2, 19–20, 40–43].
The existing work pertaining to COP discourses on social me­
dia has focused on establishing these platforms as critical to net­
working mechanisms in online protest ecology, identifying the 
communication strategies of select discourse stakeholders on X 
and Facebook, analysing visual framing on X, and diagnosing in­
creasing rates of polarization and criticism of political hypocrisy 
on X [44–48]. Kunelius et al. examined the X discourse around 
COP26, but only in terms of the discourse structure, i.e. who 
interacted with whom and the resulting communities, without 
content analysis [7]. No study has directly compared the framing 
strategies of news and social media stakeholders directly, and 
with the exception of De-Lara et al.’s comparison of 10 prominent 
users on Facebook after COP25, no studies have compared their 
dominant sentiments [46].
Research design
Overview
Our study addresses these gaps with the following re­
search questions:
i) What were the main topic frames in mainstream media 
coverage of the outcomes of COP26, and what were the 
dominant sentiments expressed about these outcomes? 
ii) What were the main topic frames in Facebook and 
Instagram posts about the outcomes of COP26, and what 
were 
the 
dominant 
sentiments 
expressed 
about 
these outcomes? 
iii) What were the main divergences between the two arenas 
with respect to topic frames and sentiments? 
To answer these questions, we use the following methodologi­
cal framework. First, we analyse 141 articles of mainstream me­
dia coverage related to COP26 in Australia, India, the UK, and the 
USA, extracting the topic frames and sentiments pertaining to 
the conference’s outcomes in the 48 h immediately following the 
summit’s close. Second, we apply the same analysis to the 250 
most interacted with posts per platform (500 in total) from all 
Facebook and Instagram posts mentioning the conference from 
the same time period. We identify the main differences between 
them and discuss the implications of our findings for the com­
munication of climate policy issues in the public sphere.
Datasets
Mainstream media sample
First, we chose four countries for inclusion in our analysis—three 
where English is spoken as the main language (Australia, the UK, 
the USA), and one where English is spoken or understood widely, 
and is the language of the political elite (India) [49]. All four are 
major players at COPs and in the international policy field, with 
India in particular becoming an increasingly important negotia­
tor in recent years due to its large economy, its large national 
GHG emissions, and its presence in key negotiating groups at 
COPs [50]. The UK and the USA have well-established legacy me­
dia organizations such as the BBC, The Guardian, and The New York 
Times which enjoy a very strong worldwide presence in English, 
frequently give voice to sceptical voices, and are influential 
amongst policy makers outside of their home countries [10]. 
Australia was included as it is one of the few countries where cli­
mate change policy has played a major role in the change of gov­
ernments, where various forms of scepticism are still prevalent 
in parts of the media, and where the role of the Australian dele­
gation at Glasgow COP was a particular focus of political contes­
tation [51–52] (See https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ 
2021/nov/13/cop26-australia-accused-of-hiding-while-opposing- 
deal-needed-to-limit-catastrophic-climate-breakdown.). 
India 
was chosen in part as a response to the general critique of cli­
mate media scholarship that countries from the Global South are 
not included sufficiently, in part because it has in The Times of 
India and The Hindustan Times two of the largest-circulation 
English-language media in the world, and in part because of the 
controversial role that it played at the COP in terms of the final 
declaration [49, p. 10; 53]. Users from these four countries also 
dominate the dataset collected for the social media comparison 
(see Supplementary Table S2).
The five most popular online news sites in each country were 
selected according to results of the 2021 Reuters Institute’s 
Digital News Report (DNR) for the online news sites with the larg­
est weekly reach in each country [54]. This selection method has 
been widely used by other scholars carrying out cross-country 
comparisons [33–34, 55]. It also strongly resembles that of O’Neill 
et al., which also based their selection of outlets on popularity, 
proxied by circulation and readership estimates [10]. The 20 titles 
chosen can be seen in Supplementary Table S1. The fact that all 
four country samples included the same range of political orien­
tations in each country (left-leaning, right-leaning, and centrist/ 
non-aligned), and are all news online sites (even though their 
original platform may have been television), provides a robust 
basis for the results. We chose only English-language outlets in 
India as they all enjoy large numbers of readers, receive a large 
percentage of the media advertising revenue, and wield consider­
able influence over national policy and opinion [56]. However, it 
is an important limitation that we did not include Hindi language 
outlets in India as these enjoy larger reader and viewer numbers 
(see Section 6 for discussion of how this might have affected the 
results). Further details about the selection of news outlets based 
on the 2021 DNR are provided in Supplementary Section S1.
The following search phrase was used to collect articles from 
the selected outlets via the Factiva database: ‘Glasgow’ OR ‘UN’ 
OR ‘COP26’. The time period of collection included the 48 hours 
immediately after the summit ended at 20 : 00 GMT on Saturday 
13 November. In most cases, that included articles with a date 
slug of 13th and 14th November (14th and 15th for Australia and 
Sanford and Painter | 3  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
India), when the vast majority of the coverage was published. In 
some cases a few articles on the day after those dates were in­
cluded when they were specifically about the outcome of the 
COP, often with a reaction from India and China, which took time 
to arrive in the coverage. This search yielded a corpus of 141 
articles (after several articles were discarded for being repeats, 
trails, video reports, or insufficiently focused on the outcome of 
the COP). Supplementary Table S1 shows the distribution of the 
141 articles by country and outlet political leaning. A discussion 
of how the latter was determined is presented in Supplementary 
Section S2.
Facebook and Instagram samples
Collection of the social media samples was conducted via 
CrowdTangle (CT). CT allows free access for academic research­
ers to all posts of accounts and pages associated with public Figs 
and organizations (further detail about how CT defines public fig­
ures is provided in Supplementary Section S3.). All English- 
language posts including the search term ‘COP26’ were collected 
during the same timeframe used in the mainstream media col­
lection. These searches yielded 8467 Facebook posts and 998 
Instagram posts. Although unable to capture the full public dis­
course, the restriction of data to only public Figs and organiza­
tions enables a focus on the most prominent content producers. 
This is analogous to focusing on the most popular online news 
sites for the mainstream media analysis.
The results for both platforms include a total number of 
‘interactions’ that a post has received. For Facebook posts, possi­
ble interactions include comments, likes, shares, and additional 
post reaction types including love, wow, haha, sad, angry, and 
care. For Instagram posts, possible interactions include likes and 
comments. Drawing on the current standard in social media re­
search, the total number of interactions per post is used to ap­
proximate its popularity and audience reach. We describe checks 
to ascertain the validity of the search results and further detail 
on the output of CT queries in Supplementary Section S3.
We focus on Facebook and Instagram because these platforms 
are major fora for a variety of political discussions while also pro­
viding access to a large and diverse range of users: As of 
November 2021, Facebook was the most popular social media 
platform with nearly 3 billion monthly active users (MAU) world­
wide, while Instagram was ranked fourth with 1.2 billion MAU 
[57]. These platforms offer their users a broader scope of pur­
poses and interactions compared to the commonly studied plat­
form X (ranked fourteenth in MAU). As a result, the latter is 
popular particularly amongst news-loving elites, whereas the au­
dience scope of Facebook and Instagram users is more universal 
[58]. Moreover, due to the historically wider breadth of data ac­
cess available to researchers on X relative to other platforms 
(this was true until 2023 when X’s new owner, Elon Musk, slowly 
retracted academic access to their database), X is the subject of a 
disproportionately large majority of studies in this area despite 
concerns about representativeness and external validity [59]. The 
focus on Facebook and Instagram in this work contributes to cor­
recting that imbalance.
Analysis
Mainstream media articles
We identify the main discourses in the articles by first taking a 
random sample of 10 articles from a selection of different UK and 
USA outlets, conducting an initial assessment of this sample’s 
thematic content inductively, and then refining this assessment 
with the themes present in press releases and briefings issued by 
prominent environmental NGOs at the end of the COP. Research 
has shown that mainstream media rely heavily on NGO sources 
for policy outcomes and interpretations during COP summits, so 
taking this step provided a useful framework for the finalization 
of the codebook [60–61]. Illustrative examples of the NGO mes­
saging can be found in the Supplementary Section S4, and in the 
discussion of the results which follows.
The first round of inductive coding resulted in the detection of 
topics related to three main issues discussed at the summit:
i) The commitment to cut emissions enough to keep 1.5C as 
a target 
ii) Plans to reduce coal production 
iii) The establishment of financial assistance for develop­
ing countries. 
The comparison with the NGO messaging assisted in the clas­
sification of subtopics within these themes, 12 in total, including 
sentiment (presented below). These variables were then coded 
for presence and salience in each of the articles. Presence here 
denotes if the theme appeared to any degree in the headline or 
article text, while salience denotes whether the theme appeared 
in the headline or first five sentences of an article.
Intercoder reliability was measured according to Krippendorff’s 
alpha using Deen Freelon’s Recal3 software. Krippendorff’s alpha 
value ranges from 0 to 1, with larger values indicating higher agree­
ment and reliability between annotators [62]. According to this 
measurement, eight of the variables (including sentiment) showed 
100% agreement. However, three of the variables—general weaken­
ing of the coal deal, blaming India or China for the coal deal, and 
agreement on adaptation funds—scored 0.571. In these cases, the 
text of the codebook was discussed, clarified and re-written, with 
disagreements resolved post hoc to ensure full agreement.
We first assessed the presence and salience of the commit­
ment to cut emissions (from all sources, not just fossil fuels and 
coal) enough to keep 1.5C as a target. Four types of sub- 
discourses were identified:
i) The agreement fails to commit countries to keep 1.5 a real­
istic target 
ii) Bare minimum to keep 1.5 alive or ‘on life support’ 
iii) Some progress was made, but more remains to be done to 
meet 1.5 target 
iv) The deal successfully accelerates political action to keep 
temperature rise below 1.5 
Our next assessment pertained to discourses around plans to 
cut coal production, and who was to blame for the watering down 
of the language from ‘phase out’ to ‘phase down’. These were:
i) The agreement was weakened by the language change but 
no specific blame 
ii) India and/or China blamed 
iii) India, China, the USA and the EU (collectively) blamed 
Next, we focused on four discourses around attempts to in­
crease financial aid for climate action in developing countries 
(we only assessed presence as an examination of an initial sam­
ple of articles showed that this issue was rarely salient, given the 
strong presence of the other discourses). It is important to note 
that the final Glasgow Pact recognized the importance of Loss 
and Damage, but failed to agree on a dedicated new fund.
4 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
i) Rich nations refused climate crisis support for develop­
ing nations 
ii) The lack of an agreement on a Loss and Damage fund­
ing facility 
iii) The USA and EU specifically were responsible for the lack 
of agreement 
iv) An agreement on 2025 as the date by when developed coun­
tries need to double their collective aid, based on 
2019 pledges 
Finally, sentiment on the conference outcomes was coded for 
all articles on a scale of 1 to 5: (i) Exclusively negative sentiment 
and characterization of the conference as a failure; (ii) Mostly 
negative but acknowledgment of minor progress; (iii) Balance of 
positive and negative sentiment; (iv) Mostly positive but acknowl­
edgement of some weaknesses; (v) Exclusively positive sentiment 
and characterization of the conference as a success. We use an 
additional level 6 for articles expressing no sentiment towards 
the conference’s outcomes. As with any sentiment assessment, 
there is a degree of subjective judgement, unlike an assessment 
of whether a particular topic frame is present or not. Examples of 
the five sentiment categories are presented in Supplementary 
Section S5.
Social media samples
The 250 posts per platform (500 in total) with the highest total 
number of interactions were selected for manual analysis. We 
gave equal weight to all interaction types. The type of account 
authoring each post was also annotated using a framework re­
sembling Hopke and Hestres [47]. This was done to enable com­
parison of focus points across different stakeholders in the 
discourse but alternatives are discussed in Supplementary 
Section S6. Details of the account annotation process are pro­
vided in Supplementary Section S8. Both samples include posts 
from high-profile politicians, activists, celebrities, media outlets 
(including those examined in the mainstream media sample), 
government agencies, and organizations from all countries in the 
mainstream media sample (see Supplementary Tables S2–S4 for 
a full breakdown and examples of accounts associated with each 
category, and by geographic location).
For Facebook posts, we examined the main text of the post 
along with the text of any image included in the post. For 
Instagram, all posts correspond to an image so the extractable 
text includes the main image caption and any text within the im­
age. In the first instance, each post is annotated using the code­
book applied to the mainstream media sample so as to 
approximate the extent to which the arenas resembled each 
other. However, new topic frames were added to the social media 
codebook inductively when they were found in an appreciable 
volume of posts (generally higher than 5%). These new topics are 
presented in the results and defined in Supplementary Section 
S9. Finally, the same sentiment codebook is applied as in the 
mainstream media sample.
We then calculated the prevalence of each topic and senti­
ment. In order to quantify the similarities and differences in topic 
and sentiment frames across stakeholders, we also performed 
tests of statistical significance of variance (chi-square or 
ANOVAs with Tukey honestly significant difference post hoc 
tests, where appropriate). Limitations of the data and methods 
are discussed in the Conclusion and further in Supplementary 
Section S6.
Results
Mainstream media sample
The first assessment focused on the commitment to cut emis­
sions in line with the 1.5C target. As can be seen from the first 
four columns of Table 1, 31 articles (22%) prominently presented 
the agreement as the bare minimum, 25 (18%) as some progress, 
8 (6%) as broadly positive and 8 (6%) as an outright failure.
The next assessment focused on the different discourses 
around plans to cut coal production, and who was to blame for the 
watering down of the language from ‘phase out’ to ‘phase down’.  
Table 1 shows that the general weakening frame (without any spe­
cific blame) was the most present (117 articles, 83% of sample) and 
the most salient (71 articles, 50%). Supplementary Table S4 
presents the content analysis by outlet political leaning and shows 
that the change in language was more salient in the right-leaning 
and centrist press (58–62%) than in the left-leaning (40%). When 
assessments of blame were present, coverage in the USA, UK, and 
Australia firmly targeted India and China, with that frame being 
the second most salient of the sample (100 articles, 71%) and pre­
sent in nearly half of the articles (70 articles, 50%).
Unsurprisingly, the Indian media sample showed lower Figs 
for this criticism: For presence, only 56% of articles compared to 
a range of 65%–81% for the other three countries; and for sa­
lience, only 28% compared to a range of 43%–67%. The difference 
might have been greater if several of the Indian articles had not 
been based on Western agency reports, such as Reuters, Agence 
France-Press and Bloomberg.
There was a notable difference between the left-leaning me­
dia, where the blaming of India and China was present in 63% of 
Table 1. Number of articles showing the presence of key messages by country and topic area
Emission  
Cuts/1.5C  
target
Plans to reduce  
coal production
Finance
Failure
Bare  
minimum
Some  
progress
Positive
Phase  
down/out
China/India
Collective  
blame
Rich failed  
the poorest
No L&D  
fund
Blame  
US & EU
Adaptation  
by 2025
Salient
Salient
Salient
Present Present Salient Present Salient Present Salient
Present
Present
Present
Present
Australia
1
7
5
1
36
18
28
19
1
1
11
11
5
8
India
2
7
6
4
19
9
14
4
2
1
12
9
4
7
UK
3
16
10
3
45
35
41
35
1
1
14
16
6
20
USA
2
1
4
0
17
9
17
9
0
0
13
11
9
7
Total
8
31
25
8
117
71
100
70
4
3
50
47
24
42
% of articles
6
22
18
6
83
50
71
50
3
2
35
33
17
30
Last row shows percentage Figs for presence and/or salience for each message.
Sanford and Painter | 5  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
articles and salient in 45%, and the right-leaning media where 
the presence (84%) and salience (53%) were higher. The centrist 
media came in-between (see Supplementary Table S4). A poten­
tial driver of the difference was the urge to find villains and 
scapegoats and blame China, particularly in the right-wing tab­
loid press in the UK. This ‘blame discourse’ was also in part fed 
by headlining the comments from the COP26’s chair, Alok 
Sharma, and then British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, both 
blaming India and China. However, this alone does not explain 
the strong presence of this message and the virtual absence of 
the collective responsibility message, which was present only 4 
times (3%), and only 3 times salient (2%).
Next, we examined the presence of discourses around finance 
for developing countries. The first, second and last of the finance 
subframes were each present in 30–35% of the articles. Some of 
the articles, particularly in the right-leaning UK press, presented 
the Loss and Damage text in the final agreement as a positive de­
velopment. For example, a Sun article described it as an achieve­
ment of the COP without any acknowledgement of the failure to 
set up a dedicated fund: ‘Boosting up the agenda—the conversation 
about how to pay for the loss and damage that climate change inflicts on 
developing countries’. Sky News did the same.
However, a much smaller percentage of the total sample of 
articles (only half of those which mentioned the lack of an agree­
ment) blamed the failure to achieve a Loss and Damages fund on 
Western countries such as the EU and the USA (24 articles, 17%). 
This was despite widespread frustration from many developing 
countries on the issue.
Table 2 shows the results of the sentiment analysis of the 
articles. As can be seen, the majority of articles fell into the ‘some 
progress, but many failings’ and ‘some good aspects, some nega­
tive’ categories (33% and 35%). Only 6% of the articles framed the 
outcome as an (outright) failure. Indeed, the media coverage 
overwhelmingly concluded that there had been some progress at 
the COP, despite many NGOs pushing the line of failure 
(Supplementary Section S4).
Positive appraisals were also hardly present—9% across the 
two positive-leaning categories. A sizable proportion of these 
came from the Indian sample, where five articles from across the 
political spectrum stressed the positive outcome of the COP, and 
highlighted environment minister Bhupender Yadav’s descrip­
tion of the conference as a success. Although these may have 
been attempts to counter the aforementioned accusations preva­
lent in the coverage of other countries and outlets.
Social media sample
Frame and sentiment prevalence
Additional inductive analysis of the social media posts led to the 
inclusion of six new topics in the codebook: Summit leadership, 
summit failure, the presence and role of youth activism, 
emphasis on collective hope and action to offset disappointment, 
generic updates on the summit closure, and a final ‘name drop’ 
category. Posts in this final category refer to the conference to es­
tablish a background premise for focusing on something else, 
thereby lacking specific commentary about the conference itself 
and any particular sentiment about its outcomes. They often 
contain underlying political critiques, e.g. criticism of Boris 
Johnson for mistaking the host city of the summit at a press con­
ference and praising then Scottish Prime Minister Nicola 
Sturgeon’s leadership. As depicted in the tables below, these 
posts occur with relatively high frequency, especially from 
artists, celebrities, business news outlets, other media channels, 
non-environmentally focused NGOs and nonprofits, and the 
catch-all category for miscellaneous individuals and businesses. 
As these posts lack direct expressions of sentiment related to the 
conference, analysis of them is beyond the scope of this paper. 
However, their presence raises pressing questions about how 
these stakeholders engage with policy discourses and additional 
forthcoming work treats them, and their counterparts in the 
mainstream media sample, in their own right.
The first two columns of Table 3 tabulate the prevalence of 
each topic in the samples by platform. The topics with the high­
est prevalence (besides the name drop and update categories) in­
clude pronouncements of the summit as a failure, discussions of 
the emissions and coal deals, and references to world leaders. 
The former is epitomized in an excerpt of a post from interna­
tional youth climate activist Greta Thunberg: ‘The #COP26 is over. 
Here’s a brief summary: Blah, blah, blah.’
Regarding the emissions deal, the prevalence of positive and 
negative commentary is evenly split on both platforms. These 
posts often mentioned corruption in government—especially 
China and India in contrast with the US and EU—and the finance 
industry (usually politicians and bankers beholden to fossil fuel 
companies), 
nuances 
which 
did 
not 
appear 
in 
main­
stream media.
Regarding the coal deal, it was most common to see mentions 
of the weakening of the deal’s language without specific blame 
attribution. In contrast with the news sample, focus on the fail­
ures of world leaders emerges as a discourse in its own right, spe­
cifically among activists and NGOs, and is overwhelmingly 
negative. Many of these posts begin with disparaging comments 
on the inaction of world leaders and end with calls for hope and 
collective action, i.e. ‘taking matters into our own hands’. This 
narrative is usually combined as well with references to youth 
activism, particularly on Instagram.
Finally, references to outcomes for financial aid to developing 
countries, both positive and negative, were low on both plat­
forms. Instead, references to the financial deal were most com­
monly mentioned at the end of posts summarizing the outcomes 
in a laundry-list style and were polarized in tone: either 
Table 2. Sentiment analysis of mainstream media sample, by country
Failure
Some progress, 
many failings
Some good, 
some negative
Better 
than expected
Positive
Neutral/NA
Total
Australia
4
14
12
1
1
11
43
India
1
5
7
2
5
5
25
UK
3
21
22
3
0
3
52
USA
0
7
9
1
0
4
21
Total
8
47
50
7
6
23
141
% of articles
6
33
35
5
4
15
Total counts and percentages of articles from each country coded to each sentiment category.
6 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
celebrating the deal (e.g. posts from the European Commission 
and UN Climate Change) or condemning it along with the rest of 
the summit (e.g. posts from Extinction Rebellion and The Climate 
Reality Project).
The second two columns of Table 3 tabulate the relative share 
of total interactions received by posts including each topic. On 
Facebook, posts about the summit’s failures (23%), emphasis on 
collective hope and action (20%), criticism of leadership (17%), 
and criticism of the emissions deal in particular (10%) received 
the most interactions. On Instagram, the most-interacted with 
frames include criticism of leadership (28%), mentions of youth 
activism (26%), mentions of failure (15%), and collective hope 
and action (14%). The differences in interactions with mentions 
of youth activism and emissions between the platforms (25 and 9 
percentage points, respectively) are particularly noticeable.
Given the dominance of the failure topic on Facebook and the 
leadership and youth activism topics on Instagram, we examined 
the distribution of interactions for these topics. They are all 
highly skewed towards a few outlying posts belonging to climate 
activist Greta Thunberg on Facebook and celebrity actress Emma 
Watson on Instagram, both of whom are extremely well-known 
internationally. To adjust for this, the last two columns in  
Table 3 show the share of interactions for each topic per platform 
with the posts of these two users removed.
After this correction, the margins of dominance for the failure 
and criticism of leadership topics decrease substantially. The 
shares of posts featuring collective hope and action and youth 
activism also decrease. Meanwhile, the shares of posts mention­
ing the coal and emissions deals and neutral framing of world 
leaders increase. Finally, the shares for the name drop and up­
date topics double on both platforms. This demonstrates the sig­
nificance that Thunberg and Watson had in driving engagement 
with the collective hope and action and leadership criticism 
topics versus other stakeholders, especially news outlets which 
focused on the coal, neutral leadership, positive emission, name 
drop, and update frames (see Fig. 1).
Regarding sentiment, Table 4 shows that of the posts express­
ing a clear sentiment about the conference’s outcomes, nearly 
32% fall into the two most negative sentiment categories, 7.8% in 
the balanced category, and 11% in the two positive levels.
Frame and sentiment variance across account types
Figure 1 visualizes the distribution of topics across account types 
across both samples (visualizations by platform are included in 
Supplementary Section S11). The differences are statistically sig­
nificant overall (χ2 (df ¼ 182, n ¼ 762) ¼ 502.49, P ¼ .000, Cramer’s 
V ¼ 0.225, P ¼ .000) and on each platform (Facebook: χ2 (df ¼ 182, 
n ¼ 340) ¼ 260.14, 
P ¼ .0016, 
Cramer’s 
V ¼ 0.243, 
P ¼ .000), 
(Instagram: χ2 (df ¼ 182, n ¼ 422) ¼ 412.01, P ¼ 0.000, Cramer’s 
V ¼ 0.274, P ¼ .000). Because there were several account—topic 
pairs with 0 observations, all tests are replicated with the Yates’ 
correction to counteract the risk of overestimating the signifi­
cance of the comparisons. The results remain consistent.
The difference in the frame focus of posts from news compa­
nies (all categories) and activists/eNGOs and nonprofits is sharp. 
Mirroring their full-length coverage, the accounts of news com­
panies posted most frequently about the weakening of the coal 
deal, particularly India and China’s role. Meanwhile activists/ 
eNGOs emphasized the failings of the summit, the weakness of 
the emissions deal, criticism of world leaders, appeals for collec­
tive hope and action, and praise of youth activism. When these 
accounts did mention the coal deal, they were more likely to 
mention their dismay at the weakening of the language without 
signalling specific blame. Posts from left-leaning politicians and 
political groups did the same and generally resemble the topic 
spread of activists.
Finally, the sentiment distributions across each account type 
and topic were examined using ANOVA and Tukey HSD tests. 
Supplementary Table S5 tabulates the results. The distributions 
of sentiment across account types are significantly different at 
all levels of comparison. This effect appears largely driven by the 
difference between activists and news outlets, with the former 
consistently lower than the latter.
Table 3. Raw prevalence and share of interactions of each topic for each platform
Raw prevalence
Share of interactions
Share of interactions  
(without Thunberg and Watson)
Topic/subtopic
Facebook
Instagram
Facebook
Instagram
Facebook
Instagram
Coal total
9.5
7
3.2
2.1
6
7.3
-Language of deal weakened
6
3
2
9
4
3.5
-India and China blamed for weakening
3
3
.7
.9
1
3
-US, EU, India, and China blamed 
for weakening
.5
.8
.5
.2
.9
.8
Emissions total
13
14
13
3
14
10
-Negative
6
7
10
1
8
4
-Positive
7
7
3
2
6
6
Finance total
4
6
1
1.4
2.4
5.5
-Criticism
3
3
.9
.5
2
2
-Praise of new target
1
3
.2
.9
.4
3.5
Leaders total
14
20
19.5
30.5
15
27
-Negative
8
14
17
28
11
16
-Neutral
2
3
.5
2
1
9
-Positive
4
3
2
.5
3
2
Summit failure
11
11
23
15
15
10
Collective/hope
5
9
20
14
9
4
Youth activism
3
7
1
26
3
8
Name drop
18
12
9
3
17
11
Update
13
3
5
3
10
10
First two columns show the percentage of posts in which each topic was detected per platform. Second two columns show the relative share of interactions per 
topic per platform. Last two columns show the relative share of interactions per topic after removing posts from Emma Watson and Greta Thunberg. The columns 
will not sum to 100% because in 187 of the posts, more than one topic is present. Core topics indicated in bold with subtopics indicated in italics.
Sanford and Painter | 7  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
Discussion
Summary of results
The results of the mainstream media analysis show that 
Australia, India, the UK, and the US focused on highlighting prog­
ress made at the conference, albeit the bare minimum, as well as 
blaming India and China for shortcomings of the coal deal. 
Moreover, the sentiment of the coverage regarding the conferen­
ce’s outcomes was mostly neutral.
In contrast, the most prominent discourses in the social media 
sample pertained to the failure of the conference, the particular 
failure of world leaders, and the emissions deal. The sentiment 
of the sample was largely negative. Many of the most influential 
posts were made by activists who launched narratives divergent 
from the primary scope of the news sample, as well as those of 
political leaders and government bodies in the sample who 
praised the conference’s successes without acknowledging its 
shortcomings. In doing so, these leaders could be seen as playing 
into the activists’ arguments about their own ineptitude.
Accounts in the social media sample placed less emphasis on 
the coal deal and blame on India and China compared to main­
stream media. This could be due to media outlets echoing views 
from the EU, UK, and US, aiming to shift focus from their own 
failures on emissions by highlighting the coal deal. Some social 
media users noticed this tactic and criticized Western govern­
ments for scapegoating developing nations, though the overall 
narrative of leaders' failure prevailed.
Implications for climate politics and 
communication
These results bear the following implications for climate politics 
and communication:
Activist stakeholders on social media, particularly within the 
youth movement, are moving discourses on these platforms in 
different directions to those on mainstream media, with 
criticisms of political hypocrisy and inaction increasingly salient. 
This dissonance raises questions as to how members of the pub­
lic exposed to both go about making sense of the competing nar­
ratives. While it has always been a core frame of the movement’s 
activism [18, 63–64], the failure theme is growing in salience rela­
tive to other communication objectives, such as raising aware­
ness and inspiring hope [46, 65]. Specifically within COP 
discourses on X, Falkenberg et al. found that such criticism has 
increased significantly over time, with 7% of pro-climate influ­
encers tweeting about the topic during COP21 compared to 35% 
during COP26 [48]. Moreover, framing policy summits and world 
leaders as failures legitimizes the activists’ protest-led approach 
and bolsters their argument for collective action to lead global 
change, instead of waiting for governments to do so. Han and 
Ahn describe how youth activists have done this within their 
communication to cultivate moral legitimacy over world leaders 
in the fight against climate change [64].
The growing emphasis on the failure narrative among acti­
vists on social media demonstrates the widening margin 
Figure 1. Topics discussed by account type in full dataset. Sample interpretation: The horizontal teal bar (6th from the left) corresponding to negative 
framing of political leaders is larger for activist accounts (top row) than it is for the accounts of right-leaning politicians (second row from the bottom, 
third horizontal bar from the left).
Table 4. Sentiment analysis of social media sample, by platform
Failure
Some progress,  
many failings
Some good, 
some negative
Better 
than expected
Positive
Neutral/NA
Total
Facebook
42
19
20
15
12
142
250
Instagram
82
16
19
19
11
103
250
Total
124
35
39
34
23
245
500
% of posts
24.8
7
7.8
6.8
4.6
49
Counts of posts on each platform coded into each sentiment category.
8 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
between the demands of climate activism and the inadequate 
response from international governments. While a level of frus­
tration with the progress of international climate policy is justi­
fied, we suggest that the focus on failure in activist narratives 
may damage the perceived legitimacy of COP and other global 
political initiatives as an effective forum for addressing climate 
change. As such, we propose the existence of a legitimization 
tradeoff: While the failure narrative may be used to legitimize 
and build support for civil society protest action agendas, it may 
also obstruct policy advancement by reducing the public’s belief 
in political efficacy and legitimacy. Findings from previous re­
search support this argument.
First, these narratives may erode trust in political leaders and 
the political system. This trust has been found in several studies 
to be a key determinant of support for climate policy initiatives 
[66–71]. Moreover, the focus on political failure may crowd out dis­
cussion of new policies, therefore validating suggestions in previ­
ous literature that social media platforms are increasingly edging 
out constructive discussion and societal consensus [72–73]. This 
narrative also drives a wedge between politicians and civil society, 
constructing the image of the two as diametrically opposed when 
in reality, strong synergy and collaboration between the two is 
needed to bring about systemic change [74–76]. Neither can solve 
the problem on its own; collective action is required both to spur 
political action and support it by cultivating discourses that build 
public acceptability of new policies.
The same can be said of discourses over-emphasizing the role 
of the political system. In a study of press releases of US corpora­
tions, advocacy organizations, and government agencies about 
climateissues, Wetts found a dominance of ‘elite-oriented’ and 
‘value-neutral’ narratives which portrayed scientific, political, 
economic elites as protagonists in climate action but fell short of 
defining specific actions they should take or how these actions 
could be connected to civil society [77]. The author warns that 
doing so could result in individuals feeling disenfranchised and 
unaccountable for climate action while also fostering distrust of 
the experts designated as responsible for leading action cam­
paigns. Conversely, emphasis on the failure of these same politi­
cal elites could have comparable negative consequences for 
audience engagement: Framing the international political system 
as inept, if not antagonistic, to concrete and immediate climate 
action may have the combined downsides of (i) inadvertently de- 
emphasizing and/or devaluing political efficacy to drive change, 
while (ii) reinforcing distrust in the (elite) political system, 
thereby contributing to polarization and disconsensus within 
pro-climate discourse.
Conclusion
Previous research has shown the importance of COPs for 
influencing climate discourse and policy development. We have 
added to this scholarship by providing the first comparison of 
mainstream and social media discourses of a COP summit. We 
also assessed the implications of this divergence for hindering 
the curation of cohesive narratives around climate issues, poli­
cies, and solutions around which public and political support can 
rally. These results are relevant to the discourses of future COP 
summits, as well as any other prominent event at which global 
climate politics are discussed.
Nonetheless, the work has limitations. We examined five 
news outlets in each of four English-speaking countries, along 
with exclusively English-language posts on Facebook and 
Instagram. As such, the analysis ignores discourses unfolding in 
other languages. This is a particular limitation of the Indian 
news sample, given the larger readership of Hindi and other lan­
guage titles, and the differences between these and English lan­
guage outlets in terms of resources, readership and editorial 
treatments [41]. Support for the Indian government position 
might have been stronger in a Hindi-language sample (in part be­
cause of their not being reliant on Western news agencies), but 
other results such as the presence of other key messages, and dif­
ferences between left- and right-wing outlets were probably not 
affected. Indeed, other research of the Indian media has shown 
little difference between English and Hindi titles in their general 
framing of the Glasgow COP, with an emphasis in both the 
English and the Hindi media on the dominant frame of political 
conflict, and lesser attention paid to other frames such as eco­
nomic consequences, health impacts or morality [50].
It is also the case that the mainstream media sample is 
skewed towards advanced economies. India is included in the 
sample as a contrasting emerging economy and cultural context, 
but there are many other countries which have routinely been ig­
nored in media coverage of climate issues, as well as in academic 
research, that should be prioritized in the future.
In addition, the mainstream media sample focuses on straight 
news reporting rather than opinion pieces. A wider selection of 
‘opinion-driven’ news sites and opinion pieces could have pro­
vided some interesting points of comparison with our social me­
dia sample where many of the posts came from activists or 
commentators with a clear position.
Finally, we examined only the top 250 most interacted with 
posts per platform. We could have selected a random sample to 
annotate. We preferred the former approach because it offered 
the best chance of characterizing the content that was likely to 
have reached the most people by virtue of being interacted with 
more. While the newsfeed curation algorithms of Facebook and 
Instagram are proprietary, it is generally understood that content 
which receives more interactions tends to spread farther, and be 
shown to more people, than content which receives fewer inter­
actions [78].
With our results and their limitations in mind, we propose the 
following research avenues:
First, scholars should monitor the divergences between 
mainstream coverage and social media discourse of climate 
politics, and what implications they have for policy support and 
collective action. In particular, researchers will need to better 
understand how patterns of use and trust in these arenas evolve 
over time within different demographics, and how this in turn 
affects how different demographics engage with the content they 
see in each.
Secondly, the potential effectiveness (and challenges) of co­
ordination across media outlets and activist stakeholders has 
been examined in pre-Internet studies, e.g. Gamson and 
Wolfsfeld and Trumbo, but not in the more recent digital age 
[8–9]. Researchers should update this work to investigate the 
practicalities, challenges, and affordances of media stakeholder 
collaboration within the contemporary hybrid nature of media 
practice and consumption.
Finally, further investigation of how activist narratives reso­
nate with different populations in the context of political events 
should be undertaken to determine how to effectively stimulate 
long-term engagement. There is significant discussion in the ex­
perimental environmental psychology literature on this topic, 
but little consensus (see Sanford et al., for a summary [39]). More 
research into on- and offline engagement in response to activists 
campaigns, combined with qualitative interview and survey 
Sanford and Painter | 9  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
work, should be done to add insights into the impact of various 
narratives, particularly those relating to political failure and the 
potential legitimization tradeoff, on different audiences with re­
spect to motivating collective action and policy support.
Acknowledgements
Nadine Strauss helped with the coding design for mainstream 
media, and contributed to the coder reliability tests.
Author contributions
Mary Sanford (Conceptualization-Equal, Data curation-Lead, 
Formal analysis-Lead, Funding acquisition-Equal, Investigation- 
Equal, 
Methodology-Equal, 
Project 
administration-Lead, 
Validation-Lead, Visualization-Lead, Writing—original draft- 
Lead, Writing—review & editing-Lead) and James Painter 
(Conceptualization-Equal, Formal analysis-Supporting, Funding 
acquisition-Equal, Methodology-Equal, Resources-Supporting, 
Supervision-Lead, Writing—review & editing-Supporting).
Supplementary data
Supplementary data is available at Oxford Open Climate 
Change online.
Conflict of interest: None declared.
Funding
This work was completed as part of the MS’s doctoral thesis 
which was funded by the UKRI ESRC Grand Union Doctoral 
Training Program, grant number 2262660. Some of the initial 
data collection was completed as part of work funded by the 
Children's Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF) and managed by 
Climate Outreach.
Data availability
Both the mainstream and social media data may be made avail­
able upon request to the authors. They cannot be posted publicly 
due to the copyright requirements of the databases from which 
they were queried.
Ethics statement
The study did not require IRB review in accordance with guide­
lines of the University of Oxford’s Central University Research 
Ethics Committee.
References
1.0
Boykoff M, Aoyagi M, Ballantyne A et al. World newspaper cover­
age of climate change or global warming, 2004-2024. In: Media 
and Climate Change Observatory Data Sets. Cooperative Institute 
for Research in Environmental Sciences, 2024. https://doi.org/ 
10.25810/4c3b-b819.
2.0
Kunelius R, Eide E, Moment of hope, mode of realism: on the dy­
namics of a transnational journalistic field during UN climate 
change summits. Int J Commun 2012;6:266–85.
3.0
Stoddart MCJ, Tindall DB, Brockhaus M et al. Conference of the 
parties meetings as regularly scheduled critical events for 
global climate governance: reflecting on COP 26 and the 
Glasgow Climate Pact. Soc Nat Res 2023;36:442–50.
4.0 Wolling J, Arlt D. Media coverage of international climate sum­
mits and negotiations. Oxf Res Encycl Climate Sci 2017. https:// 
oxfordre.com/climatescience/view/10.1093/acrefore/ 
9780190228620.001.0001/acrefore-9780190228620-e-362.
5.0 Wozniak A, Wessler H, Chan C et al. The event-centered nature 
of global public spheres: the UN climate change conferences, 
fridays for future, and the (limited) transnationalization of me­
dia debates. Int J Commun 2021;15:688–714.
6.0 Anderson AA. Effects of Social Media Use on Climate Change 
Opinion, Knowledge, and Behavior. Oxf Res Encycl of Climate Sci 2017.
7.0 Kunelius R, Tegelberg M, Pohjonen M. A Social Climate Sphere: 
Analysing the 2021 Glasgow Climate Summit (COP26) on 
Twitter A Work-in-Progress Report. 2022. https://www.helsinki. 
fi/assets/drupal/2022-10/Kunelius_Tegelberg_Pohjonen_(2022) 
_A_Social_Climate_Sphere_(FINAL_REPORT_VERSION_1).pdf 
(23 May 2024, date last accessed).
8.0 Gamson WA, Wolfsfeld G. Movements and media as interacting 
systems. Ann Am Acad Polit Soc Sci 1993;528:114–25.
9.0 Trumbo C. Constructing climate change: claims and frames in 
US news coverage of an environmental issue. Publ Underst Sci 
1996;5:269–83.
10. O’Neill S, Williams HTP, Kurz T et al. Dominant frames in legacy 
and social media coverage of the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. 
Nat Clim Chan 2015;5:380–5.
11. Bourdieu P. The Logic of Practice (Nice R., Trans.). Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1990.
12. Bourdieu P. Practical Reason: On the Theory of Action (Johnson R., 
Trans.). Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998.
13. Carvalho A. Media(ted)discourses and climate change: a focus 
on political subjectivity and (dis)engagement. WIREs Clim Chan 
2010;1:172–9.
14. Liu X, Lindquist E, Vedlitz A. Explaining media and congressio­
nal attention to global climate change, 1969-2005: an empirical 
test of agenda-setting theory. Polit Res Q 2011;64:405–19.
15. Chadwick A. The Hybrid Media System: Politics and Power. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2013.
16. Hestres LE, Hopke JE. Internet-enabled activism and climate 
change. Oxf Res Encycl Climate Sci 2017.
17. Mavrodieva AV, Rachman OK, Harahap VB et al. Role of social 
media as a soft power tool in raising public awareness and en­
gagement in addressing climate change. Climate 2019;7:122.
18. Boulianne S, Lalancette M, Ilkiw D. “School Strike 4 Climate”: so­
cial media and the international youth protest on climate 
change. Media Commun 2020;8:208–18.
19. Gurwitt S, Roberts T. The Paris Climate Talks According to U.S. Print 
Media: Plenty of Heat, but not so Much Light. Brookings, 2015. 
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/planetpolicy/2015/12/18/the- 
paris-climate-talks-according-to-u-s-print-media-plenty-of- 
heat-but-not-so-much-light/ (24 May 2024, date last accessed).
20. Gurwitt S, Malkki K, Mitra M. Global issue, developed country 
bias: the Paris climate conference as covered by daily print 
news organizations in 13 nations. Clim Chan 2017; 143:281–96.
21. Smith J, McCarthy JD, McPhail C et al. From protest to agenda 
building: description bias in media coverage of protest events in 
Washington, D. C. Soc Forces 2001;79:1397–423.
22. Earl J, Maher TV, Elliott T. Youth, activism, and social move­
ments. Sociol Compass 2017;11:e12465.
23. Maher TV, Earl J. Barrier or booster? Digital media, social net­
works, and youth micromobilization. Sociol Perspect 2019; 
62:865–83.
10 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
24.
Heiberger R, Majo-Vazquez S, Castro Herrero L et al. Do not 
blame the media! The role of politicians and parties in frag­
menting online political debate. Int J Press/Politics 2022; 
27:910–41.
25.
Dunaway J, Searles K, Sui M et al. News attention in a mobile 
era. J Comput Mediat Commun 2018;23:107–24.
26.
Haile T. What You Get Wrong about the Internet. Time, 2014. 
https://time.com/12933/what-you-think-you-know-about-the- 
web-is-wrong/ (24 May 2024, date last accessed).
27.
Majo-Vazquez S, Zhao J, Nielsen RK. The Digital-Born and Legacy 
News Media on Twitter during the French Presidential Elections. 
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. https://reutersin 
stitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/our-research/digital-born-and-legacy- 
news-media-twitter-during-french-presidential-elections 
(24 
May 2024, date last accessed).
28.
Martin N. How social media has changed how we consume 
news. 
Forbes. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/nicolemartin1/ 
2018/11/30/how-social-media-has-changed-how-we-consume- 
news/ (24 May 2024, date last accessed).
29.
Thurman N. Newspaper consumption in the digital age. Digit 
Journal 2014;2:156–78.
30.
Iyengar S. Framing responsibility for political issues. Ann Am 
Acad Polit Soc Sci 1996;546:59–70.
31.
Chong D, Druckman JN. Framing theory. Annu Rev Polit Sci 2007; 
10:103–26.
32.
Vu HT, Blomberg M, Seo H et al. Social media and environmental 
activism: framing climate change on Facebook by global NGOs. 
Sci Commun 2021;43:91–115.
33.
Chen K, Molder AL, Duan Z et al. How climate movement actors 
and news media frame climate change and strike: evidence 
from analyzing Twitter and news media discourse from 2018 to 
2021. Int J Press/Politics 2022;28:384–413.
34.
Wang Z, Song Y, Chen Z. Tracing the flow of climate change 
frames: intermedia agenda setting between Twitter and News 
Media in the US and the UK. Emerg Media 2024;1:1–25.
35.
Medhat W, Hassan A, Korashy H. Sentiment analysis algorithms 
and applications: a survey. Ain Shams Eng J 2013;5:1093–113.
36.
Chapman DA, Lickel B, Markowitz EM. Reassessing emotion in 
climate change communication. Nat Clim Chan 2017;7:850–2.
37.
Feinberg M, Willer R. Apocalypse soon?: Dire messages reduce 
belief in global warming by contradicting just-world beliefs. 
Psychol Sci 2011;22:34–8.
38.
O’Neill S, Nicholson-Cole S. “Fear Won’t Do It”: promoting posi­
tive engagement with climate change through visual and iconic 
representations. Sci Commun 2009;30:355–79.
39.
Sanford M, Witkowska M, Gifford R et al. Emotional framing in 
online environmental activism: Pairing a Twitter study with an 
offline experiment. Front Psychol 2022;13:1099331.
40.
Dirikx A, Gelders D. To frame is to explain: a deductive frame- 
analysis of Dutch and French climate change coverage during 
the annual UN Conferences of the Parties. Public Underst Sci 
2010;19:732–42.
41.
Painter J. Summoned by Science: Reporting Climate Change at 
Copenhagen and Beyond. Reuters Institute for the Study of 
Journalism. 
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/de 
fault/files/2017-12/Summoned%20by%20Science%20Reporting 
%20Climate%20Change%20at%20Copenhagen%20and%20be 
yond.pdf (24 May 2024, date last accessed).
42.
Castillo Esparcia A, Lopez Gomez S. Public Opinion about 
Climate Change in United States, Partisan View and Media 
Coverage of the 2019 United Nations Climate Change 
Conference (COP 25) in Madrid. Sustainability 2021;13:3926.
43. Painter J, Kristiansen S, Sch€afer MS. How ‘Digital-born’ media 
cover climate change in comparison to legacy media: a case study 
of the COP 21 summit in Paris. Global Env Chan 2018;48:1–10.
44. Segerberg A, Bennett WL. Social media and the organization of 
collective action: using Twitter to explore the ecologies of two 
climate change protests. Commun Rev 2011;14:197–215.
45. Comfort SE, Hester JB. Three dimensions of social media mes­
saging success by environmental NGOs. Env Commun 2019; 
13:281–6.
46. De-Lara A, Erviti M-C, Leon B. Communication strategies in the 
climate change debate on Facebook. Discourse on the Madrid 
Climate Summit (COP 25). Profes Informacion 2022;31:e310202.
47. Hopke JE, Hestres LE. Visualizing the Paris climate talks on 
Twitter: media and climate stakeholder visual social media dur­
ing COP21. Soc Media Soc 2018;4:2056305118782687.
48. Falkenberg M, Galeazzi A, Torricelli M et al. Growing polariza­
tion around climate change on social media. Nat Clim Chan 
2022;12:1114–21.
49. Painter J, Thaker J, Borwankar V et al. The 2022 Indian heat­
waves: exploring media coverage in English, Hindi, Marathi, and 
Telugu. Climate Trends. https://climatetrends.in/wp-content/ 
uploads/2024/02/the-2022-indian-heatwaves-report.pdf 
(24 
May 2024, date last accessed).
50. Tiwari M. Enquiring framing in India’s mainstream newspapers: 
interpreting frames of the climate change news in India during 
COP-26. In: Briesen, D., Das, S.P. (eds) Media, Politics and 
Environment. 
Springer 
Studies 
in 
Media 
and 
Political 
Communication. Cham: Springer, 2023, 23–38.
51. Crowley K. Fighting the future: the politics of climate policy fail­
ure in Australia (2015–2020). WIREs Clim Chan 2021;12:e725.
52. Painter J, Ettinger J, Holmes D et al. Climate delay discourses 
present in global mainstream television coverage of the IPCC’s 
2021 report. Commun Earth Environ 2023;4:4.
53. Sch€afer MS, Painter J. Climate journalism in a changing media 
ecosystem: assessing the production of climate change-related 
news around the world. WIREs Clim Chan 2021;12:e675.
54. Newman N, Fletcher R, Schulz A et al. Digital News Report 2021. 
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. https://reutersin 
stitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/digital-news-report/2021 (24 May 2024, 
date last accessed).
55. Painter J, Ettinger J, Doutreix MN et al. Is it climate change? 
Coverage by online news sites of the 2019 European summer 
heatwaves in France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the UK. 
Clim Chan 2021;169:4.
56. Aneez Z, Neyazi TA, Kalogeropoulos A et al. India Digital News 
Report. Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. https://reu 
tersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/our-research/india-digital-news- 
report (24 May 2024, date last accessed).
57. Biggest Social Media Platforms. Statista. https://www.statista. 
com/statistics/272014/global-social-networks-ranked-by-num 
ber-of-users/ (24 May 2024, date last accessed).
58. Sehl A, Cornia A, Levy DAL et al. Private Sector News, Social Media 
Distribution, and Algorithm Change. Reuters Institute for the 
Study of Journalism. https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/ 
sites/default/files/2018-10/Cornia_Private_Sector_News_FINAL. 
pdf (24 May 2024, date last accessed).
59. Pearce W, Niederer S, €Ozkula SM et al. The social media life of 
climate change: platforms, publics, and future imaginaries. 
WIREs Clim Chan 2019;10:e569.
60. Eide E, Kunelius R. Domesticating global moments. A transna­
tional study on the coverage of the Bali and Copenhagen cli­
mate summits. In: Eide E, Kunelius R, Kumpu V. (eds) Global 
Climate—Local Journalisms. Projekt, 2010, 11–50.
Sanford and Painter | 11  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
61.
L€uck J, Wozniak A, Wessler H. Networks of coproduction: how 
journalists and environmental NGOs create common interpre­
tations of the UN climate change conferences. The Int J Press/ 
Politics 2016;21:25–47.
62.
Krippendorff K. Estimating the reliability, systematic error and 
random error of interval data. Educ Psychol Meas 1970;30:61–70.
63.
Evensen D. The rhetorical limitations of the #FridaysForFuture 
movement. Nat Clim Chan 2019;9:428–30.
64.
Han H, Ahn SW. Youth mobilization to stop global climate 
change: narratives and impact. Sustain 2020;12:4127.
65.
Molder AL, Lakind A, Clemmons ZE et al. Framing the global 
youth climate movement: a qualitative content analysis of 
Greta Thunberg’s moral, hopeful, and motivational framing on 
Instagram. Int J Press/Politics 2022;27:668–95.
66.
Bergquist M, Nilsson A, Harring N et al. Meta-analyses of fifteen 
determinants of public opinion about climate change taxes and 
laws. Nat Clim Chan 2022;12:235–40.
67.
Drews S, van den Bergh JCJM. What explains public support for 
climate policies? A review of empirical and experimental stud­
ies. Clim Policy 2016;16:855–76.
68.
Klenert D, Mattauch L, Combet E et al. Making carbon pricing 
work for citizens. Nat Clim Chan 2018;8:669–77.
69.
Maestre-Andres S, Drews S. van den Bergh J. Perceived fairness 
and public acceptability of carbon pricing: a review of the litera­
ture. Clim Policy 2019;19:1186–204.
70.
Rinscheid A, Pianta S, Weber EU. What shapes public support 
for climate change mitigation policies? The role of descriptive 
social norms and elite cues. Behav Public Policy 2021;5:503–27.
71. Stoddart MCJ, Mattoni A, McLevey J. Environmental movement 
conflict and collaboration in the oil-tourism interface. In 
Stoddart MCJ, Mattoni A, McLevey J (eds), Industrial Development 
and Eco-Tourisms: Can Oil Extraction and Nature Conservation Co- 
Exist? 
Switzerland: 
Springer 
International 
Publishing, 
2020, 145–79.
72. Sch€afer M, North P. Are social media making constructive cli­
mate policymaking harder? In Hulme M (ed.), Contemporary 
Climate Change Debates: A Student Primer. London: Routledge, 
2019, 222–35.
73. Cardenal AS, Galais C, Majo-Vazquez S. Is Facebook eroding the 
public agenda? Evidence from survey and web-tracking data. 
International Journal of Public Opinion Research 2018;31:589–608. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijpor/edy025.
74. Chapin FS, Weber EU, Bennett EM et al. Earth stewardship: shap­
ing a sustainable future through interacting policy and norm 
shifts. Ambio 2022;51:1907–20.
75. Maniates MF. Individualization: plant a tree, buy a bike, save 
the world? Global Environ Polit 2001;1:31–52.
76. Stern N. The Economics of Climate Change. Am Econ Rev Pap Proc 
2008;98:1–137.
77. Wetts R. Models and morals: elite-oriented and value-neutral 
discourse dominates American Organizations’ framings of cli­
mate change. Soc Forces 2020;98:1339–69.
78. Lipsman A, Mudd G, Rich M et al. The power of “Like”: how 
brands reach (and influence) fans through social-media mar­
keting. J Advert Res 2012;52:40–52.
# The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, 4, 1–12
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgae006
Research Article
12 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae006/7687231 by guest on 26 August 2024
