Embodied emissions policies—design options and 
political mobilization potential
Nino David Jordan 
1,2,
1Institute for Sustainable Resources, University College London, Central House, 14 Upper Woburn Place, London, WC1H 0NN, UK 
2Research Institute for Sustainability—Helmholtz Centre Potsdam, Berliner Str. 130, Potsdam, 14467, Germany
Correspondence address. Institute for Sustainable Resources, University College London, 14 Upper Woburn Place, WC1H 0NN, London, UK.  
Tel: þ44 20 3108 9381, E-mail: nino.jordan@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract  
The topic of greenhouse gas emissions embodied in products is gaining in prominence and the possibilities for measuring and verify­
ing them are improving. This provides fertile ground for those who demand that climate policy should address such embodied emis­
sions. There are different design options for policies targeting embodied emissions. Such differences affect which groups can be mo­
bilized in their favour. This paper shows that procurement standards which target intermediate products can mobilize the support 
of relatively low carbon producers of high carbon materials, while product standards which target final products can mobilize the 
support of producers of relatively low carbon materials and knowledge-intensive service providers.
Keywords: environmental product declaration; product carbon footprint; carbon leakage; public procurement; policy coali­
tions; lobbying
Introduction
The question of how to generate support for ambitious climate 
policy is crucial for limiting global temperature rise in line with 
internationally agreed targets. The failure to implement carbon 
pricing at the US federal level, the violent gilets jaunes protests in 
France against rising fuel taxes [1], protests against the removal 
of fuel subsidies in Nigeria [2], and the political backlash against 
the phase-out of fossil fuel heating in Germany [3] are prominent 
cases underlining the need to move political feasibility to the 
centre of attention when considering solutions to climate 
change. There is a well-established academic debate on the polit­
ical economy and feasibility of regulatory standards versus car­
bon pricing [4, 5]. However, most of that debate does not yet 
consider the inclusion of ‘embodied’, often transnational, supply 
chain emissions in policy instruments. Where it does, it is largely 
limited to the political economy of including cross-border emis­
sions into pricing mechanisms and does not provide a thorough 
analysis of alternatives, complements or potential precursors to 
pricing, such as public procurement and regulatory standards 
targeted at the carbon footprint of products [6]. The objective of 
the present paper is to respond to this gap by developing a com­
parative political economy account that specifies how different 
embodied emissions policy instruments vary with respect to 
which business coalitions they can mobilize in their favour.
The potential of new policy instruments targeting the green­
house gas emissions embodied in products has led to the emer­
gence of new lobbying coalitions. Transcending prior, more 
disparate, framings of the environmental qualities of their goods 
and services, businesses can now rally behind the common fram­
ing of ‘low embodied emissions’. This paper first develops a 
theory explaining how different policy designs affect which 
actors can be mobilized in support of embodied emissions poli­
cies and then tests it on the basis of a network analysis.
As long as greenhouse gas emissions embodied in goods are 
not sufficiently addressed, ambitious climate policy is more 
likely to result in competitive disadvantages. In the case of car­
bon pricing, carbon leakage describes a situation where the exis­
tence of a domestic carbon price leads to a competitive 
advantage for producers from abroad, who do not face the car­
bon price. As a result, domestic industries may relocate abroad 
and/or foreign producers may become more competitive, leading 
to income and employment losses in the domestic setting. The 
most tragic aspect of the carbon leakage scenario is that the do­
mestic consumption of the good in question continues, making 
the policy largely ineffectual for reducing GHG emissions [7].1 
Addressing embodied emissions would be an important step to­
wards alleviating carbon leakage. Similarly, the adoption of en­
ergy efficiency measures and the use of renewable energy should 
become more attractive for producers if the emissions embodied 
in products were to become criteria for purchasing decisions, for 
instance through pricing, standards or procurement.
The European Union has started to address carbon leakage 
through the introduction of the Border Carbon Adjustment 
Mechanism (CBAM). It plans to phase-out the free allocation of 
emission permits to industry and to phase-in requirements for 
importers to surrender emission permits. While this is an impor­
tant step forward for addressing carbon leakage, other instru­
ments targeted at the emissions ’embodied’ in products are 
1
To what extent this is the case for different industries and carbon price 
levels is a politically charged matter of contestation.
Received: September 28, 2023. Revised: December 29, 2023. Accepted: January 12, 2024 
# The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, 4(1), kgae003  
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgae003 
Advance Access Publication Date: 9 February 2024 
Research Article   
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
relevant as alternatives, complements or as part of well- 
sequenced dynamic policy instrument mixes [6, 8–11].
Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs) have emerged as a 
promising way to make the carbon content of products transpar­
ent, and to serve as the informational basis for further climate 
policy [12, 13]. EPDs have been proposed as the basis for policies 
targeted at different points in the value chain: at the level of in­
termediate commodities, such as steel or cement, and at the 
level of final products, such as cars or buildings.
In 2018 the Netherlands introduced maximum thresholds for 
the overall embodied impacts of buildings across a number of en­
vironmental categories. In 2022 France introduced upper limits 
for the embodied carbon lifecycle emissions of buildings. In 2023 
Denmark introduced mandatory maximum whole life carbon 
thresholds for buildings, addressing both operational and em­
bodied emissions. At the same time Sweden and Finland were 
working on similar regulations [14]. Since March 2023 the 
German government has made the disbursement of the most 
subsidized loans for the construction of buildings conditional 
upon low greenhouse gas emissions along the whole life cycle 
[15, 16]. There are discussions about a potential inclusion of em­
bodied emissions into the European Commission’s Energy 
Performance of Buildings Directive (EPBD) [17]. In the run-up to 
these developments, in Germany, the UK and at the European 
level various organizations had already been advocating for the 
inclusion of embodied emissions performance in mandatory 
building standards.2
The Buy Clean California Act (BCCA) is a measure against car­
bon leakage, requiring the Californian state to only procure cer­
tain building products if their carbon footprint is below a certain 
threshold. The BCCA applies to carbon steel rebar, flat glass, 
mineral wool board insulation, and structural steel [12, 18–20].3 
This marked the first instance of a US state actively working to 
mitigate embodied emissions from imported products [21].4 
Since July 2022 authorities check compliance with the BCCA by 
demanding to see EPDs for the goods in question [24]. The BCCA 
has inspired the take-up of similar policies by other US states 
and at the Federal level [25–28]. The 2022 US Inflation Reduction 
Act provides for considerable investment into EPD development, 
product labelling and public procurement of low carbon materi­
als [29]. In 2023 Canada, Germany, the UK and the USA jointly 
pledged to buy low-emission steel, cement and concrete, and/or 
to adopt lifecycle assessment and set emissions reduction targets 
for public buildings and/or infrastructure. A US representative 
explicitly linked this development to the US Federal Buy Clean 
Initiative [30].
Given their potential to address significant gaps in climate 
policy [10], it is crucial to enhance our understanding of the polit­
ical economy behind policies dealing with embodied emissions. 
Who can be mobilized in their support? How do variations in pol­
icy design affect who can be mobilized as supporters?
This article, for the first time, puts forward an explicit theory 
of how businesses re-align from prior sustainability framings to 
coalesce behind demands for embodied emissions policies and 
specifies who lobbies for what, i.e. which industries lobby for what 
types of embodied emissions policies. The propositions are then 
tested through an analysis of major parts of the transnational 
network of organizations advocating for different embodied 
emissions policies or producing technical guidelines for these. To 
this end, the article presents the first network dataset dedicated 
to organizations advocating for embodied emissions policies. 
Through recursively mapping the relevant organizations’ spon­
sors and member organizations, and, in turn, their members and 
sponsors, the dataset covers more than 2000 organizations.
The next section presents the theoretical framework and the 
hypotheses arising from it, section 3 describes materials and 
methods, section 4 and 5 present and discuss the results.
Theory and hypotheses
Support from business interest groups is often key for environ­
mental legislation to be passed. Due to the powerful role of busi­
ness in environmental politics, it is of particular interest how 
specific policies can mobilize particular business interests in 
their support [31–34]. Corporate support for or resistance to envi­
ronmental policies can be largely explained by their differential 
effects on businesses [35, 36]. For example, Vogel [37] suggests 
that domestic producers may be more willing to support stricter 
regulations when they anticipate that their international com­
petitors will bear a disproportionately greater share of the bur­
dens of compliance.
Many authors suggest that product standards or subsidies 
[4, 37, 38] can successfully mobilize business support in their fa­
vour. The expansion of feed-in tariffs for renewable energy has 
spawned its own lobby and has thus ushered in a self- 
reenforcing dynamic [39]. There is a clear constituency for energy 
efficiency standards and targets [40]. In both cases, concentrated 
groups can reap large benefits. In contrast, critics have pointed 
to carbon pricing’s failure to muster industry support for ratchet­
ing up [4, 5].5
At each stage of value or supply chains there are specific con­
stellations of relevant actors and differences in the interests they 
pursue [35, 41, 42]. For analysts, advocates and policy-makers it 
is crucial to know more more about the differences in the politi­
cal dynamics associated with interventions at different points in 
the value chain. Accordingly, this study focuses on the different 
business coalitions that can be mobilized in support of policies 
targeting intermediate (building materials) and final prod­
ucts (buildings).
The presence of benefits for the different coalition members is 
a key factor for coalition building, which, in turn, is a crucial de­
terminant of policy adoption. Public choice literature suggests it 
is easier to mobilize actors in the pursuit of concentrated benefits 
or in resisting to concentrated losses rather than diffuse ones 
[43]. Increasingly, environmental struggles and controversies are 
located on the terrain of the informational [44]. More information 
enables new environmental policies [45]. Information on life cy­
cle environmental impacts makes different products commensu­
rable in terms of environmental impacts, enabling new types of 
environmental policy. A transformation of information on 
production-based emissions into product qualities can enable 
the emergence of product standards. As these have more clearly 
defined and concentrated beneficiaries [4, 37, 38], this should 
also make them a more attractive proposition for carbon efficient 
businesses to rally behind them in support.
Commensuration – “the transformation of different qualities 
into a common metric” [46]—can be an important aspect in the 
dynamics of coalition-building. Espeland and Stevens [46] suggest 
2
Supplementary Table S2 provides an overview of actors advocating for a 
greater role for embodied emissions.
3
Originally, concrete was also part of the draft proposal.
4
Between 2009 and 2015 Chinese steel exports rose by 400% [22]. By 2017 
China was producing about half of the annual global steel output [23].
5
However, to what extent this is an innate feature of carbon pricing or 
simply due to the failure to address emissions embodied in trade, and 
the resulting threat of carbon leakage, is an open question.
2 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
that, as commensuration establishes new interpretative frame­
works, it can have political effects. As such, “it is not a neutral or 
merely technical process”. Carbon has become a central unit of 
account for the evaluation of production and consumption prac­
tices in climate politics [47]. It is the unit of account by which dif­
ferent processes are made commensurable across time and 
space. By creating an equivalence between different activities 
and identities, an overarching frame such as ‘low-carbon’ can 
unite different actors under one banner.
As E. E. Schattschneider already argued in the first half of the 
20th century: “new policies create a new politics” [48]. Through 
redistributive as well as cognitive, or interpretive, effects, policies 
can shape interest groups, just as interest groups shape policies 
[48]. On the one hand, institutions enable and constrain individ­
ual choice and strategies. But beyond that, they also “affect the 
articulation of interests, and particularly the articulation of collec­
tive interests” (author’s own emphasis) [49]. As a result, institu­
tional configurations play a role in facilitating the organization of 
certain groups and contributing to the disarticulation of others. 
Institutions contribute to the emergence and decline of groups 
not only by affecting coalition formation but also by influencing 
the “capacities … to recognize shared interests in the first 
place” [49].
Shared interests, however, may only manifest themselves 
once specific policies, which benefit one set of actors at the ex­
pense of another, become technically feasible. Thus, initiatives 
that contribute towards capacity-building, by helping to make the 
greenhouse gas emissions of different products commensurable, 
can have ripple effects on the conditions for coalition building [50].
In order to work out how information might affect political 
divisions one needs to be attentive to how it can affect the feasi­
bility of regulation, i.e. how the feasibility of regulation mediates 
the effect of information on political divisions. The availability of 
information can affect the ability to craft policy in more univer­
salist, rather than particularist, terms. Policies that can be justi­
fied with reference to universal higher normative principles 
enjoy greater and wider legitimacy than policies that only serve 
particular interests.
Whether a policy is designed in more particular or more uni­
versalist terms impinges on the identity of interest groups. 
Where a higher level concept is used, a broader group may corre­
spond to the scope of the policy. For example, ‘support for renew­
able energy’ has a broader policy scope than ‘support for wind 
energy’ and support for ‘low or zero carbon energy’ is even 
broader.6 Information-providing institutions can be an anteced­
ent condition for the emergence of coalitions that are held to­
gether by an alignment of their particular interests with a more 
universal, collective, interest [49, 51].
Embodied environmental impacts can complement or super­
sede existing sustainability criteria, which tend to be far less in­
formation intensive, but also less precise. For instance, rather 
than relying on scientific measurements of the environmental 
impacts of building materials, the 2009 version of the dominant 
green building certification scheme in the USA, LEED, still relied 
on non-measurement proxies for the environmental impacts of 
building materials, such as materials that were reused, regional, 
recycled, or renewable [52]. A 2014 version of the British green 
building certification scheme BREEAM also allowed the provision 
of credits for the use of recycled or re-used materials [53]. Where 
LCA is available, one could instead emphasize the criterium of 
embodied emissions.7 By making different materials comparable, 
renewable materials such as wood, and recycled ones, such as 
low carbon cement, can unite behind the common banner of em­
bodied emissions, rather than behind separate framings, where, 
for example, steel and conventional concrete would also be able 
to rally behind the banner of recyclability.
Prior framings of the environmental advantage of the different 
materials would have been ‘renewable’ in the case of wood, 
‘natural’ in the case of clay, ‘recyclable’ and ‘re-use’ in the case 
of steel, and ‘recycled’ in the case of low carbon cements and 
concrete. However, ‘recyclable’ and ‘recycled’ are also potentially 
attributes of higher carbon concrete and steel, ‘natural’ and 
‘renewable’ are attributes of wood pellets for heating. Figure 1 
shows examples of sustainability qualities that have been 
claimed for different materials.8
As embodied emissions become measurable and comparable, 
a new embodied emissions framing allows actors hitherto frag­
mented into different camps of environmental framings to rally 
behind one banner—it enables a re-aggregation of interest group 
identities. Different actors who, in the past, have emphasized dif­
ferent framings, such as support for wood or renewable materials 
or ‘natural materials’, now lobby jointly for the regulation of em­
bodied emissions in the buildings sector. This not only includes 
material suppliers but also experts in sustainable construction 
and businesses specializing in enabling carbon commensurabil­
ity, such as database and software providers. This shows that 
information-based commensuration processes can enable the ar­
ticulation of new coalitions.
By making the environmental impacts of different products 
commensurable—be it at the level of the building material, the 
element or the building itself—policies based on life cycle assess­
ment can transcend specific materials or technologies and, 
therefore, garner the support of heterogenous coalitions of 
Figure 1. Sustainability framings of materials.
6
This example already shows that a broader scope should not necessarily 
be equated with a higher degree of universal legitimacy, as low rather 
than zero carbon energy may be seen as insufficient for reaching long- 
term climate goals.
7
Or embodied environmental impacts more generally, which, however, 
would be less commensurable.
8
Supplementary Table 1 provides the sources of these claims.
N.D. Jordan | 3  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
product and service providers, who would, in the absence of such 
a more universal policy, fend for more particular interests.
Framing the qualities of products or services in terms of em­
bodied emissions can provide an alternative to other sustainabil­
ity framings and thus allows for the re-aggregation of interest 
groups behind a common framing. The way in which such a re- 
aggregation occurs depends on the specific characteristics of the 
policy advocated. Some policies will lead to inter-sectoral and 
others to intra-sectoral competition over which product has lower 
embodied emissions.
While the Californian approach promotes intra-material com­
petition over better carbon performance, the whole building ap­
proach can also promote inter-material competition. From this, 
two interrelated hypotheses can be deduced: policies that have 
intra-sectoral competitive benefits to producers of goods that are 
relatively low carbon compared to other products within the 
same materials category can mobilize the support of producers 
of relatively low carbon products. In contrast, policies that have 
inter-sectoral competitive benefits will tend to mobilize the sup­
port of producers of materials that are relatively low carbon, or 
that, at least, have a greater decarbonization potential than ri­
val materials.
Figure 2 locates these hypotheses within more extended 
sequences of propositions on the coalition shaping effects of 
product level life cycle emissions information.
Materials and methods
An in-depth study9 of the embodied emissions in buildings policy 
field in Germany, the UK, and the USA yielded key umbrella 
organizations advocating for a greater role for embodied emis­
sions in policy-making. An analysis of organizational affiliations 
with these umbrella organizations formed the basis for a network 
analysis testing the hypotheses specifying how variations in the 
inter- and intra-sectoral distributive effects of embodied emis­
sions policy proposals correspond to differences in the composi­
tion of lobbying coalitions.
The focus is on embodied emission policies in the form of reg­
ulatory standards for the built environment and public procure­
ment specifications setting upper limits for embodied emissions 
of intermediate products. Carbon border adjustments or tariff 
walls targeting embodied carbon contents can also be considered 
embodied emissions policies but are not included in the analysis.
Table 1 shows the entities that were classified as ‘targets’ in 
the embodied emissions network, i.e. the umbrella organizations 
whose member- and sponsorships were to be analysed. The tar­
get classification consists of two layers. On the one hand, those 
entities that are directly associated with advocacy or technical 
guidelines for the consideration of embodied emissions (first or­
der). On the other hand, some of the organizations that are affili­
ated with the first, for example as sponsors or members 
(second order).
Where the network nodes were associations, their member 
organizations and other associates, such as sponsors, were col­
lected by analysing information on their affiliations from their 
websites in 2017 and 2018. The data on network nodes and edges 
was cleaned and standardized with OpenRefine [54] and turned 
into a network graph via various R packages, in particularly 
igraph [55–62]. This resulted in a directed network with 2171 
nodes and 2249 edges. The removal of nodes with fewer than two 
links/edges enabled a concentrated focus on key actors, facilitat­
ing a clearer visualization of the network in Fig. 3. Consequently, 
89 nodes and 167 edges were left.
The Walktrap algorithm served to cluster the network into dif­
ferent communities, as indicated by the different colours in  
Fig. 3. The communities are the results of random walks with 
four steps. Such short random walks tend to stay within densely 
connected subgraphs [57, 63–67].
Network connections are “realist”, i.e. based on declared affili­
ations between organizations. This is objective, in so far as actors 
self-identify their associations [68]. However, the selection of the 
original set of organizations and the extent to which one includes 
additional links is somewhat subjective. Such additional links 
can be an organization’s members, the organizations it is itself a 
member of, or sponsor or partner organizations. Whenever an 
organization’s affiliations were included in the analysis, all of the 
Figure 2. Sequences of propositions on coalition shaping effects of 
product level life cycle emissions information.
9
In the Supplementary Section S2 provides more information on building 
materials and Section 3 on embodied emissions advocacy networks.
4 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
self-declared affiliations were included. However, not all the 
affiliations of all the affiliated organizations were included. 
Sometimes, it appeared, meaningful connections could not be 
identified without including more connections, while at other 
times the inclusion of more organizations would unduly dilute 
the network and make it useless for the purposes of analysis. 
Supplementary Section S3 provides detailed qualitative informa­
tion on these networks, as well as reasons for the inclusion or ex­
clusion of specific actors.
For each case study region, one organization was chosen as 
the most pure, typical, representative of an advocate for the em­
bodied emissions policy prevalently proposed in that region.10 By 
analysing in detail with respect to which materials the member­
ship of these three main organizations have commercial interest, 
as reflected by their websites, it became possible to identify the 
materials suppliers associated with advocacy for specific embod­
ied emissions policies. The focus was on commonly recurring 
building products instead of exhaustively covering the entire uni­
verse of different building products.
Results
Figure 3 shows the joint network of embodied emissions advo­
cates across Germany, the UK and the USA. There are several 
links between the “British-Germanophone wood interests” and 
“British sustainable building” communities and also a link 
between 
the 
“German-Nordic 
wood” 
and 
“European- 
Germanophone sustainable building” communities. However, 
there are no corresponding links between wood interests and the 
US-based “Carbon Leadership Forum” and “Buy Clean California 
campaign” communities. Note that the nodes in the “British sus­
tainable building” community are more densely concentrated. 
This is a consequence of the research having yielded a higher 
number of entities that are directly associated with advocacy or 
technical guidelines for the consideration of embodied emissions. 
However, this should not be taken to infer greater support for 
embodied emissions policies in the UK.
When delving further into the makeup of three key umbrella 
organizations advocating for embodied emissions in the respec­
tive countries, it becomes apparent that in the US the Buy Clean 
California coalition shows the presence of concrete and steel11 
interests, including trade unions, and the absence of wood, hemp 
and clay interests. In the UK and German-speaking countries, on 
the other hand, wood, hemp, and clay interests dominate the 
Alliance for Sustainable Building Products and the natureplus as­
sociation (see Supplementary Tables S4–S6).
While explicitly not speaking in the name of their companies, 
experts from large multinational developers and engineering 
consultancies like Skanska and Arup have participated in initia­
tives advocating for a greater role of embodied emissions in con­
struction. 
As 
the 
conceptual 
and 
planning 
branch 
of 
construction, they are not bound to specific building materials 
and any policy drivers for more innovation in the construction in­
dustry may increase the value of their technical and organiza­
tional capabilities. If these expert statements can be interpret as 
‘lobbying’, this would imply that not only low-carbon materials 
suppliers have an interest in the embodied emissions narrative 
but also service providers.
Table 2 shows that property developers and consultancies are 
very prominent among the actors with most outgoing links 
(Outdegrees) in the network. It also highlights the role of 
wood interests.
Discussion
There is a difference in the mobilization logics between the 
European and Californian approaches. The strategy of specifying 
minimum carbon intensities for intermediate materials has 
allowed the emergence of a coalition of businesses representing 
incumbent materials (if relatively carbon efficient products), la­
bour unions and environmental groups to push for the legisla­
tion. This would be improbable with a generalized LCA building 
standard—whereas efficiency standards at the level of building 
products can pitch domestic against foreign interests (or state 
against nationwide ones), building-level LCAs also pitch materials 
against each other.
Embodied emissions standards for final products can be neu­
tral with respect to the technologies and materials used. This 
allows the forging of novel alliances among suppliers of different 
materials and also between suppliers and service providers, as 
these do not need to be aligned via a preference for a certain ma­
terial or type of construction but simply in terms of a preference 
for the incorporation of embodied emissions into standards.
Embodied emissions, enabled by information provision, is a 
new banner behind which different groups, such as low-carbon 
cement, renewable building materials suppliers, building consul­
tants and progressive developers, can rally. In doing so, other 
group identities can weaken: in Germany, organizations 
Table 1. Entities as targets in embodied emissions network.
Entities
Order
Alliance for Sustainable Building Products (ASBP)
1
Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Rohholzverbraucher e. V.
2
ASBP BREEAM Consultation
1
Athena Sustainable Materials Institute
2
Building Alliance (GA)
1
Bundesverband der S€age- und Holzindustrie e. V.
2
Buy Clean California Campaign (BCC)
1
Carbon Leadership Forum (CLF)
1
Deutscher Holzwirtschaftsrat (DHWR)
1
Deutscher Massivholz- und Blockhausverbandes e. V.
2
Embodied Carbon Task Force (ECTF)
1
German Sustainable Building Council (DGNB)
1
Gesamtverband Deutscher Holzhandel e. V.
2
GLA Guidance
1
Green Construction Board (GCB)
1
Hauptverband der Deutschen Holzindustrie und 
Kunststoffe verarbeitenden Industrie und verwandter 
Industrie- und Wirtschaftszweige e. V.
2
Innovation and Growth Team (IGT)
1
natureplus
1
Polaris Materials
2
RICS Methodology
1
Silicon Valley Leadership Group
2
Sustainable Silicon Valley
2
Timber Accord
1
U.S. Concrete
2
Verband der Deutschen Holzwerkstoffindustrie
2
Verband Deutscher Papierfabriken e. V.
2
Verband €Osterreichischer Ziegelwerke
2
Wood for Good
1
Zero Carbon Non Domestic Task Group (ZCNDTG)
1
10
See Supplementary Section S3 for a detailed rationale for choosing the 
different representatives.
11
The overall higher carbon efficiency of US steel, due to higher recycling 
rates (see Supplementary Section 2), helps to explain why parts of the 
US steel industry and unions could be mobilized in favour of carbon 
benchmarks for procurement.
N.D. Jordan | 5  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
representing 
construction 
wood 
and 
wood-as-fuel, 
both 
‘renewables’, eventually parted ways over the question of life­
cycle carbon emissions [69].12
While the EPD-based policies most prominently advocated for 
in the USA and Europe have profoundly different implications for 
inter- and intrasectoral competition, the additional push for the 
diffusion of EPDs that can be expected as a result of successful 
implementation would improve the basis for any one of these 
policies. Mandatory regulation or public procurement specifica­
tions drawing on EPDs are likely more exigent than purely volun­
tary processes and could thus help to improve the reliability of 
the underlying data. In addition, a proliferation of EPDs and qual­
ity enhancements would also improve the informational basis 
for the adoption of border carbon adjustments. Importantly, 
these policies, while being backed by partly very different constit­
uencies, are not mutually exclusive, and could thus be combined. 
Yet the differences between the Californian and European policy 
proposals mean that support for one of the policies does not im­
ply support for the other.
The proliferation of EPDs improves the data on the environ­
mental performance of individual producers and allows compari­
sons between them. Insofar as it allows producers to better 
anticipate the competitive effects of potential procurement 
Figure 3. Major part of the transatlantic embodied emissions advocacy network.
Table 2. Actors with most outgoing links (Outdegrees) 
in network.
Name
Outdegrees
Arup
8
Skanska
7
Circular Ecology
4
thinkstep
4
British Woodworking Federation
3
UCL
3
Atkins
3
Davis Langdon/AECOM
3
Timber Trade Federation
3
Timber Research and Development Association
3
Laing O’Rourke
3
UKGBC
3
12
Various actors subscribe to the idea that the cascading use of wood, 
which implies that it is only burned for its energy-use after at least one 
other ‘higher value’ use-stage, increases it contributions to a low carbon 
economy, as it thus can help to provide alternative construction materi­
als, thereby avoiding the embodied emissions associated with conven­
tional materials [70, 71]. Crucially, support for the argument that wood 
can help to cut emissions by substituting high carbon materials (such as 
cement, steel and plastics) benefits the construction wood sector over 
the wood-as-fuel sector, in the political-economic competition between 
the use of biomass as an energy carrier and as a material [72, 73, for 
more information on this competition].
6 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
specifications or regulations, it may have cognitive effects on coa­
lition formation. Further research may wish to investigate such 
potential effects through qualitative interviews, historical analy­
ses and game-theoretical modelling taking into account condi­
tions of imperfect information.
It is worthwhile to engage in more political comparative politi­
cal economy analysis of different embodied emissions policies. 
For instance, steel sector lobbying for the BCCA was mirrored by 
the European steel trade association Eurofer’s support for a car­
bon inclusion mechanism requiring importers into the European 
market to purchase EU ETS permits [74] and steel giant 
ArcelorMittal’s intervention in favour of a European carbon bor­
der tax [75]. It may also be possible to extend lessons learnt from 
a political economy analysis of public procurement to eventual 
mandatory limits to the lifecycle emissions of industrial prod­
ucts, such as steel and cement [76], which could be adopted by 
carbon clubs [77].
The empirical results of this paper are valid for a particular 
time and place. More empirical research for other time frames 
and other places would be desirable. Future research may use­
fully apply artificial intelligence to data from the Internet 
Archive to extract dynamic, large-scale network representations 
of organizational memberships in coalitions supporting or oppos­
ing specific types of embodied emissions policies.
A more recent analysis of the Carbon Leadership Forum web­
site reveals that wood interests now have joined as sponsors.13 
Unlike the Buy Clean California campaign, the Carbon 
Leadership Forum has never been purely focused on thresholds 
for intermediate products, so this development does not go 
against the grain of the analysis presented here. More specula­
tively, there might be a correspondence between the chance of 
whole life carbon building regulations actually being imple­
mented and the engagement of wood interests with advocacy 
efforts towards such aims.
From 2024 onwards California’s building code addresses em­
bodied emissions for commercial buildings and schools of a cer­
tain size. Interestingly, of the three compliance paths offered, 
one is based on the use of products below certain embodied emis­
sions thresholds, within specific materials categories, and an­
other one on whole building life cycle assessment analysis [79]. 
The regulation thus incorporates a compromise solution, allow­
ing to choose between downstream standards and thresholds/ 
benchmarks for intermediate products. The work presented in 
this paper could be usefully complemented by an analysis of the 
coalitions behind these code changes.
The building of greater capabilities for EPD creation in the 
building sector could also help to introduce embodied emissions 
policies in other sectors, such as automotives [80] or food [81, 82]. 
Further research may examine the coalition dynamics in 
those sectors.
Conclusion
This paper contributes a unique dataset of the early advocacy 
network for embodied emissions policies in the form of regula­
tory building requirements and procurement specifications. It 
develops the first theory of how businesses re-align from prior 
sustainability framings to that of embodied emissions and comes 
up with testable propositions on which businesses come out in 
support of what specific embodied emissions policy. The network 
analysis empirically corroborates the propositions.
A wide range of different building material suppliers and ser­
vice providers can rally behind the banner of a greater role for 
embodied emissions. Commensurability enables technology- and 
material-open policies that have the potential to re-aggregate in­
terest groups behind common demands, instead of each advocat­
ing for material-specific privileges. Embodied emissions policies 
that can legitimately rest on quantifiable metrics allow actors to 
transcend merely qualitative sustainability framings and to re- 
aggregate behind a novel common frame for policy demands.
Different embodied emissions policy designs mobilize different 
constituents. Whereas the BCCA can muster support from the 
same trade unions that supported steel tariffs under the Trump 
administration [83–86], building standards that incorporate em­
bodied emissions criteria are better suited to garner support from 
alternative low carbon providers and sophisticated planners and 
service providers, who are not bound by specific materials and 
who can benefit from novel challenges in construction.
The non-exclusive nature of different embodied emissions 
policies means that correspondingly different coalitions can be 
fostered either simultaneously or sequentially, with synergetic 
spillover effects in the form of forced diffusion of EPDs, which 
serve as the informational foundation of such policies.
Acknowledgements
Raimund Bleischwitz, David Coen and Colin Provost provided im­
portant advice during the research process. Ben Cashore, Reid 
Lifset, James Patterson, James Price, and Hamish Van der Ven 
also provided valuable feedback on earlier versions of this paper. 
Michael Grubb, Karsten Neuhoff and Misato Sato provided fur­
ther guidance at an early stage of the research process. Damian 
Harrison provided valuable feedback on the final edits. I wrote 
parts of this paper during a stay at the Yale School for Forestry 
and Environmental Studies, where Dan Esty and Ben Cashore 
were so friendly as to host me. The Klaus T€opfer Sustainability 
Fellowship 2023 with the Research Institute for Sustainability— 
Helmholtz Centre Potsdam—allowed me to revise the paper for 
final publication.
Author’s contributions
Nino David Jordan (Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal 
analysis, 
Funding 
acquisition, 
Investigation, 
Methodology, 
Project 
administration, 
Resources, 
Software, 
Validation, 
Visualization, Writing—original draft, Writing—review & editing)
Non-author’s contributions
Raimund Bleischwitz (primary PhD supervisor), David Coen and 
Colin Provost (secondary PhD supervisors).
Conflict of interest
The author is on the core committee of the Whole Life Carbon 
Policy Coalition (WLCP.Co), a sub-working group of the UNEP- 
hosted Global Alliance for Buildings and Construction (Global 
ABC). The authors main academic affiliation, the UCL Institute 
for Sustainable Resources (ISR), is listed as founding member of 
the ASBP, one of the organizations under examination in this ar­
ticle. The author was not involved in the founding of the ASBP, 
any preceding discussions, or any subsequent collaboration. He 
only became aware of it during the course of his research and is 
not aware of any conflict of interest.
13
eg Softwood Lumber Board (SLB) and Weyerhaeuser [78].
N.D. Jordan | 7  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
Funding
Funding support for this article was provided by the Research 
Institute for Sustainability - Helmholtz Centre Potsdam (Klaus 
T€opfer Sustainability Fellowship 2023), UCL (Yale-UCL exchange 
bursary), UCL Institute for Sustainable Resources (UCL Research 
Studentship).
Data availability
The data and code underlying this article are available in the 
UCL Research Data Repository, at https://doi.org/10.5522/04/ 
c.7033433.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data are available at Oxford Open Climate 
Change online.
Ethics declaration
This project is covered by the UCL Data Protection Registration, 
reference No Z6364106/2015/03/136, section 19, research.
References
1.0
Boyer PC, Delemotte T, Gauthier G et al. Les determinants de la 
mobilisation des gilets jaunes. Revue Economique 2020;71:109–38.
2.0
Agbonifo J. Fuel subsidy protests in Nigeria: The promise and 
mirage of empowerment. Extr Ind Soc 2023;16:101333.
3.0
Connolly K. German heat pump rollout at risk as government 
suspends climate subsidies. The Guardian 2023.
4.0
Meckling J, Kelsey N, Biber E et al. Climate change. Winning coa­
litions for climate policy. Science 2015;349:1170–1.
5.0
Cullenward D, Victor DG. Making Climate Policy Work. Hoboken, 
New Jersey: Wiley, 2020.
6.0
Jakob M. The political economy of carbon border adjustment in 
the EU. Oxf Rev Econ Policy 2023;39:134–46.
7.0
Grubb M, Hourcade JC, Neuhoff K. Planetary Economics: Energy, 
Climate Change and the Three Domains of Sustainable Development. 
London: Routledge, 2014.
8.0
Rogge KS, Reichardt K. Policy mixes for sustainability transi­
tions: an extended concept and framework for analysis. Res 
Policy 2016;45:1620–35.
9.0
Grubb M, McDowall W, Drummond P. On order and complexity 
in innovations systems: Conceptual frameworks for policy 
mixes in sustainability transitions. Ener Res Soc Sci 2017; 
33:21–34.
10.
Grubb M, Jordan ND, Hertwich E et al. Carbon leakage, con­
sumption, and trade. Annu Rev Environ Resour 2022;47:753–95.
11.
Jordan N, Butnar I, Grubb M et al. Joint Response by Climate Policy 
Experts from UCL and LSE to BEIS Call for Evidence: Towards a Market 
for Low Emissions Industrial Products. 2022. https://perma.cc/ 
F7Q4-PZDX.
12.
Jordan ND, Bleischwitz R. Legitimating the governance of em­
bodied emissions as a building block for sustainable energy 
transitions. Global Trans 2020;2:37–46.
13.
Anderson J. Reducing Embodied Carbon in the Built Environment: The 
Role of Environmental Product Declarations. PhD Thesis. Milton 
Keynes: The Open University, 2023. https://oro.open.ac.uk/ 
90696/1/J%20Anderson%20Thesis%2010-07-2023.pdf (accessed 
14 February 2024).
14. Steinmann J, R€ock M, L€utzkendorf T et al. Whole Life Carbon 
Models for the EU27 to Bring down Embodied Carbon Emissions from 
New Buildings. Review of Existing National Legislative Measures. 
Leuven: KU Leuven and Brussels: Ramboll, 2022. https://perma. 
cc/3TAL-PQK9.
15. German Federal Government. Klimafreundlich bauen und 
sanieren.Berlin: German Federal Government, 2023. https:// 
perma.cc/2PFH-URJT.
16. Bundesministerin 
f€ur 
Wohnen, 
Stadtentwicklung 
und 
Bauwesen. Qualit€atssiegel Nachhaltiges Geb€aude (QNG). Berlin: 
Bundesministerin 
f€ur 
Wohnen, 
Stadtentwicklung 
und 
Bauwesen, 2023.
17. Toth Z, Volt SSJ. Roadmap to Climate-Proof Buildings and 
Construction. How to Embed Whole-Life Carbon in the EPBD. Brussels 
and Berlin: Buildings Performance Institute Europe, 2022. 
https://perma.cc/3JL5-PMQQ.
18. LegiScan. Bill text: CA AB262. 2017-2018. Regular session. 
Chaptered. 2017. https://perma.cc/7SZN-6KJ7.
19. Lyubich E, Shapiro JS, Walker R. Regulating mismeasured pollu­
tion: Implications of firm heterogeneity for environmental pol­
icy. NBER Working Paper 24228, 2018.
20. Carbon Leadership Forum. Buy Clean California Limits. A Proposed 
Methodology for Assigning Industry-Average GWP Values for Steel, 
Mineral Wool, and Flat Glass in California. Seattle: Carbon 
Leadership Forum, 2022. https://perma.cc/4C8N-GP7N.
21. Hausfather Z. California’s new law aims to tackle imported 
emissions. Carbon Brief 2017. https://perma.cc/QB2S-YSFF.
22. Ruddick G. British steel plants must be sold within weeks, says 
Tata. The Guardian, 30 March 2016.
23. Pooler M. Growth in steel demand forecast to slow next year. 
Financial Times, 16 October 2017.
24. California State Government Department of General Services 
Procurement 
Division. 
Buy 
Clean 
California 
Act. 
West 
Sacramento, 
California: 
California 
State 
Government 
Department of General Services Procurement Division, 2023. 
https://perma.cc/7ZMC-F22A.
25. Rempher A, Olgyay V. Colorado Passes Embodied Carbon 
Legislation. Boulder, Colorado: Rocky Mountain Institute, 2021. 
https://perma.cc/T6WK-JGXX.
26. BlueGreen Alliance.Gov. Kate Brown Signs Bill to Ensure Oregon 
Will Now “Buy Clean” When it Comes to Materials for Infrastructure 
Projects.Minneapolis and Washington, DC: BlueGreen Alliance, 
2022. https://perma.cc/PAE9-6GCM.
27. BlueGreen Alliance. Buy Clean. Minneapolis and Washington, 
DC: BlueGreen Alliance, 2023. https://perma.cc/ZEP2-96KQ.
28. BlueGreen Alliance. Buy Clean Buy Fair Bill Signed by Gov. Walz 
Will Support Good Jobs, Reduce Pollution. Minneapolis and 
Washington, DC: BlueGreen Alliance, 2023. https://perma.cc/ 
9Z3M-3BCT.
29. The White House. Building A Clean Energy Economy: A Guidebook 
To The Inflation Reduction Act’s Investments In Clean Energy And 
Climate Action. Washington, DC: The White House, 2023. https:// 
perma.cc/6EML-T84J.
30. UNIDO. Seven Key Governments Generate Demand for Cement and 
Steel Decarbonization Technologies via UNIDO-led Green Public 
Procurement Campaign. Vienna: UNIDO, 2023. https://perma.cc/ 
KH3Q-BMG4.
31. Bleischwitz R. Governance of sustainable development: co- 
evolution of corporate and political strategies. IJSD 2004; 
7:27–43.
32. Falkner R. Business and global climate governance: a neo- 
pluralist perspective. In: Ougaard M, Leander A (eds). Business 
and Global Governance. New York: Routledge, 2010, 99–117.
8 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
33.
Meckling J. The globalization of carbon trading: transnational 
business coalitions in climate politics. Glob Environ Polit 2011; 
11:26–50.
34.
Newell P, Paterson M. Climate capitalism. In: Altvater E, 
Brunnengr€aber A (eds). After Cancun. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag f€ur 
Sozialwissenschaften, 2011, 23–44.
35.
Falkner 
R. 
Business 
Power 
and 
Conflict 
in 
International 
Environmental 
Politics. 
Basingstoke, 
Hampshire: 
Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2008.
36.
Meckling J. Oppose, support, or hedge? Distributional effects, 
regulatory pressure, and business strategy in environmental 
politics. Glob Environ Polit 2015;15:19–37.
37.
Vogel D. Trading up and governing across: transnational gover­
nance and environmental protection. J Eur Public Policy 1997; 
4:556–71.
38.
Yandle B, Bootleggers BS. Baptists, and the global warming bat­
tle. Harv Environ Law Rev 2002;26:177.
39.
Aklin M, Urpelainen J. Political competition, path dependence, 
and the strategy of sustainable energy transitions. Am J Polit Sci 
2013;57:643–58.
40.
Rosenow J. The politics of the German CO2-Building 
Rehabilitation Programme. Energy Effic 2013;6:219–38.
41.
Henderson J, Dicken P, Hess M et al. Global production networks 
and the analysis of economic development. Rev Int Polit Econ 
2002;9:436–64.
42.
Levy DL. Political contestation in global production networks. 
AMR 2008;33:943–63.
43.
Olson M. The Logic of Collective Action. Public Goods and the Theory 
of Groups. 5th edn. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1975.
44.
Mol APJ. The lost innocence of transparency in environmental 
politics. In: Gupta A, Mason M (eds), Transparency in Global 
Environmental Governance: Critical Perspectives. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2014, 39–60.
45.
Esty DC. Environmental protection in the information age. N Y 
U L Rev2004;79:115–211.
46.
Espeland WN, Stevens ML. Commensuration as a social process. 
Annu Rev Sociol 1998; 24:313–43.
47.
Kolk A, Levy D, Pinkse J. Corporate responses in an emerging cli­
mate regime: the institutionalization and commensuration of 
carbon disclosure. Eur Account Rev 2008;17:719–45.
48.
Pierson P. When effect becomes cause: policy feedback and po­
litical change. World Pol 1993;45:595–628.
49.
Thelen K. The explanatory power of historical institutionalism. 
In: 
Mayntz 
R 
(ed.), 
Akteure—Mechanismen—Modelle. 
Zur 
Theorief€ahigkeit Makro-Sozialer Analysen. Frankfurt: Campus, 
2002, 91–107.
50.
Bernstein S, Hoffmann M. The politics of decarbonization and 
the catalytic impact of subnational climate experiments. Policy 
Sci 2018;51:189–211.
51.
Bernstein S. Legitimacy in intergovernmental and non-state 
global governance. Rev Int Polit Econ 2011;18:17–51.
52.
U.S. Green Building Council. LEED 2009 for New Construction and 
Major Renovations. Philadelphia and Washington, DC: U.S. Green 
Building Council, 2016 [2008]. https://perma.cc/2BUK-EEH3.
53.
BRE Global. Mat 03 Responsible Sourcing of Materials. Watford: BRE 
Global, 2014. https://perma.cc/PHB2-2J8R.
54.
Sterner E. Cleaning collections data using OpenRefine. Istl 2019;
55.
Csardi G, Nepusz T. The igraph software package for complex 
network research. Int J Complex Syst 1695(5) 2006.1–9.
56.
Wickham H, Averick M, Bryan J et al. Welcome to the tidyverse. 
JOSS 2019;4:1686. DOI: 10.21105/joss.01686.
57. Pedersen TL. Ggraph: An Implementation of Grammar of Graphics 
for Graphs and Networks. 2022. https://ggraph.data-imaginist. 
com (accessed 14 February 2024).
58. Wickham H, Franc¸ois R, Henry L et al. Dplyr: A Grammar of Data 
Manipulation. 2023. https://dplyr.tidyverse.org (accessed 14 
February 2024).
59. Csardi G, Nepusz T, Traag V et al. Igraph: Network Analysis and 
Visualization. 2024. doi:10.5281/zenodo.7682609.
60. Pedersen TL. Tidygraph: A Tidy API for Graph Manipulation. 2023. 
https://tidygraph.data-imaginist.com (accessed 14 February 2024).
61. Wickham H, Vaughan D, Girlich M. Tidyr: Tidy Messy Data. 2023. 
https://tidyr.tidyverse.org (accessed 14 February 2024).
62. Wickham H. Tidyverse: Easily Install and Load the Tidyverse. 2023. 
https://tidyverse.tidyverse.org (accessed 14 February 2024).
63. Harenberg S, Bello G, Gjeltema L et al. Community detection in 
large-scale networks: a survey and empirical evaluation. WIREs 
Comput Stats 2014;6:426–39.
64. Latapy M, Pons P. Computing communities in large networks 
using random walks. Proceedings of the 20th International 
Symposium on Computer and Information Sciences, ISCIS’05, LNCS. 
Istanbul, Turkey. Vol 3733. 2005, 284–93.
65. Kalinka AT, Tomancak P. Linkcomm: an r package for the gen­
eration, visualization, and analysis of link communities in net­
works of arbitrary size and type. Bioinformatics 2011;27:2011–2.
66. Wickham H. Ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. New 
York: Springer, 2016.
67. Wickham H, Chang W, Henry L et al. Ggplot2: Create Elegant Data 
Visualisations Using the Grammar of Graphics. 2023. https:// 
ggplot2.tidyverse.org (accessed 14 February 2024).
68. Laumann EO, Marsden PV, Prensky D. The boundary specifica­
tion problem in network analysis. In: Freeman LC, White DR, 
Romney AK (eds), Research Methods in Social Network Analysis. 
New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 1992, 61–86.
69. Informationsdienst Holz. Holzwirtschaft fordert Kohlendioxid- 
Einsparverordnung. D€usseldorf: Informationsverein Holz e.V., 
2016. https://perma.cc/Z3PF-DJAP.
70. Bundesamt f€ur Energie BFE. Strategie f€ur die energetische Nutzung 
von Biomasse in der Schweiz. Eidgen€ossisches Departement f€ur 
Umwelt, Verkehr, Energie und Kommunikation UVEK (Swiss 
Department for Environment, Transportation, Energy and 
Communication), 2010. https://perma.cc/VP82-XHKD.
71. Klima-Allianz Schweiz. Klima-Masterplan Schweiz. Geneva: 
Klima-Allianz Schweiz, 2016. https://perma.cc/T3G4-366A.
72. Arnold K, Bienge K, von Geibler J et al. Klimaschutz Und 
Optimierter Ausbau Erneuerbarer Energien Durch Kaskadennutzung 
Von Biomasseprodukten. Wuppertal: Wuppertal Institute for 
Climate, Environment and Energy, 2009.
73. Fehrenbach H, K€oppen S, Breitmayer E et al. Biomassekaskaden. 
Mehr Ressourceneffizienz Durch Stoffliche Kaskadennutzung Von 
Biomasse—Von Der Theorie Zur Praxis. Umweltforschungsplan Des 
Bundesministeriums 
F€ur 
Umwelt, 
Naturschutz, 
Bau 
Und 
Reaktorsicherheit. Dessau-Roßlau: Umweltbundesamt, 2017.
74. Simon F. France details plans for “carbon inclusion mecha­
nism”. Euractiv, 18 May 2010.
75. Mittal L. A carbon border tax is the best answer on climate 
change. Financial Times, 12 February 2017.
76. Gerres T, Haussner M, Neuhoff K et al. To ban or not to ban 
carbon-intensive materials: a legal and administrative assess­
ment of product carbon requirements. Rev Euro Comp Intl Enviro 
2021;30:249–62.
77. Martini L, G€orlach B. What role for a climate club under the 
German G7 presidency? Options and recommendations for a cli­
mate club. Ecologic Policy Brief 2022. https://perma.cc/M7BC-7L6K.
N.D. Jordan | 9  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
78.
Carbon Leadership Forum. Sponsors. 2023. https://carbonleader 
shipforum.org/our-sponsors/ (accessed 22 December 2023).
79.
Price R. The Changes to Advance Decarbonization will Take Effect in 
July 2024. Philadelphia and Washington, D.C.: U.S. Green 
Building Council, 2023. https://perma.cc/7W5E-3GFQ.
80.
European Political Strategy Centre. Towards low-emission mo­
bility. Driving the modernisation of the EU economy. EPSC 
Strategic Notes 17. 2016. https://perma.cc/EZ3Z-ZDSF.
81.
The Local. Denmark to Label Food According to Effect on Climate. The 
Local, 2018. https://perma.cc/JJ6T-2XL4.
82.
Quackenbush C. Denmark wants food labels to include environ­
mental impact. Time, 9 October 2018. https://perma.cc/ 
KA59-8TF4.
83. Brotherton-Bunch E. Time to Bust Some Myths about Trump’s Steel 
and Aluminum Imports Investigations. Washington, D.C.: Alliance 
for 
American 
Manufacturing, 
2017. 
https://perma.cc/ 
6NJU-QQTY.
84. Lombardozzi B. California Aims to Buy Clean–And it Starts with 
Buying American-made. Washington, D.C.: Alliance for American 
Manufacturing, 2017. https://perma.cc/9VRA-6RBH.
85. Lombardozzi B. Is America Importing its Pollution? Washington, D. 
C.: Alliance for American Manufacturing, 2018. https://perma. 
cc/S8UQ-HZZG.
86. Alliance for American Manufacturing. About us. Washington, D. 
C.: Alliance for American Manufacturing, 2018. https://perma. 
cc/U996-BEGD.
10 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae003/7604540 by guest on 26 August 2024
