What’s Scope 2 good for?
Marc Roston1,, Alicia Seiger1, Abigail Mathieson1,2 
1Sustainable Finance Initiative, Precourt Institute for Energy, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94305, United States 
2Breakthrough Energy, New York, NY 10174, United States
Corresponding author. Sustainable Finance Initiative, Precourt Institute for Energy, 559 Nathan Abbott Way, Stanford, CA 94305, United Sates.  
E-mail: mroston@stanford.edu
Abstract 
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol’s Scope 2 has long been pivotal in addressing electricity's role in emissions, yet its effectiveness 
in emissions accounting is limited. This paper critiques Scope 2 for its inadequate allocation of electricity-derived emissions and 
for supporting misleading emissions reduction claims through market-based transactions. The paper investigates alternatives like 
24/7 Carbon Free Electricity and Emissions First, noting their improvements over Scope 2, but also their failure to fully address grid 
embodied emissions. The concept of carbon solvency is introduced as a superior model, compelling firms to align long-term 
emissions liabilities with carbon removal assets, thus enabling more accurate emissions accounting and investment decisions 
for grid decarbonization. This approach fosters clearer decision-making, particularly in electricity generation methods with variable 
upstream emissions, such as hydrogen and biofuels. By redefining net zero within a rigorous, auditable framework, we propose a 
shift from current practices towards a more accountable and environmentally impactful model.
Keywords: emissions, carbon accounting, E-Liabilities, E-Assets, carbon solvency, Scope 2, GHG Protocol, embodied emissions, emis­
sions liability management 
Introduction
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol started life as a risk management 
tool for evaluating the incidence of an expected carbon tax or 
similar legislative action. In more than two decades since its 
launch, the Protocol has suffered mission creep: driven by activ­
ist demand for measurement and accountability, they pulled the 
Protocol into an accounting-like role beyond its capacity. 
Currently, billions of dollars of planned investments and policy 
prescriptions rely on the Protocol to justify decisions.
Effective global economic transformation away from fossil 
fuels demands massive investment, as much as $4.3 trillion an­
nually by 2030 [1]. In support of this transition, activists and lead­
ing firms race to voluntarily deploy limited resources effectively 
while awaiting government action or, in some cases, supporting 
and expanding mandatory compliance actions. A shift from car­
bon counting to carbon accountability and from agitation to capi­
tal allocation requires functional accounting. The limitations of 
the Protocol as an accounting tool have moved to center stage, 
hindering progress. The Protocol does not allocate emissions in a 
mutually exclusive and comprehensively exhaustive way—an es­
sential property of a functional accounting system. Therefore, 
the Protocol cannot correctly assign responsibility, demand 
accountability, or accurately inform investment decisions in sup­
port of climate goals. Absent a functional accounting system, 
corporate, national, and international emissions reduction goals 
and progress evaluation will fall short.
For more than two decades, firms have used the Protocol’s 
Scope 2 guidance to estimate electricity-derived emissions and 
inform electricity market transactions and related investment 
decisions. Recent SEC rule making has concluded that disclo­
sures and oversight in the United States will focus on Scope 1 
and Scope 2 emissions, excluding Scope 3 [2]. (Scope 1 includes 
direct emissions from combustion activities. Scope 2 includes 
electricity, heating, and cooling. This paper focuses on electricity 
without loss of generality as the accounting failures of Scope 2 
apply to heating and cooling as well.) This bright line between 
Scopes 1 & 2 and Scope 3 misses the point that the Scopes are not 
separable and do not accurately attribute emissions. Only Scope 
1 emissions enter the atmosphere. Scope 2 underestimates and 
misattributes direct emissions (i.e. Scope 1) of others in an elec­
tricity supply chain. Therefore, decisions designed to reduce 
Scope 2 emissions risk misallocating limited resources. Rather 
than repeatedly adjusting and patching flaws in Scopes, firms 
and governments need to adopt valid accounting as the path to 
effective climate-positive actions aligned with budgets that span 
companies, nations, and the globe.
Electricity grids must maintain stability across many sellers 
with disparate technologies, innumerable buyers with demand 
variation and divergent incentives, balancing authorities, trans­
mission constraints and regulators. That electricity grids func­
tion at all is nothing short of miraculous. Decarbonizing this 
system requires massive investment and system change that 
demands sound attribution and allocation based on a solid ac­
counting foundation. Scope 2 does not correctly identify and allo­
cate all electricity-derived emissions, rendering unsuitable 
information to accurately measure and internalize the green­
house gas externalities. Scope 2 also supports flawed claims of 
emissions reductions by allowing for the distinction between 
market- and location-based measures. Proposed variations to 
Received: December 13, 2023. Revised: April 11, 2024. Accepted: June 3, 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, 4(1), kgae011  
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgae011 
Advance Access Publication Date: 17 July 2024 
Perspective Article   
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae011/7715934 by guest on 26 August 2024
electricity emissions methodologies offer some substantial 
improvements, but gaps remain.
The paper’s first section describes Scope 2 challenges. Scope 2 
counts only combustion emissions from the vantage point of the 
electricity consumer, not an integrated grid. By implication, elec­
tricity consumers will likely underinvest in their own emissions 
reductions. The Protocol’s allowance for location- and market- 
based estimates compounds those inaccuracies because it con­
flates emissions that are difficult to measure and allocate but 
have, in fact, occurred, with hypothetical counterfactual emis­
sions. This approach risks misdirected investments from actions 
that could reduce actual emissions.
The second section considers two enhanced approaches to 
electricity-derived emissions. Each approach has substantial 
advantages over existing Scope 2 emissions counting. The first 
approach, 24/7 Carbon Free Energy specifically challenges firms to 
link market-based emissions transactions and investments to 
time-sliced electricity-consumption driven emissions [3]. The 
second approach, Emissions First Partnership, suggests firms opti­
mize investments to maximize emissions avoidance system wide 
[4]. Both viable approaches emphasize the importance of higher 
frequency (or shorter measurement interval) emissions calcula­
tions than current Scope 2 requires. Each allows for market- 
based transactions with ambitious but ambiguous impacts. 
Neither describes a closed system that solves for meaningful net 
zero claims.
The third section defines carbon solvency in contrast to corpo­
rate net zero claims and the related patchwork of legal and 
regulatory disclosure frameworks based on the Protocol. Carbon 
solvency requires that firms match long-duration emissions lia­
bilities with carbon removal assets, providing a measurable and 
parsimonious budget constraint that defines net zero in a volun­
tary setting, consistent and adaptable to a compliance regime.
The last section provides an overview of implementation, sug­
gesting that the most efficient path to understanding and allocat­
ing grid emissions ought to occur at the balancing authority or 
grid level, where the ability to balance the private and public 
good characteristics of the electricity and related emissions align 
most effectively. The conclusion presents both a research path 
for incentives that align with emissions liability management, 
and policy recommendations regarding complex (potentially) 
clean energy systems such as biofuels and hydrogen.
Scope 2
Scope 2 emissions sound straightforward: indirect emissions 
from electricity generation. The Protocol defines Scope 3 emis­
sions as “indirect emissions resulting from value chain activities” 
[5]. While indirect emissions from electricity generation fall 
squarely in “value chain activities,” the Protocol chooses to carve 
out Scope 2 as a special case. If Scope 2 captured all indirect emis­
sions resulting from purchased electricity, that might be useful 
accounting. This section identifies missing components to 
accurate electricity emissions accounting, the Protocol design 
features that incentivize inaccurate reduction claims and misdir­
ected investments, and two novel approaches to improve on 
Scope 2 that still fall short.
Scope 2 and Scope 3 Category 3
What does Scope 2 measure? Scope 2 counts only combustion 
emissions based on end-user estimates from consumed electric­
ity. That definition falls short: the sum of customer estimates 
based on consumed electricity, even if correctly estimated, 
excludes all transmission and distribution losses. In the U.S. and 
India, such estimates would undercount by about 5% and at least 
20%, respectively [6, 7]. More accurately, Scope 2 estimates a 
firm’s emissions under the novel conditions that the firm had 
onsite generation continuously matched to load, with a fixed 
emissions factor equal to the grid annual average emissions fac­
tor at the firm’s location. (Electricity rate setting incorporates 
this concept of adjustments for losses. See “Electricity E-liability 
Implementation” below.)
Scope 3 Category 3 (“S3C3”) defines the complete set of exclu­
sions from Scope 2 that make it an inaccurate measure of 
electricity-derived emissions. S3C3 estimates the indirect emis­
sions upstream in the electricity supply chain across a range of 
activities, including everything from fossil fuel extraction to gen­
eration facility construction to transmission and distribution in­
frastructure manufacturing and installation and previously 
noted transmission and distribution line losses [5].
The Protocol’s distinction between S2 and S3C3 made more 
sense in the original risk management context but falls short as a 
capital allocation tool. S3C3 captures what are largely sunk or 
fixed costs in the short run (e.g. transmission and distribution 
infrastructure) and difficult-to-measure, higher order emissions 
(e.g. diesel fuel to move coal from a mine to a power plant.) 
Planning electricity systems transformation and growth, how­
ever, cannot rely on S2 alone. First, the sum across all customers 
on a grid of estimated S2 will not add-up to the actual emissions 
of generators on the grid due to transmission and distribution 
losses. Second, customer estimates do not include embodied 
emissions in generation, transmission, and distribution systems. 
More generally, customer-level estimated emissions cannot con­
verge to actual generation emissions. Therefore, efforts to esti­
mate emissions misdirect efforts, when grid operators could 
report and allocate actual emissions to their customers. Counting 
S2 emissions might be useful for back-of-the-envelope decisions 
or disclosures, but it is not a useful tool for accountability. An ac­
countable firm wants to invest appropriately to internalize emis­
sions externalities, or even beyond, fully informed by accurate 
accounts. Scope 2 underestimates that obligation. Scope 2 plus 
S3C3 may be closer, but still uses difficult to reconcile estimates. 
(The Net Zero and Carbon Solvency section below reviews a method 
for true emissions accounting first described by Kaplan and 
Ramanna [8] and an approach to accountability described by 
Roston, Seiger and Heller [9].)
Location versus market
The Protocol suggests firms report Scope 2 emissions using two 
methods: location-based and market-based. Location-based 
Scope 2 emissions (“LBS2”) considers the physical location of a 
load in a particular geography or attached to a particular grid, 
and requires the firm combine its known electricity consumption 
with average emissions factors (e.g. kg CO2e/MWh) for the 
specific location.
In a nod to accountability, market-based Scope 2 (“MBS2”) 
allows a firm to report lower emissions than LBS2 by adjusting 
for market-based activities that the Protocol accepts as offsets 
against LBS2. Energy attribute transactions (“EATs”) comprise the 
bulk of these investments. (Power purchase agreements account 
for most EATs. While PPAs may not look like traditional invest­
ments, the party entering a PPA provides capital to a counter­
party building generation capacity—a form of an investment.) A 
firm acknowledges its LBS2 but spends to report lower MBS2. 
This distinction between LBS2 and MBS2 presents challenges for 
net zero goals and distorts net zero claims. A company that has 
2 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae011/7715934 by guest on 26 August 2024
done nothing to reduce LBS2 emissions might still report zero 
MBS2 emissions through EATs. While the legal basis for EATs has 
been well documented [10], the transactions violate accounting, 
financial, and atmospheric CO2 logic. (Trading liabilities obscures 
product embodied emissions; such actions are the financial ac­
counting equivalent of separating prices from quantities [11]. 
Subsequent sections examine these issues in more detail.
Practically, most firms treat LBS2 as fixed, and costly to re­
duce because emissions externalities are not (or were not) priced 
in their capital expenditure decision to locate their facilities. 
They focus their reporting and investing efforts on low-cost MBS2 
reductions through EATs that do not reduce the firm’s emissions.
Energy attribute trading
Energy attribute trading, originally developed to subsidize de­
ployment of non-economic renewable power generation, allows 
power generators to separate delivered electricity from the gen­
eration attributes of that power: an electricity consumer receives 
electricity, another party receives the generation attributes of the 
power. This market supports and encourages a perplexing notion 
of setting emissions targets or tracking emissions reductions, 
causing confusion or even deception. MBS2 reporting relies on 
trading attributes of power generation, through time, across loca­
tions, and detached from the actual generation technology of the 
buyer or the seller. Two perverse results follow from this market: 
First, electricity buyers may consume power with no emissions 
attributes. Second, the emissions impact of an energy attribute 
trade depends on the buyer’s electricity generation mix, not on 
the product purchased. These inconsistencies inherent to Scope 
2, support over-counting reductions, fail truth-in-advertising 
type claims about electricity and cannot correctly attrib­
ute emissions.
Consider a standard energy attribute transaction. A renewable 
power producer generates 1 MWh of electricity, delivered to its 
grid. That power producer also issues a renewable energy certifi­
cate (“REC”) saying it produced 1 MWh of renewable power con­
sidered “carbon free.” (As previously noted, this power is not 
carbon free: scope 2 and related electricity discussions generally 
ignore Scope 3 Category 3.) An electricity consumer, potentially 
on a different grid, buys that REC and now claims the right to say 
their 1 MWh purchased electricity is “renewable”, “carbon free” or 
“carbon neutral” under MBS2. (REC trading and PPAs both discon­
nect emissions from electricity.)
This transaction creates a novel electricity product: null power. 
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol Scope 2 Guidance defines null 
power as power that “can no longer be considered to contain the 
energy attributes, including the type of energy (e.g. that it is 
‘renewable’) and its GHG emissions rate (that it is ‘zero emis­
sions/MWh’)” [19].
A stylized example illustrates energy attribute trading and ex­
actly where such transactions go wrong from an accounting per­
spective. Imagine three unconnected grids with vertically 
integrated utilities. Utility A has 100% hydroelectric generation. 
Utility B burns natural gas, generating 0.47 t CO2/MWh; utility C 
burns coal, generating 0.99 t CO2/MWh (EPA, 2020) [18]. Firms X, 
Y and Z each operate on grids A, B and C, respectively (see Fig. 1).
Grid A burns no fossil fuels, so firm X has no CO2 emissions 
from electricity consumption. However, Utility A sells RECs for 
each MWh generated, two in the example. Firms Y and Z com­
pete to buy RECs from utility A to reduce their MBS2. MBS2 guid­
ance allows either Y or Z to obtain a REC from utility A, match 
that REC with their local electricity, throw away (“retire”) the 
REC, and claim the purchased attribute as a substitute for their 
actual electricity attribute. As a result of this transaction, X now 
has 2 MWh of null power. Y and Z each has the right to claim 
1 MWh of zero MBS2 electricity, while their LBS2 remains 
unchanged. Because this market mechanism matches MWh 
(versus emissions) the MBS2 impact of the transaction depends 
on whether Y or Z buys, reducing buyer MBS2 by 0.47 t or 0.99 t.
Firm X may not know that A sold its energy attributes and 
delivered null power. Utility A transacts firm X’s emissions 
attributes without consent.
These transactions may look like typical financial market 
swaps. They are not. Swaps require that both counterparties con­
sent to swapping assets and liabilities. EATs allow the buyer to 
claim the emissions of the seller without the seller accepting the 
attribute of the buyer. Energy attribute swaps should, in princi­
ple, be allowable. Under current market practice why would they 
happen? Firm X might swap attributes with Y such that emis­
sions do not disappear, but that only happens if X cares less 
about emissions than Y—that’s good accounting but provides no 
environmental gain. The final section on implementation exam­
ines this more closely in the context of a universal carbon ac­
counting strategy where EAT may result in system-wide 
emissions reductions.
Variant approaches
Technology firms consume enormous quantities of electricity. A 
mix of competitive forces, self-imposed accountability, and activ­
ism drive these firms and many others to attempt to reduce 
MBS2 and, to a lesser extent, LBS2. In their leadership roles and 
acknowledging some of the weaknesses of Scope 2 and EATs, 
technology firms have formed two leading coalitions proposing 
Scope 2 variants. Both variants acknowledge the reality that LBS2 
more closely aligns with their actual emissions, while attempting 
to tighten the lax constraints of MBS2. First, they dispense with 
the EAT anomaly that allows a megawatt of renewable electricity 
generation to eliminate a megawatt of arbitrary fossil fuel emis­
sions. Second, they reduce the interval for evaluating LBS2 and 
MBS2 from one year to one hour, better reflecting variable emis­
sions based on grid conditions—an important incentive for con­
sumers with the ability to shift or vary their electricity loads, and 
producers attempting to deliver lower emissions electricity dur­
ing periods of highest demand. However, they neither attempt to 
correct for S3C3 undercounting, nor estimated versus ac­
tual emissions.
The variants diverge on their implied investment strategies. 
The United Nations 24/7 Carbon Free Energy Compact (“CFE”) signato­
ries seek to invest in generation capacity that will reduce Scope 2 
emissions for the grids on which they operate [3]. Such a 
location-focused strategy likely means over-investment by an in­
dividual firm: driving down emissions during the highest emis­
sions hours demands investments that benefit the collective grid 
customers more than the individual firm making the investment. 
(Investment, in this context, might mean signing a long-term PPA 
with a new solar plus storage generator that serves a grid on 
which the investor operates.) CFE signatories propose recovering 
incremental costs that reduce emissions for others through 
hourly matched EATs that would defease much of the over- 
investment. For example, financing solar plus storage generation 
on a grid where the storage would displace high marginal emis­
sions generation would be preferred over the same deployment 
on a grid with relatively lower marginal emissions because the 
EATs would be more attractive in the former case.
Roston et al. | 3  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae011/7715934 by guest on 26 August 2024
In contrast, The Emissions First Partnership (“EF”) allows for 
location-agnostic investments that avoid emissions most effi­
ciently [4]. For example, a firm operating in California might in­
vest in solar capacity in South Africa because the emissions 
reductions for an additional solar farm in California might be 
quite low, whereas South African solar capacity displaces high 
emissions electricity. (As EF develops, practitioners may impose 
some level of geographic constraints.)
Both CFE and EF benefit from higher frequency marginal emis­
sions factors in service of more accurate location- and time- 
based emissions reductions (i.e. Scope 2), but the data serves dif­
ferent ends: CFE to identify time periods that require additional 
investment to reduce emissions when demand would be greatest 
for EATs from similarly located buyers; EF to quantify marginal 
emissions and match investment-driven avoided emissions.
Large electricity buyers typically use power purchase agree­
ments (“PPAs”) to acquire both electricity and energy attributes 
(i.e. RECs). They argue that PPAs reduce their MBS2, potentially 
help align with CFE or EF, and support deployment of non- 
fossil generation.
Non-fossil deployment support requires further examination. 
PPA proponents argue that absent PPAs, banks would not finance 
non-fossil generation projects. A highly simplified example: A 
new project requires $10 million in up-front costs. The project 
developer has $3 million to invest. A bank will not lend the proj­
ect $7 million out of concern that electricity prices may not be 
high enough to pay off the debt. The PPA buyer steps in to com­
mit to buying the electricity at a minimum price, adequate to pay 
off the loan.
The PPA may look like an agreement to buy electricity. It is 
not. It is more like a credit guarantee where the PPA buyer agrees 
to pay the project in the event the project cannot generate 
enough revenue selling electricity. Or it is an insurance policy of­
fered by the PPA buyer to make up a loss by the project resulting 
from a shortfall between an expected future electricity price and 
the actual future electricity price. The PPA buyer provides contin­
gent capital to the project in the event electricity prices fall short. 
Financial economics describes the electricity market absent PPAs 
as “incomplete” because there are securities that could trade that 
do not [12].
Most market participant intuition about PPA effectiveness 
comes from a period when non-fossil generation costs exceeded 
fossil generation costs substantially, and when state-level renew­
able portfolio standards imposed constraints on fossil generation 
in the United States. Disentangling the effects of renewable port­
folio standards, substantially reduced non-fossil generation costs 
and PPAs poses a challenging question beyond this paper's scope. 
However, executing PPAs has nothing to do with effective carbon 
emissions accounting, nor does it necessarily tie back to electric­
ity consumption. In fact, a firm that has skill at negotiating PPAs 
and believes PPAs expand non-fossil electricity might simply 
grow their PPA activity based on capital allocation decisions, not 
electricity consumption. (The PPA consumes corporate capital 
like any other investment. A firm could choose to operate the 
business profitably or chose to efficiently lose money in support 
of energy transition.)
PPAs support an important risk transfer function applied to 
any power generation project. However, using PPAs in conjunc­
tion with flawed emissions accounting propagates null power, 
further compounding emissions misattribution and confusing 
efforts to track emissions reductions.
Much like the GHG Protocol draws a distinction between LBS2 
and MBS2, reporting firms might choose to report the results of 
their EATs as pro forma disclosures, but this should not be mis­
taken for good accounting for electricity-derived emissions. Both 
frameworks and their differing approaches signal firm action 
around electricity emissions and climate action broadly. But they 
do not address the essential emissions accounting problem.
Net zero and carbon solvency
Formal and informal net zero claims abound. The Science Based 
Targets Initiative (SBTi), a non-profit partnership formed to sup­
port aligning corporate action with consensus climate science, 
serves as a leading arbiter of net zero targets. While logical in 
theory, in practice SBTi-approved targets are based on transition 
pathways with bold assumptions about technology diffusion and 
Ulity A
Ulity B
Ulity C
100% Hydroelectric
0.0t CO  /MWh 
100% Natural Gas
0.47t CO  /MWh 
100% Coal
0.99t CO  /MWh
REC 
(1 MWh, 0t CO )
Electricity
(2 MWh, 0t CO  )
REC 
(1 MWh, 
Oﬀsets 0.47t 
)
+
Electricity
(1 MWh, 0.47t CO )
+
Electricity
(1 MWh, 0.99t CO )
REC 
(1 MWh, 
Oﬀsets 0.99t 
)
FIRM Y
Locaon Based: 0.47t CO
Market Based: 0.0t CO
FIRM Z
Locaon Based: 0.99t CO
Market Based: 0.0t CO
FIRM X
Locaon Based: “Null Power”
Market Based: “Null Power”
x2
Figure 1. Energy attribute trading stylized example.
4 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae011/7715934 by guest on 26 August 2024
adoption, in conjunction with scientifically reasonable yet politi­
cally challenging budget constraints on future emissions [13]. 
Informal claims of “net zero” or more likely “carbon neutrality” 
often reflect vague corporate sustainability reports that may 
point toward combinations of offsets, avoidance actions, and am­
biguous (yet ambitious) plans.
Most firms make pledges with the best of intentions. Firms 
hire teams of sustainability analysts, GHG Protocol consultants 
and other advisors to identify their GHG emissions. An extensive 
literature illustrates the imprecise and incomplete nature of 
these inventories [14]. Neither formal nor informal net zero 
claims stop emissions from entering the atmosphere. The former 
promises that at a future date, with future technologies, the firm 
will no longer emit greenhouse gases on a net basis. The latter 
says little about actual emissions at any point.
What’s the alternative? Clarifying accounting principles and 
practices will formalize net zero pledges and targets through au­
ditable carbon solvency.
Kaplan and Ramanna proposes an approach that resolves 
weaknesses inherent to the GHG Protocol by applying cost ac­
counting methods to carbon emissions tracking termed E-Liability 
accounting [8]. This method recognizes the simple reality that only 
Scope 1 emissions enter the atmosphere and that proper carbon ac­
counting ought to allocate these emissions—only once—at the 
point the emissions occur. E-liability accounting accumulates 
embodied emissions in products and services, cradle to gate, 
based on atmospheric emissions, passed from supplier to cus­
tomer at each step in a supply chain. E-liabilities amount to 
reported cumulative supply chain emissions in contrast to the 
largely top-down, industry-aggregate collection of estimates ad­
mitted under the GHG Protocol.
Roston, Seiger and Heller (“RSH”) expands on the basic struc­
ture of E-liabilities, providing a straightforward definition of a net 
zero firm or product under Emissions Liability Management 
(“ELM”) [9]. RSH proposes matching E-liabilities with carbon re­
moval assets, or E-assets, in sufficient quantity to ensure emis­
sions solvency: E-assets must meet or exceed E-liabilities both 
with respect to quantity (tons of GHGs removed greater than or 
equal to emissions) and duration (tons entering the atmosphere 
persist essentially indefinitely—removals must persist as well). 
ELM does not assume that only removals perform the heavy lift of 
achieving net zero. Ex post removal cost will likely exceed ex ante 
avoidance [9]. Therefore, firms will pressure their suppliers to re­
duce emissions.
Kaplan, Ramanna and Roston (“KRR”) establishes accounting 
principles for E-assets, noting that only carbon removals count as 
E-assets [11]. That principle does not deny that avoiding emis­
sions is a good thing to do. In fact, E-Liability accounting directly 
incorporates incentives to avoid emissions because avoided 
emissions lead to fewer liabilities and lower removal obligations.
The definition of net zero that follows from RSH and KRR 
imposes rigorous, auditable standards. Carbon solvency under 
ELM ensures that a firm does not cause any atmospheric CO2 
increase. Under this definition of net zero, a firm cannot defease 
E-liabilities with counterfactual avoided emissions, or offsets 
that result from someone else’s action to avoid creating an 
E-liability [9]. As activist and policy-maker prescriptions focus on 
electrifying everything and carbon-free electricity, they must also rec­
ognize the implications for avoided emissions: the total future 
demand for carbon-free electricity (replacing all current genera­
tion plus the additional generation demanded by a growing world 
economy) means that the theoretical avoidable emissions from 
new generation exceed current actual emissions.
Given this precise definition of net zero, firms can take actions 
within their supply chains, particularly the complex electricity 
supply chain, which will: encourage meaningful decarbonization; 
internalize the externality of their own actions, and, ideally, halt 
their own emissions. The subsequent section uses this compre­
hensive notion of carbon solvency as the basis against which we 
evaluate the efficacy of current practice to align firm carbon ac­
counting, firm accountability, and electricity market policy and 
regulations.
Electricity E-liability implementation
As noted previously, Kaplan and Ramanna establishes the foun­
dations of E-liability accounting by applying activity-based cost 
accounting methods to tracking and allocating actual carbon 
emissions. In the language of the GHG Protocol, E-liability ac­
counting attributes and allocates Scope 1 emissions to products 
and services, passing known direct emissions to the relevant cus­
tomers, rather than demanding customers to estimate suppliers’ 
emissions, (i.e. upstream Scope 3 emissions).
This method works in a straightforward fashion for most 
products and services. Kaplan and Cooper (“KC”) provides the 
conceptual foundations for activity-based accounting that apply 
directly to E-liability accounting [15]. Under activity-based ac­
counting, a firm knows the cost of purchased inputs. It also allo­
cates overhead costs, (e.g., office space, administration, and 
utilities,) with some level of discretion. The firm has leeway in 
precise allocation, but competitive forces and auditing standards 
provide guardrails. Allocating the CEO’s pay or all the electricity 
expense to one product or product line would make that product 
uncompetitive in the marketplace.
Under E-Liability accounting, a widget manufacturer knows 
the E-liabilities of input goods, the emissions generated by 
firm operations, the E-liabilities of the widget factory, machinery, 
and the E-liabilities passed from its utility or grid operator. 
Therefore, the widget manufacturer determines the E-liabilities 
of a widget by adding (a) E-liabilities of material inputs, (b) its 
own direct emissions allocated appropriately, and (c) the allo­
cated E-liabilities of the factory and machinery used. KC provides 
guidance on allocation rules that apply to costs that directly 
transfer to E-liability allocation rules. Importantly, neither cost 
accounting 
nor 
E-liability 
accounting 
methods 
uniquely 
determine allocation of costs or E-Liabilities—accountants have 
discretion over exact procedures—but accountants apply fair 
and consistent standards.
Electricity production itself does not follow that method so 
easily. Electricity production and delivery straddles public and 
private goods, violating the simplicity of strict boundaries as­
sumed in KC and standard accounting methods. Electricity con­
sumed by the widget manufacturer certainly fits the private good 
mold: count the megawatt-hours the factory consumes, allocate 
grid emissions appropriately to finished goods. However, the fact 
that the electricity is always available with highly flexible de­
mand to all grid customers from all grid-attached generators has 
public good features [16]. All customers benefit from grid balanc­
ing, contingent transmission and distribution resilience, excess 
generation capacity, etc. More generally, grid redundancies bene­
fit all customers whether they directly use them or not. (Cost ac­
counting for resource capacity and highly variable demand, 
obvious issues for grid operations, are discussed in KC, but are 
beyond the scope of this paper.)
While E-Liability accounting straightforwardly quantifies the 
total emissions from electricity, emissions allocations to 
Roston et al. | 5  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae011/7715934 by guest on 26 August 2024
individual customers are not uniquely determined or controlled 
by any single electricity generator. Just like the widget factory ex­
ample, accountants would establish procedures to allocate E- 
Liabilities consistently. At the same time, customers would have 
divergent views about any allocation method. Consider two firms 
on the same grid. Firm F has a stable load 24/7 at one location. 
Firm V has a variable load because it operates at less than capac­
ity and has more than one facility. Firm F would prefer the grid 
operator allocate all E-Liabilities uniformly across time. This allo­
cation implicitly penalizes V for its variable operations. Firm V 
would prefer the grid allocated at time intervals that aligned 
with V’s ability to time or location shift production, thus mini­
mizing V’s liability, and penalizing F for its inability to time shift.
Any E-Liability allocation scheme at the regional transmission 
organization or independent system operator determines incen­
tives to grid participants. Today, rate setting incorporates these 
disparate interests when allocating costs. Peak demand sur­
charges, capacity payments, demand-response, grid connections 
for rooftop solar, etc., all determine incentives to electricity con­
sumers and producers. Rate setting responds to economic and 
political incentives aligning reliability and affordability. Ideally, 
public utility commissions or balancing authorities would set al­
location procedures adding emissions reduction incentives into 
their decision-making, aligned with KC methods. In the interim, 
electricity customers might apply their own implicit allocation 
schemes consistent with KC, as more promising long-term solu­
tions than EF or CFE. For example, time-sensitive unexpected de­
mand for computing power presumably has a higher price for 
cloud computing. The same ought to hold for E-liabilities passed 
from the cloud computing provider to the customer.
Finally, in a world of E-Liability accounting, the EAT flaws dis­
cussed in the first section resolve themselves. Once emissions 
allocations are mutually exclusive and comprehensively exhaus­
tive, then consenting parties may agree to an allocation such 
that no emissions disappear from the system, and null power no 
longer exists.
Conclusion
What is Scope 2 good for? For two decades, Scope 2 has informed 
electricity consumers about the emissions impacts of their usage 
and helped spur advocacy efforts for energy system transforma­
tion. Today, energy system transformation is an investment 
problem, not an advocacy problem. Investor decision making, 
whether private or public, must internalize the externality of 
emissions. As currently defined, Scope 2 cannot inform capital 
allocation and investment required for energy system transfor­
mation. Scope 3 Category 3 narrows the gap by incorporating 
supply chains but cannot close it because estimates misalign 
incentives. Scope 2 encourages energy attribute trading, which 
violates logical accounting practices, allows companies’ presen­
tation of flawed emissions measures, and reinforces overcount­
ing and misattributing emissions reductions. Scope 2 cannot 
drive toward the future the global economy needs in a voluntary 
or mandatory reporting regime.
Many stakeholders support CFE or EF approaches that amount 
to useful but incomplete corrections to Scope 2 counting. While 
these methods might impact emissions, they violate accounting 
logic, mis-identify reductions, and do not align with carbon sol­
vency goals or obligations. They certainly add substantially to 
reporting complexity. These enhanced Scope 2 measures have 
potential as pro forma signals, communicating firm intentions 
and sincerity. However, they neither represent functional emis­
sions accounting nor a path to accurate accountability.
E-liability accounting provides accurate, mutually exclusive, 
and comprehensively exhaustive measures of electricity-derived 
emissions. Leading climate actors from the corporate sector, 
NGOs and regulators should adopt E-liabilities rather than Scope 
2 as their approach to accounting for their emissions and holding 
themselves to account. Even E-liability estimates in the short-run 
provide better capital allocation signals, better emissions attribu­
tion, and likely better alignment with future policy-driven incen­
tives. As governments consider expanded programs and 
pathways for grid transformation, aligning real accounting and 
incentives grows in importance. Future work will consider incen­
tive structures and allocation methods aligning incremental E-li­
ability adoption by individual actors with long-term uniform 
application.
Current debates about hydrogen impacts and incentives illus­
trate the challenges of Scope 2. Hydrogen producers describe a 
rainbow of colors for a colorless gas. This color variation seeks to 
describe emissions upstream of the hydrogen itself—S3C3 emis­
sions for hydrogen electrolysis. Surplus solar or wind? Green. 
Natural gas with carbon capture and storage? Blue. Nuclear 
power? Pink. Natural gas without carbon capture? Gray. Coal? 
Brown. The list goes on [17]. This rainbow classification follows 
directly from the failure of Scope 2 to account for upstream 
emissions. Under Scope 2, nothing consuming hydrogen for 
power has any greenhouse gas emissions. That makes no sense. 
Under E-liability accounting, hydrogen consumers simply receive 
the E-liabilities associated with their hydrogen. The colors are 
shortcuts around current accounting failures.
Author contributions
Marc Roston (Conceptualization [lead], Writing—original draft 
[equal], Writing—review & editing [equal]), Alicia Seiger 
(Conceptualization 
[equal], 
Writing—original draft 
[equal], 
Writing—review & editing [equal]), and Abigail Mathieson 
(Conceptualization [supporting], Writing—original draft [sup­
porting], Writing—review & editing [supporting])
Conflict of interest: None declared.
Funding
None declared.
Data availability
There is no data to make available.
References
01. Climate Policy Initiative. Global Landscape of Climate Finance - A 
Decade of Data: 2011-2020. 2022. https://www.climatepolicyinitia 
tive.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Global-Landscape-of- 
Climate-Finance-A-Decade-of-Data.pdf (20 June 2024, date 
last accessed).
02. United States Securities and Exchange Commission. The 
Enhancement and Standardization of Climate-Related Disclosures: 
Final Rule. 2024. https://www.sec.gov/files/33-11275-fact-sheet. 
pdf (20 June 2024, date last accessed).
03. 24/7 Carbon Free Energy Compact. https://gocarbonfree247.com/ 
(20 June 2024, date last accessed).
6 | Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, Vol. 4, No. 1  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae011/7715934 by guest on 26 August 2024
04.
Emissions First Partnership. https://www.emissionsfirst.com/ (20 
June 2024, date last accessed).
05.
World Resources Institute and World Business Council for 
Sustainable Development. Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) 
Accounting and Reporting Standard. 2011 https://ghgprotocol.org/ 
sites/default/files/standards/Corporate-Value-Chain-Accounting- 
Reporing-Standard_041613_2.pdf (4 May 2024, date last 
accessed).
06.
Energy Information Administration. United States Electricity 
Profile 2021. Table 10. 2022. https://www.eia.gov/electricity/ 
state/unitedstates/ (20 June 2024, date last accessed).
07.
Central Electricity Authority. Executive Summary on Power Sector 
July 2022. 2022. https://cea.nic.in/wpcontent/uploads/execu 
tive/2022/07/Executive_Summary_Jul_2022.pdf (20 June 2024, 
date last accessed).
08.
Kaplan R, Ramanna K. Accounting for climate change. Harv Bus 
Rev. 2021;99:120–31.
09.
Roston M, Seiger A, Heller T. What's next after carbon account­
ing? Emissions liability management. Oxford Open Clim Change 
2023;3.
10.
Center For Resource Solutions. The Legal Basis for Renewable 
Energy Certificates. 2023 (20 June 2024, last date accessed).
11.
Kaplan R, Ramanna K, Roston M. Accounting for carbon offsets. 
Harv Bus Rev 2023. 101(4):126–137.
12. Newbery D. Missing money and missing markets: reliability, 
capacity auctions and interconnectors. Energy Policy 2016; 
94:401–10.
13. Roston M, Marie J, Seiger A, Heller T. Pathways versus incen­
tives: climate action to climate aligned portfolio management. 
Oxford Open Clim Change, forthcoming.
14. Jia J, Ranger N, Chaudhury A. Designing for Comparability: A 
Foundational Principle of Analysis Missing In Carbon Reporting 
Systems. 2023. https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4258460 (4 May 
2024, date last accessed).
15. Kaplan R, Cooper R. Cost and Effect. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1997, Chapter 7.
16. Toomey D et al. Reliability, electric power, and public versus 
private goods: a new look at the role of markets. In: Proceedings 
of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, Big Island, HI, USA, 2005.
17. 24/7 Carbon Free Energy Compact. Hydrogen Color Wheel. http:// 
gocarbonfree247.com/hydrogen-color-wheel/ (20 June 2024, 
date last accessed).
18. International Energy Agency. Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 
2020. 2020. https://www.iea.org/reports/projected-costs-of-gener 
ating-electricity-2020 (20 June 2024, date last accessed).
19. Sotos M. GHG Protocol Scope 2 Guidance. 2023. https://ghgproto 
col.org/sites/default/files/2023-03/Scope%202%20Guidance.pdf 
(4 May 2024 date last accessed).
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Oxford Open Climate Change, 2024, 4, 1–7
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgae011
Perspective Article
Roston et al. | 7  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/oocc/article/4/1/kgae011/7715934 by guest on 26 August 2024
