1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE SESSION REPORT 
MAKING NATURE COUNT FOR ADAPTATION: 
Global, naƟonal and local acƟon to  
value services provided by nature 
 
Joanna Eyquem, PGeo. ENV SP. CWEM. CEnv  
Intact Centre on Climate AdaptaƟon, University of Waterloo 
Dr Ursule Boyer-Villemaire  
Ouranos and Associate Professor in Disaster Risk and Resilience,  
Université du Québec à Montréal 
  
2 
 
SESSION DESCRIPTION 
It is widely recognised that nature-based soluƟons have a key role to play in climate adaptaƟon. Historically, 
climate adaptaƟon approaches have heavily relied on “grey” infrastructure soluƟons to either control natural 
processes, or to harden development, to reduce risk of damage and danger to public safety. In some cases, these 
techniques have resulted in negaƟve impacts on the funcƟon of ecosystems. In contrast, nature-based soluƟons 
can help manage climate risks in a way that provides beneﬁts for both people and nature. Examples include 
protecƟng and restoring wetlands to manage downstream ﬂooding or increasing urban forest cover to reduce 
extreme heat in ciƟes. The role of nature in climate adaptaƟon is underscored by Target 11 of the recently 
adopted Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework, which calls for ParƟes to use nature-based soluƟons 
to restore, maintain and enhance nature’s contribuƟons to people, including protecƟon from natural hazards. 
As parƟes work to implement the Global Biodiversity Framework, there is signiﬁcant opportunity to accelerate 
the use of nature-based soluƟons to reduce the impact of climate change on people, while achieving mulƟple 
beneﬁts. IdenƟfying and valuing these mulƟple beneﬁts will be important to support decision-making to make 
this opportunity a reality, at global, naƟonal and local scales.  
A key challenge is that, while nature is considered by many to be priceless, nature’s contribuƟons to people are 
largely absent from the ﬁnancial balance sheet of a world driven by produced capital and GDP. This panel session 
brought together leaders working at global, naƟonal and local scales to highlight iniƟaƟves and tools that are 
already been applied to make the value of nature for climate adaptaƟon (and other services) transparent. 
Speciﬁc consideraƟon was given to how Indigenous ways of knowing and values can be used to accelerate this 
process. Canada was also used as a case study to discussed the inter-relaƟonship between organisaƟon and 
ecosystem scales. 
CO-ORGANISERS 
Joanna Eyquem, PGeo. ENV SP. CWEM. CEnv, Managing Director, Climate-Resilient Infrastructure 
Intact Centre on Climate AdaptaƟon, University of Waterloo 
Joanna is an internaƟonally recognized leader in climate adaptaƟon and nature-based soluƟons, with over 20 
years experience in Europe, North America and Western Africa. She focuses on pracƟcal measures to reduce 
ﬂooding, erosion and heat risk, in parƟcular working with nature and the ﬁnancial sector. Joanna is leading 
eﬀorts to mainstream nature-based soluƟons, including natural asset management, across Canada and serves on 
several related boards and commitees, including as Vice Chair of the Board of the Natural Assets IniƟaƟve. 
Dr Ursule Boyer-Villemaire, Team Leader, Socioeconomic Analysis for AdaptaƟon,  
Ouranos and Associate Professor in Disaster Risk and Resilience, Université du Québec à Montréal 
Ursule Boyer-Villemaire is a geographer-oceanographer and leads a team in climate disaster risk and 
socioeconomic analysis for climate change adaptaƟon at Ouranos. She earned a PhD. in environmental sciences 
focussed on community and infrastructure vulnerability to climate change and percepƟons of natural risks, 
including geomorphology, geomaƟcs, risk percepƟon and public policies. 
 
3 
 
PANELISTS AND CONTRIBUTORS 
 
Shawn Blankinship, MBA, CPA, CA, Data & AnalyƟcs Manager (Panelist) 
First NaƟons Financial Management Board 
Shawn provides leadership in staƟsƟcal research and evaluaƟon, design and implementaƟon of quanƟtaƟve data 
collecƟon tools, and economic/ﬁscal policy research to support First NaƟons governments in their decision 
making. FMB is advancing its role in data and analyƟcs to provide meaningful informaƟon to First NaƟons that 
will be useful in their policy development. In this role, Shawn is forging relaƟonships, networks, and partnerships 
with First NaƟons governments and other organizaƟons to advance First NaƟons economic/ﬁscal data, analyƟcs, 
and policy research. 
 
Liesbeth Casier, LLB., Nature-Based Infrastructure Global Resource Centre (Panelist) 
InternaƟonal InsƟtute for Sustainable Development (IISD)  
Liesbeth is Coordinator of the Nature-Based Infrastructure (NBI) Global Resource Centre, where she works with 
the Sustainable Asset ValuaƟon (SAVi) methodology to make the case for invesƟng in nature. In this capacity, she 
has been building new partnerships with naƟonal governments, ciƟes, CSOs, IFIs and project developers to plan, 
procure, value, ﬁnance and implement NBI projects. Liesbeth has an academic background in poliƟcal science, 
law and sustainable development. She previously worked with the UN Environment Program and started her 
career as consultant in audiƟng and corporate ﬁnance with a family-owned consultancy business in Belgium. 
 
François Soulard, Research Manager, Census of Environment (Contributor) 
StaƟsƟcs Canada  
Francois manages the Census of Environment program at StaƟsƟcs Canada and has been involved in the ﬁeld of 
environmental staƟsƟcs for over 25 years, with a speciﬁc focus on the development of environmental accounts 
and the integraƟon of Earth observaƟon data. He has coordinated several large scale environmental accounƟng 
projects, provides internaƟonal training and engages in cooperaƟon on the development and applicaƟons of the 
United NaƟon’s System of Environmental-Economic AccounƟng (SEEA), namely on ecosystem, land, water, urban 
and ocean accounts. 
 
Bailey Church, CPA, CA, CIA, Lead, NaƟonal Public Sector AccounƟng Advisory (Contributor) 
KPMG Canada  
Bailey is the leader of KPMG’s NaƟonal Public Sector AccounƟng Advisory service line. His more than 17 years of 
experience includes substanƟal work in ﬁnancial management, accounƟng, ﬁnancial reporƟng and audiƟng 
maters within the public sector environment. Bailey is a well-known speaker at seminars and conferences across 
the country, including the Government Financial Oﬃcers AssociaƟon, the Municipal Financial Oﬃcers AssociaƟon 
of Ontario, the InsƟtute of Internal Auditors, the Financial Management InsƟtute, the Canadian Comprehensive 
AudiƟng FoundaƟon and the Oﬃce of the Auditor General. 
4 
 
KEY DISCUSSION POINTS 
 
1) 
OPPORTUNITIES 
Coming from COP15 to AdaptaƟon Futures in Montreal, there is a sense of momentum in how we recognise the 
role and value of nature for adaptaƟon. The ﬁnance and business sector are at the nature table. Our panelists 
were asked if they felt the same momentum, and to idenƟfy opportuniƟes that we should be taking right now to 
drive adaptaƟon that also makes nature count. 
RecogniƟon of ﬁnancial risks and returns 
 
• The conversaƟon can be steered from “funding” 
to “investment” in nature as infrastructure. 
 
• It is possible to make returns on investment 
explicit in decision-making, by assigning economic 
value to ecosystem services, including those 
related to climate adaptaƟon (e.g. ﬂood risk 
damage reducƟon due to soaking up and storing 
water in wetlands). 
 
• Decision-makers can use direct growing 
investment in adaptaƟon to approaches that 
create more “return”, by embedding beneﬁts of 
nature in opƟon selecƟon processes. 
 
 
The power of data for decision-making 
 
• Data on the state of ecosystems, at scale, can 
enable governments, businesses, and communiƟes 
to make evidence-based decisions regarding 
climate adaptaƟon strategies to achieve beneﬁts 
for people and nature. 
 
• Climate adaptaƟon can be aligned to address 
documented environmental trends, based on Ɵme-
series informaƟon (e.g. trends in urban greenness, 
conƟnuously setled area) 
 
• Higher resoluƟon and reference data can be 
collected at a local scale and inform asset 
management planning. There is a “right” scale of 
informaƟon for diﬀerent, nested spaƟal scales. 
Indigenous leadership and reconciliaƟon 
 
• Recognizing the value of nature can be framed 
within Indigenous worldviews, including 
consideraƟon of seven generaƟonal thinking and 
translaƟon into Indigenous languages. 
 
• There is a key opportunity to upliŌ Indigenous-led 
approaches to managing nature and learn from 
diﬀerent communiƟes (Australia, New Zealand) 
 
• Puƫng a ﬁnancial value on services from nature 
and concepts of ownership of natural assets may 
be challenging to reconcile, but there is 
opportunity to explain why these approaches are 
being used to contribute to nature 
protecƟon/restoraƟon and climate adaptaƟon. 
Development of standards and guidance 
 
• Standards are required to guide formalized 
reporƟng and disclosures on nature and 
biodiversity in sustainability reports. This can be 
embedded in standards from the InternaƟonal 
Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB). 
 
• Planning and design standards of nature-based 
soluƟons can be used to increase conﬁdence and 
scale-up use of technical soluƟons. 
 
• Training and guidance can help build capacity to 
plan, design, manage and report on nature-based 
approaches to climate adaptaƟon. 
 
5 
 
2) 
PRACTICAL TOOLS 
SomeƟmes our discussions around working with nature to reduce climate risks may appear aspiraƟonal or 
abstract. Our panelists sought to “make it real” by idenƟfying key pracƟcal tools that parƟcipants could use right 
now to help them make nature count for adaptaƟon: 
• 
ExisƟng data brokers: - Environmental data can be overwhelming, so it is useful to rely on data brokers, 
or data intermediaries to “translate” data into useful ﬁndings. Data brokers may include climate / nature 
informaƟon portals,  
 
• 
Geographic InformaƟon Systems: SpaƟal data is crucial in understanding natural ecosystems, climate 
impacts and adaptaƟon needs. A GIS allows us to analyze and visualize spaƟal data and paterns and 
their evoluƟon, idenƟfy vulnerable areas and planning appropriate adaptaƟon strategies.  
 
• 
Ecosystem services valuaƟon tools: tools like the Natural Capital Project's InVEST model can help assign 
economic values to ecosystem services according to established methods. 
 
• 
The Taskforce on Nature-related Financial Disclosures (TNFD): The TNFD are currently looking for early 
adopters The framework is an excellent tool to build structure around nature-related disclosures and tell 
a story to interested parƟes relaƟng to a speciﬁc organizaƟon. 
 
• 
ExisƟng standards on natural assets and natural capital accounƟng: South Africa’s AccounƟng Standard 
Board has also developed a Standard of Generally Recognised AccounƟng PracƟce. Living and Non-Living 
Resources (GRAP 110). CSA Group have released a ﬁrst NaƟonal Standard of Canada on SpeciﬁcaƟons for 
Natural Asset Inventories (CSA W218:23). There is also a BriƟsh Standard on Natural Capital AccounƟng 
for OrganizaƟons. SpeciﬁcaƟon (BS 8632:2021). 
 
3) 
GETTING STARTED 
It is acƟons that change things not just words. Our panelists were asked what they wanted parƟcipants to do 
when they leŌ the room at AdaptaƟon Futures 2023: 
• 
Inform yourself: Use the resources provided to ﬁnd out more and consider how this ﬁts into your own 
work on climate adaptaƟon and nature-based soluƟons. 
 
• 
Get involved! We will not advance collecƟvely on accounƟng for nature and making nature central to 
decision-making, including adaptaƟon, unless we start somewhere.  
 
• 
Make your voice heard in the standard seƫng process: Respond to consultaƟons from the InternaƟonal 
Sustainability Standards Board, InternaƟonal Public Sector AccounƟng Board (Natural Resources) and 
naƟonal accounƟng boards. 
 
• 
Sign up for updates from the Census of Environment: Available from the Daily, StatCan’s oﬃcial 
communicaƟon channel. 
 
6 
 
WHAT WE HEARD 
ParƟcipants were asked to complete an online survey to obtain feedback and addiƟonal audience perspecƟves 
on the discussion. The results are summarized below: 
What aspects of the event did you ﬁnd most valuable, and are there any suggesƟons or areas for improvement 
that you'd like to share? 
• 
Using natural asset value to inform project related decisions - it would be interesting to go deeper into 
this topic to outline what should be considered in the evaluation or provide examples of evaluations. 
• 
Discussion on the barriers and tools was most valuable for me. 
• 
Consideration of potential lower cost / more durable solutions is useful. 
• 
Good to hear of strategies to get neighbouring municipalities on board with nature-based solutions. 
• 
Talking about the practicality of how to do this was very helpful. Bringing the diﬀerent perspectives of the 
panel was also good.  
• 
The discussions and Q and A. some tangible experiences and more on tools would be useful 
• 
Appreciated the casual and personal delivery. Panel format of speciﬁc questions in a logical progression 
while hearing short answers from each panelist. Leaving time for questions at the end.  
• 
The fact that we will receive a report with all the references and tools listed !!  
 
Lessons learned, highlighƟng success and impacts of the session: What were the most signiﬁcant lessons or 
insights you gained from the workshop regarding the role of nature-based soluƟons in climate adaptaƟon? 
How do you envision applying these lessons in your work or community? 
• 
I’m going to do some research on natural asset valuation to see if it would be possible to put it in action 
at my ministry. 
• 
That there are municipalities already doing this.  
• 
Indigenous perspectives. Choosing words carefully when talking about valuation of nature. Translating to 
Indigenous languages. 
• 
To promote nature-based solutions in our territory 
• 
Needs to develop knowledge-based solutions to ensure optimal option and follow up on eﬃciency  
• 
On the possibility of including a continued appreciation of value into decision-making and also as a 
mechanism for raising ﬁnancing and ensuring regular monitoring and reporting  
• 
The importance of standards for investors and the existing tools, especially the natural assets inventories 
being used by Canadian municipalities.  
• 
"The real meaning behind Natural Assets is to recognize the value of nature.”  
• 
I was a bit apprehensive of the importance of ﬁnance in this presentation, but I understand more the 
importance of it now.  
• 
As an advisor to a provider of wave-powered desalination solutions to coastal communities and 
enterprises, curious to learn and think about the intersection of our solution and investment in nature. 
 
7 
 
Exploring Research Avenues and User Needs:Are there speciﬁc areas or topics discussed during the workshop 
that you believe warrant further research or exploraƟon in the context of nature-based adaptaƟon strategies? 
Please provide details. 
• 
How can government support/promote this in municipalities with limited capacity? 
• 
We need a set of standardized values for natural assets that can be applied to create a ﬁrst blush, back of 
the envelope calculation that can be used to start conversations. 
• 
Municipal level nature-based infrastructure and knowledge systems that support design, ﬁnancing, 
implementation, and management  
• 
Stream/ riverbank rehabilitation and « stabilization » to protect nearby infrastructures. 
• 
The inclusion of nature valuation and reporting in ﬁnancial reporting should be investigated further. 
There do not appear to be common standards that allow the upscaling and connection with stakeholders 
regarding the beneﬁts of adaptation. 
• 
The social and cultural aspect of natural assets. 
 
AcƟons needed: In your opinion, what are some collaboraƟve or collecƟve acƟons that could be taken at the 
global, naƟonal, or local levels to beter harness and value the services provided by nature for climate 
adaptaƟon? 
• 
Creating a national or provincial policy, or some type of standard that values nature-based solutions over 
grey ones.  
• 
Do they include human health and wellness costs into their determinants or just infrastructure? 
• 
FCM would be open to partnerships with academic institutions to conduct research on the beneﬁts of 
natural assists, especially for equity deserving groups with Canadian communities.  
• 
Municipal, academia, and civil society partnerships  
• 
Need to quantify « unexpected » contribution from the nature-base solutions (other than the base/design 
role) 
 
 
8 
 
RESOURCES TO GET STARTED 
 
Resource 
 
 
OrganisaƟon 
 
Use 
IUCN Global Standard for Nature-
based SoluƟons: a user-friendly 
framework for the veriﬁcaƟon, 
design and scaling up of NbS : ﬁrst 
ediƟon 
 
InternaƟonal Union for 
ConservaƟon of Nature 
Consistent deﬁniƟon and criteria 
for veriﬁcaƟon of nature-based 
soluƟons 
System of Environmental-
Economic AccounƟng Ecosystem 
AccounƟng (SEEA EA) 
 
 
United NaƟons 
Conceptual framework for naƟonal 
natural capital accounƟng 
 
InVEST (Integrated ValuaƟon of 
Ecosystem Services and Tradeoﬀs) 
Natural Capital Project, 
Stanford University 
 
 
ValuaƟon of ecosystem services 
(several modules available). 
Sustainable Asset ValuaƟon (SAVi) 
 
InternaƟonal InsƟtute for 
Sustainable Development 
 
Method for analysis of costs of 
infrastructure throughout their life 
cycles, including full costs of 
environmental, social, economic 
and governance risks 
 
Taskforce on Nature-Related 
Financial Disclosures 
 
 
Taskforce on Nature-Related 
Financial Disclosures 
Framework for Nature-Related 
Financial Disclosures 
 
Standard of Generally Recognised 
AccounƟng PracƟce. Living and 
Non-Living Resources (GRAP 110), 
South Africa 
 
AccounƟng Standards Board, 
South Africa 
Example of exisƟng accounƟng 
standards for living and non-living 
resources. 
Census of Environment 
 
StaƟsƟcs Canada 
NaƟonal register of Canada's 
ecosystems, linked to naƟonal 
natural capital accounƟng 
 
SpeciﬁcaƟons for Natural Asset 
Inventories (CSA W218:23) 
 
CSA Group 
NaƟonal Standard of Canada for 
inventorying natural assets 
Geƫng Nature on the Balance 
Sheet: Recognizing the Financial 
Value Provided by Natural Assets 
in a Changing Climate 
Intact Centre on Climate 
AdaptaƟon, Natural Assets 
IniƟaƟve, KPMG Canada 
Review of the State of Play of 
natural asset management in 
Canada (October 2022). 
9 
 
 
 
To ﬁnd out more:  
Joanna Eyquem PGeo. ENV SP. CWEM. CEnv.  
Managing Director, Climate-Resilient Infrastructure 
Intact Centre on Climate AdaptaƟon, 
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo  
514-268-0873 | joanna.eyquem@uwaterloo.ca 
www.intactcentre.ca | LinkedIn 
