CANADIAN
CLIMATE
INSTITUTE
L’INSTITUT
CLIMATIQUE
DU CANADA
INTRODUCTION: 
The role of private finance in climate 
adaptation infrastructure
Infrastructure is essential to Canadians’ well-being and to the country’s 
economic activity, but increasingly acute climate impacts pose serious 
threats. Floods, wildfires, heat waves, and other extreme weather events 
are already taking a toll on infrastructure, and these damages are set 
to accelerate (Sawyer et al. 2022, IPCC 2021; ECCC 2019). Canada has 
experienced a number of costly extreme weather events during the last 
decade, including the estimated $4 billion impacts of Hurricane Fiona 
in the Maritimes in 2022 (Sullivan 2022), the $9 billion floods in British 
Columbia in 2021 (Hunter 2022), and the $9 billion wildfire in Fort McMurray 
in 2016 (Snowdon 2017). These events reinforce the urgency of adapting 
Canada’s infrastructure to climate change.1
Of particular importance in limiting the damage from worsening climate 
change is the need to scale up systems-focused adaptation investments, 
which are investments “explicitly intended to deliver climate resilience 
benefits to the broader system” (CBI 2019: 18).2 These investments, which we 
refer to as “climate adaptation infrastructure,” will be the focus of this paper. 
The challenge of scaling up this needed investment cannot be met through 
public funding alone. The scale of investment required is simply too large, 
especially as governments are operating in a relatively constrained spending 
1 A major driver of the costs of these and other extreme weather events are infrastructure repair and 
business interruption associated with infrastructure failure, in addition to other impacts.
2 Examples of systems-focused adaptation investments include new or upgraded infrastructure to 
reduce community flood risk and landscape-level interventions to protect communities from wildfires. 
By contrast, asset-focused climate resilience investments “enhance the resilience of an asset or activity to 
climate change” (CBI 2019: 18).
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL 
FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION 
INFRASTRUCTURE
May 2023
This scoping paper is 
part of a series that 
explores specific 
challenges and 
opportunities in the 
development and 
implementation of 
adaptation policy 
in Canada.
By Tom Ewart, Joyce Coffee, and Sarah Miller
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
2
environment and their ability to borrow and spend is not infinite.3 This challenge is particularly acute for 
municipalities, which own and operate 60 per cent of Canada’s public infrastructure: they face limited 
capacity and revenue sources to address climate impacts and are facing a large price tag for infrastructure 
adaptation—an estimated $5 billion annually (IBC and FCM 2021). 
Climate adaptation is chronically underfunded, not only in Canada but around the world. Adaptation 
accounted for only 7 per cent of climate finance flows in 2021 (while so-called “dual-use” low-carbon 
resilience projects accounted for an additional 2 per cent), leaving the remaining 90+ per cent focused 
on climate mitigation (Buchner et al. 2021). In Canada only 3 per cent of climate bonds issued in 2018 
were used for climate adaptation projects (Zerbe 2019). And while the recent National Adaptation 
Strategy is a major step forward for more effective national adaptation action, the investment that the 
federal government has so far committed to implementing the strategy falls far short of what is required 
(Government of Canada 2022a, Ness and Miller 2022). 
Closing the funding gap and investing more ambitiously in proactive adaptation is critical—not only 
to protect communities and livelihoods but also to limit the toll that climate change takes on Canada’s 
economy as a whole. The economic case for proactive adaptation is extremely strong: recent studies 
estimate that without proactive adaptation, climate impacts could cost the Canadian economy $78 
billion annually by mid-century, even under a low-emissions scenario. Proactive adaptation can cut 
those costs in half (Sawyer et al. 2022). 
But despite a strong economic case for resilience, Canada must address considerable challenges to 
unlock private finance. Most significantly, the benefits of climate adaptation infrastructure cannot 
always be easily quantified, aggregated, and monetized in a way that creates the cash flows required 
for the private sector to invest. This paper explores these challenges and identifies potential solutions 
to align the financial case for adaptation investment with the myriad benefits it provides. Beyond this 
primary challenge, other barriers have hampered progress in adaptation infrastructure broadly—and 
mobilizing private finance for adaptation infrastructure specifically—that must be addressed. These 
include a lack of climate risk awareness at the individual and organizational level, institutional inertia, 
and capacity challenges, particularly at the municipal level. We discuss these challenges and put forward 
potential tools to begin to address them, for further discussion and policy analysis. 
3 Among other factors, the Russian invasion of Ukraine changed the geopolitical and macroeconomic context, and the conflict continues to drive 
uncertainty for supply chains and global markets. Inflation and rising interest rates have altered the investment environment that had been stimulated 
by public spending in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The effect is rising cost of capital and increased discount rates, which in turn depress the value 
of future cash flows—rendering long-term investments such as infrastructure more challenging than they otherwise would be, at least in the near term.
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
3
In addition to providing the capital needed to close the adaptation infrastructure funding gap, the 
private sector can deliver benefits in how infrastructure projects are delivered. These are not new: 
governments already have experience realizing these benefits from partnerships with the private sector 
in designing, building, financing, maintaining, and operating other categories of public infrastructure, 
including for climate mitigation. 
SPEED AND SCALE: Canadians and their assets are already at risk. The longer it takes to build the climate 
adaptation infrastructure required to reduce risk, the more loss and disruption is likely to occur. If 
public dollars can be used to crowd in private investment, this increased capital will increase the speed 
and scale at which Canada is able to build adaptation infrastructure. In addition, the private sector 
is motivated to move quickly to complete projects, which may accelerate timelines and keep costs 
contained, and the additional capacity can generate swifter progress than may otherwise be the case. 
SHARING OF RISK: Engaging the private sector in building, financing, operating, or maintaining 
infrastructure transfers some of the inherent risks in those activities from the public to the private 
sector. This limits the potential liability facing the public if the risks are greater than anticipated or work 
does not go to plan. 
SOPHISTICATION: In some instances, there is a benefit of increased creativity, efficiency, and/or flexibility 
from engaging the private sector in building adaptation infrastructure. A collaborative approach 
involving the private sector can bring additional resources and expertise to municipalities of all sizes. 
For example, the City of Edmonton’s flood mitigation plan was initially priced by City staff at between 
$2.4 billion and $4.7 billion, with a completion timeline of “up to a century” using traditional approaches 
(Stolte 2017). Upon engaging the expertise and capacity of its City-owned utility, EPCOR, the approach 
was revisited to use more nature-based solutions and to manage risk more strategically, and the price 
reduced to $1.6 billion over 20 years, “requir[ing] less capital investment and deliver[ing] faster results 
than traditional engineering approaches” (EPCOR 2023). EPCOR finances the infrastructure with debt 
secured by modest utility rate increases phased in over the period.  
ADDITIONAL BENEFITS TO 
HARNESSING THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
BOX 1
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
4
It’s clear that adaptation infrastructure provides economic value to society, and this value is likely to 
increase over time given our changing climate. Multiple studies have computed the economic value of 
resilience, including adaptation infrastructure specifically, and have found that an ounce of prevention is 
worth a pound of cure. Even conservative estimates of benefits-to-costs ratios range from 4:1 to 6:1 (GCA 
2019; PSC 2022a; FCM 2023a). Others have estimated the ratio at up to 15:1, when indirect macroeconomic 
benefits are included as well as direct avoided costs (Sawyer et al. 2022). Assuming a piece of infrastructure 
has a 50-year lifespan, this would amount to an annual return on investment of 30 per cent.4 As such, 
investing in adaptation infrastructure presents a significant opportunity for investors and beneficiaries, 
with the ability to drive positive societal outcomes by reducing overall climate change risk.
Nevertheless, making adaptation investments “bankable” for private investment remains challenging. 
Most significantly, despite the strong economic case for resilience, there is a “difference between an 
economic perspective, which considers all costs and benefits to society, and a financial perspective, 
which considers private costs and benefits from the perspective of an organization, group or individual” 
(U.K. CCC 2023: 51). The elephant in the room is the absence of readily available cash flows typically 
required to incentivize private investment (Tall et al. 2021). The fundamental question is whether 
enough of the benefits resulting from climate adaptation infrastructure can be quantified, aggregated, 
harvested, and/or monetized in such a way that enables crowding in private capital. 
The U.K. Climate Change Committee rated the lack of revenue as among the most important barriers 
to adaptation infrastructure interventions, concluding that “A lack of revenues from undertaking 
adaptation actions is preventing investable adaptation projects from securing financing” (U.K. CCC 2023: 
11). Canada faces a similar challenge, the dimensions of which include the following factors (adapted 
from Alvarado and Welch 2022: 7):
	
▶
Concentration: The benefits of resiliency infrastructure, including social value and avoided losses, 
accrue to a wide range of individuals and organizations, rather than primarily to the investors in 
that infrastructure (Miller and Swann 2019: 37). The highly diffuse nature of these benefits makes 
4 Assuming a 50-year infrastructure lifespan, a benefit-to-cost ratio of 15:1 would generate a return on investment of 30% (1,500% divided by 50 
years).
ADAPTATION HAS MANY BENEFITS—
THE CHALLENGE IS MONETIZING THEM
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
5
quantification and harvesting complex and costly. 
	
▶
Quantification potential: Some benefits are easily quantified (e.g., changes in insurance premiums, 
property values, and corresponding taxes). Some are contingent, like avoided losses. Others are 
difficult to quantify or may elude quantification altogether (e.g., peace of mind, livability, mental 
health from green space). In addition, there are particularly thorny challenges with quantifying the 
benefits of avoided costs from avoided disasters with a high enough degree of confidence to form 
the basis of investment decisions. Quantifying the absence of a phenomenon may require modelling 
future scenarios (sometimes distant) on which there may not be a high degree of understanding 
or high degree of agreement among decision-makers. 
	
▶
Cash-ability: Even if benefits are quantifiable, some can be difficult to monetize as cash flows—
much less to aggregate and harvest to repay investors. 
And yet, as noted above, there is a strong economic case for investing in resilience. To bring the economics 
to fruition, new financial models are required to quantify, aggregate, harvest, and monetize sufficient 
benefits to attract private investment. The following section describes potential solutions for addressing 
the challenges outlined above and identifies potential tools in the policy toolkit for governments 
to create a more favourable investment environment. These ideas are presented to initiate further 
discussion and policy analysis to move the dial on private finance for adaptation.
MONETIZING THE BENEFITS OF RESILIENCE
Although cash flows may not always be readily available, they can be realized with creativity and flexibility. 
To use a nature-based analogy, this may take more of a watershed approach, where tributaries of benefits 
flow in a variety of ways to investors, instead of through one aggregated channel. Different situations 
may call for different approaches, as shown in Table 1 (Alvarado and Welch 2022). 
Table 1: 
How cash flows arise from climate adaptation infrastructure
Cash flow genesis
Explanation
Examples
Direct cash flows from 
resiliency infrastructure
Flow directly to infrastructure owners or the 
beneficiaries of the infrastructure as a result of 
its existence
User fees, insurance premium reductions, other 
revenues (e.g., sale of electricity from a turbine 
in a dam system that mitigates flood risk)
Indirect cash flows from 
the infrastructure but 
dependent on it
The existence of the infrastructure may enable 
a public entity to enact a cash-generation 
mechanism that can flow to investors
Avoided mop-up costs, enhanced 
infrastructure reliability, development cost 
charges, local improvement charges, tax-
increment financing
Cash flows that are 
independent from the 
infrastructure
A public entity may generate cash (that flows 
through to investors by agreement) by means 
completely independent of the resiliency 
infrastructure
Taxes, general operating revenues, transfer 
from other orders of government
Source: Alvarado and Welch (2022)
The remainder of this section offers illustrations to bring to life several examples. 
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
6
Direct cash flows 
Two simple illustrations of direct cash flows for investors are user fees and changes in insurance 
premiums.
1.	 User fees 
Municipal governments frequently charge user fees to “recover the cost of specific services delivered to 
properties” (Zerbe 2019: 29), from potable water to waste collection. Widely applied in the United States 
and increasingly in Canada, stormwater user fees are the most prominent example related to climate 
adaptation. These fees provide relatively stable revenues and can strengthen incentives to enhance 
resilience (especially when complemented by rebate programs). Multiple models exist for managing 
stormwater, which may involve municipal departments, independent utilities, Crown corporations, or 
utility structures within a municipality. And multiple methods are available to calculate the fees, trading 
off effort and accuracy (O’Neil and Cairns 2016).5
5 For example, assessing a flat fee requires little effort but does not distinguish between properties, whereas measuring impervious area on 
properties provides high accuracy but requires effort.	
Prior to 2016, stormwater fees in Victoria were assessed based on property values, leaving 
homeowners with no financial incentives to reduce stormwater flows that stress the city’s 
infrastructure. Starting in 2016 the City shifted the bulk of stormwater fees from property taxes 
to utility bills, charged based on each property’s: 
	
▶
Impervious surface area, such as roofs, driveways and parking areas; 
	
▶
Street cleaning, as determined by frontage length and street type;
	
▶
Property type, which impacts stormwater intensity; and
	
▶
Stormwater cleaning practices (in the case of larger properties). 
(City of Victoria, 2023a)
To strengthen the incentive for property owners to adopt practices that reduce peak stormwater 
flow, the city introduced a rewards program, including rebates and credits for certain activities, 
such as the use of rain barrels, cisterns, infiltration chambers, permeable paving, rain gardens, 
bioswales, and green roofs (City of Victoria 2023b). 
CASE STUDY 1: Stormwater user fees in Victoria, B.C.
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
7
2.	Insurance premiums  
When climate-resilient infrastructure is installed that reduces risk in a community, property insurance 
payouts should decrease. In a competitive insurance market this means that insurance premiums will 
be lower than they would otherwise be, as less money needs to be collected by insurers to cover claims 
payouts (since premiums reflect the risk being underwritten). This change in insurance premiums is 
a source of cash flow that, in theory, could be used to pay back investors for having built the climate 
adaptation infrastructure. The challenge with this option would not be in quantifying or monetizing 
the benefits but rather in aggregating them, since the adaptation project would protect homeowners 
and businesses served by numerous insurers, each with their own actuarial and distribution models. 
Some mechanisms have been conceptualized that employ this phenomenon, such as resilience bonds 
(Vajjhala and Rhodes 2015) and community-based flood insurance (CDI 2022), but implementation 
is lacking. Capturing changes in insurance premiums could in theory work at different scales, from 
the sovereign level for the country, to the watershed scale provincially, to a bundle of contiguous or 
non-contiguous communities with like risks willing to invest in adaptation infrastructure.
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
8
Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac is a suburb of Montreal, located at the convergence of the Ottawa and St. 
Lawrence rivers. It was built on wetlands and, in the 1970s, a natural dike was built from clay and 
grass to protect the city from flooding. On April 27, 2019, floodwaters breached the dike. According 
to the Government of Quebec, the water level is estimated to have reached the 1-in-200-year 
flood level.6 Approximately 2,500 of the community’s 6,000 private dwellings were flooded, and 
approximately 7,700 of the community’s 18,000+ people were evacuated (Olson 2019). 
The insured losses from the floods in and around Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac totalled over $127 
million (IBC 2019). Given the insurance protection gap, the total economic losses were likely 
significantly higher. 
Within four months of the flood, the community had begun to rebuild the dike and added 1.5 
metres to the previous dike’s height. These enhancements were designed to protect the town 
against a bigger flood.
The investment totalled $49 million, equivalent to approximately $8,100 per household (Infrastructure 
Canada 2019). The costs were shared by the city and the provincial and federal governments. 
The economic case for investing in flood resiliency 
According to one Canadian insurer’s models, if all residents of Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac were insured 
against flooding to the full value of their homes, the premiums associated with the water damage 
coverage would have decreased by an average of 64 per cent after the dike enhancement. These 
savings equate to a 15.4-year payback on the municipality’s investment in the flood defence, at 20 
per cent of the cost. This payback period is shorter than the expected lifetime of the dike but would 
have been insufficient to single-handedly pay up-front for the total cost of the infrastructure if 
there had been no provincial or federal grants. Despite this, this example shows that changes in 
insurance-related cash flow arise from adaptation. Moreover, if a wider range of the future avoided 
costs were factored in beyond premium reductions for homeowners’ water damage insurance—
including, for example, uninsured losses, clean-up costs, business interruption, emergency 
response, and mental health impacts—the payback would become much more compelling. 
6  https://www.cehq.gouv.qc.ca/depot/historique_donnees_som_mensuels/043108_N_MAX.txt
CASE STUDY 2: Ste-Marthe-sur-le-Lac’s upgraded dike
Photo by User:P199 at Wikimedia Commons CC BY-SA 4.0
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
9
Two myths are worth dispelling. First, that insurance alone can address 
climate impacts to infrastructure. Second, that insurers are financially 
self-interested in climate adaptation. 
MYTH #1: 
Insurance alone is the solution
Insurance is but one tool in society’s climate action toolkit—and far from the most important. That is 
because climate change is a risk reduction problem, not a risk transfer problem. A few comments are 
noteworthy about risk transfer versus risk reduction.
First, insurance is designed to protect against rare and unpredictable events. While it’s impossible 
to know precisely which neighbourhoods will flood this year, it is possible to predict with increasing 
confidence which neighbourhoods will experience a flood in the coming decades. Armed with this 
knowledge, the goal of governments, communities, and individuals should be to reduce and manage 
the risk before an event occurs instead of relying on insurance to provide protection in the aftermath. 
Second, while the societal value of risk transfer and indemnification cannot be overstated, the ideal 
societal outcome is to avoid the loss in the first place. 
Third, on a practical level, the cost of insurance must reflect the risk it is covering (or else the insurer’s 
financial stability and, in turn, the security of their policyholders, will be in jeopardy). Climate risk is 
increasing, and therefore so must the cost of insuring against that risk, making it unaffordable for some 
people in some locations. Instead, they must adapt to the risk and increase their resilience. 
INSURANCE AND INSURERS 
HAVE A ROLE, BUT ARE NOT 
THE FIRST OR ONLY SOLUTION
BOX 2
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
10
Without a doubt, there will be a critical role for insurance to protect against extreme events that are difficult 
to predict and therefore avoid, such as the so-called 1-in-1,000-year storms. A wetland can only absorb so 
much water, and a community can only afford to build a seawall or river dike to a certain height without 
taking away money from other social priorities. Inevitably, there will be residual physical climate risk once 
adaptation infrastructure has been put in place, and this is where insurance should come into play—whether 
in the form of a catastrophe bond at the community level, a performance guarantee for the adaptation 
infrastructure itself, or a flood endorsement in a homeowner’s insurance policy at the individual level. 
MYTH #2: 
Insurers are self-interested investors in climate adaptation
It is true that insurers have a direct interest in adapting to climate change. After all, they are already in 
the resilience business, focusing on recovery (UNDRR 2015) by providing financial relief after a loss. If 
Canada does not increase resilience, over time more and more Canadians will become insufficiently 
protected, leading to a widening protection gap. 
However, when it comes to reaping the financial benefits of adaptation and resilience, the situation 
is more nuanced. Premiums are typically adjusted annually to reflect the nature of the risk being 
underwritten. While lower risk means lower claims costs, it also means reduced insurance premiums. In 
a properly functioning market, insurers should not realize improved underwriting profitability as a result 
of its clients having built resilience, because they should be collecting less revenue in client premiums 
than they would be if the adaptation infrastructure did not exist (UCISL 2016).
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
11
3.	Other revenues 
It is possible that other revenues may arise directly from climate adaptation infrastructure that are 
not related to its role in climate adaptation. For example, imagine a small dam designed to protect a 
community from flooding; a small turbine could be incorporated into the dam’s design, generating 
electricity that could be sold to unlock the financing required for the project. Alternatively, an effort 
to manage wildfire risk by clearing the timber that is uneconomic to the forestry industry could lead 
to revenue generation through other uses, such as for wood pellets and biochar. Another example is 
natural infrastructure such as dry ponds, which may be tied to recreation spaces and can generate 
co-benefits through rental fees.
Indirect cash flows 
Different stakeholders—each order of government, First Nations, businesses, and individuals—pay 
for climate-driven loss and damage and stand to benefit from adaptation infrastructure. Therefore, 
many indirect sources of cash flows exist for the wider, more diffuse benefits of resilience projects. This 
sub-section provides examples of the various beneficiaries of adaptation infrastructure and draws 
inspiration from Simon Fraser University’s Adaptation to Climate Change Team’s study “Paying for 
Urban Infrastructure Adaptation in Canada” (Zerbe 2019). 
1.	 Avoided mop-up costs 
While it is not known precisely what proportion of clean-up costs are paid by different stakeholders, we 
know that less than half of the total economic cost from Canadian catastrophes is covered by insurance 
(42 per cent in 2022) (DiSabatino 2023), with governments, households, and businesses paying the 
balance. Government disaster relief programs are both often oversubscribed and do not fully indemnify 
people affected by disasters (Office of the PBO 2016). Directing even small proportions of the budgets 
for existing disaster assistance programs could provide a potential source of public capital to crowd in 
private investment to climate adaptation infrastructure—ultimately decreasing the growing budgetary 
pressure on reactionary post-disaster relief programs. 
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
12
In early 2023, the federal government was reviewing the recommendations of the Task Force on 
Flood Insurance and Relocation to develop a new national flood insurance program to protect 
homeowners facing high flood risk. Careful design of such a program will be critical to providing 
incentives for building climate-resilient infrastructure before further flooding occurs and the 
federal government’s insurance backstop kicks in. 
The federal government should design the flood program in such a way that creates strong 
incentives to invest in adaptation infrastructure. Given the significant cost savings from 
proactive adaptation compared to cleaning up and rectifying flood damage after the fact, the 
federal government should offer a significant portion of the approximately $25 billion liability 
it would assume through a national flood insurance program to enable the development of 
climate-resilient infrastructure (PSC 2022b). To create accountability, these payments could be 
linked to the performance of the infrastructure, meaning that the government only pays if the 
infrastructure materially defends and de-risks insured properties over its lifecycle.  
If done right, this program could unlock massive investment at scale in flood protection. 
Canadians would realize significant savings both as policy holders and taxpayers through 
federal aggregation of incentives for private investors to design, deliver, and potentially maintain 
climate-adjusted flood adaptation infrastructure. 
On the other hand, a poorly designed program could disincentivize the building of effective 
defences by subsidizing poor risk management—simply distributing rising unmanaged risk 
without reducing it would be financially unsustainable and maladaptive.
CASE STUDY 3: Federal High-Risk Flood Insurance Program
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
13
2.	Enhanced reliability of critical infrastructure
A future of compounding climate disruptions is likely to undermine the reliability of critical infrastructure, 
from electricity to transportation, and disrupt critical services in the times when they are most needed. 
The beneficiaries of critical infrastructure may be willing to pay for performance guarantees related to 
climate resilience—a possible source of cash flows. 
3.	Additional development cost charges 
Climate change explains only part of the increase in loss and damage from catastrophic events in 
Canada over the last few decades; socio-economic factors also play a role, including building on flood 
plains, outdated building codes, and lack of investment in risk-mitigating infrastructure. Eventually, as 
climate risk awareness passes a critical threshold and incentives to reduce risk become aligned, these 
issues should begin to resolve. Adaptation infrastructure can give rise to incremental development 
cost charges—either through recovering the value of property increasingly at risk, or by unlocking 
new development. Rising risk transparency and market awareness may negatively impact some 
property values, which may only be recovered if appropriate adaptation infrastructure is put in place. 
Similarly, the development of previously flood-prone land thanks to an adaptation infrastructure 
intervention may give rise to incremental development cost charges—one-time fees paid by developers 
to municipalities—which can be used as a cash flow to crowd in private finance. A caution is warranted: 
Canada has a poor track record of supplanting natural infrastructure, which may provide the most cost-
effective form of flood mitigation, to say nothing of its other co-benefits (Moudrak et al 2018). Therefore, 
care must be taken to ensure that natural infrastructure is not further supplanted in pursuit of revenue 
from development cost charges.  
4.	Local improvement charges 
Also known as levies, these fees are added “on title” to property tax bills to help pay for improvements 
that benefit specific properties. These charges are typically set for a payback period of 10–20 years and 
“run with the land,” so if a property changes hands, the new owners contribute during the period of their 
tenancy. Already used in Canada (largely for climate mitigation), local improvement charges “are likely 
a more politically acceptable funding tool for smaller neighborhood infrastructure projects … and can 
be a useful tool for rural municipalities, where service levels vary significantly between communities 
and residents” (Zerbe 2019: 28).
5.	Tax-increment financing 
Tax-increment financing,7 which enables a municipality to collect up front a future increase in property 
tax resulting from an improvement, could enable a cash flow derived both from rising property values 
in a catchment area and from an incremental new tax base arising from development that’s enabled 
by the presence of adaptation infrastructure. The cash flow could be split between the municipality and 
a private investor in an infrastructure intervention paid for by the private investor. While tax-increment 
financing in Canada has included components related to adaptation (e.g., flood-proofing), it has not 
been used to fund adaptation infrastructure (Zerbe 2019). However, these mechanisms could generate 
cash flows linked to the performance of adaptation infrastructure that restores investor confidence in 
a benefitting area, reflected in stronger property values. This could drive incremental new tax revenue 
that can in turn pay back private investors for having financed the adaptation infrastructure. 
7  Known in Alberta as “community revitalization levies.”
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
14
Building resilience is often “most effective and most economical” (CDI 2021: 40) through actions 
at the regional level. In August 2022, California state legislature authorized the creation of Climate 
Resilience Districts (Senate Bill 852), modelled after its Geologic Hazard Abatement Districts. 
The districts were intended as innovation sandboxes where pilot projects blending community- 
and landscape-level risk reduction and risk transfer could be pursued. The Districts can raise 
cash flows from one or more jurisdictions to fund resilience projects through tax-increment 
financing, property benefit assessments or fees (local improvement charges), or dedicated 
property tax increases. 
Provinces and territories in Canada should consider enacting legislation similar to California’s 
SB 852, to enable action at the regional level and equip designated districts with more ways to 
raise funds to build adaptation infrastructure. 
CASE STUDY 4: California’s Climate Resilience Districts
Figure 1:
Illustrated model for 
flood protection
Municipality
River berm and wetland
Insurers
Infrastructure 
investor
Local beneficiaries
(households, community, industry)
Investor capital
Infrastructure 
investment
Performance 
certification 
+ reduced 
claims
Enhanced resilience 
of public and 
private assets
Flood insurance cost 
relief (partially offsets  
new infrastructure 
costs) 
Co benefit and cost 
avoidance
Utility fees, 
area levies, 
special taxes, etc.
Interest and/
or performance 
payments
2
6
3
3
4
3
5
6
1
Other value payments 
or attribution (if applicable)
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
15
It is rare for municipalities to have a wholly owned Crown-style utility that can support flood mitigation 
efforts. Edmonton has this resource in the form of EPCOR Utilities Inc., the city’s provider of electricity, 
water, wastewater treatment, and sanitary and storm drainage services. EPCOR also deploys its 
expertise and scale in communities throughout North America, from operating the wastewater 
plant in Regina to being the largest private water provider in both Arizona and New Mexico. 
With respect to Edmonton’s overland flooding challenge, EPCOR’s approach reduced costs 
significantly through efficiencies in planning action across five themes: slowing water from 
entering drainage networks, moving it away from areas at risk, securing properties, predicting 
water movement, and responding to rising water. By contrast, traditional approaches focus on 
the “move, predict, and respond” themes, neglecting the significant cost savings that can come 
from needing smaller infrastructure due to slowing water. 
EPCOR also consolidated an all-important mechanism to amass the required equity and debt 
on the strength of its balance sheet and stable, predictable utility rate revenue. EPCOR finances 
flood mitigation infrastructure by raising debt capital secured through city-wide utility rate 
increases, effectively collecting stormwater charges distributed on all utility bills based on lot 
size. The rate increases are tied not to the benefits provided by the infrastructure but rather to 
the cost of installing it. In this sense, the cash flow is independent of each incremental flood-
mitigation infrastructure project. 
In aggregate, the aim of the Stormwater Integrated Resource Plan (a cornerstone of the City’s 
Climate Resilience plan) is to systematically reduce the city’s risk from overland flooding by 
prioritizing works according to risk reduction potential. A 20-year effort piggybacks on the 
Independent cash flows 
The third category of cash flow sources to pay back investors in adaptation infrastructure are those 
independent of the infrastructure. In other words, the government relies on taxation, general operating 
revenues, or other means of raising funds to pay investors, based on avoided costs or modelled savings 
that are otherwise difficult to gather. While tax-supported cash flows can be efficiently administered, 
securing them may depend on an appropriate political environment (e.g., high level of trust in elected 
officials, high climate risk awareness and desire for action, well-communicated benefits of adaptation 
infrastructure). The investor may be agnostic on how governments generate revenues so long as there 
is a robust agreement in place to secure cash flows.
CASE STUDY 5: Edmonton and “utility-izing” flood mitigation 
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
16
existing asset management capacity and funding, with a modest 3 per cent per year increase 
over that time to fund climate resilience measures. Using a utility model, which can also be a 
segmented department, allows for dedicated cash flows and long-term planning and helps 
separate the utility’s infrastructure program from competition with transit, roads, housing, parks, 
hockey rinks, and other local projects.
ALLOCATING CAPITAL 
An innovative study conducted by the Multi-Hazard Mitigation Council (2020) for the U.S. National 
Institute of Building Sciences, which examined how to incentivize investment in resilient buildings, 
suggests a logic for how governments might decide on which levers to focus to generate cash flows. 
The study calculated the benefit-to-cost ratios of resilient buildings experienced by different stakeholders, 
including developers, owners, lenders, tenants, and the community. It found that while building owners 
and tenants bear all the cost to make the building resilient, they are not the sole beneficiaries of the 
resilience—and they do not share the same benefit-to-cost ratio (Figure 2). Building on past research 
that found a 5-to-1 benefit-to-cost ratio for investing in above-code flood design in buildings, the study 
recommended that all stakeholders contribute to the cost for resilience in proportion to ensure they all 
receive the same benefit-to-cost ratio. Consequently, less cost would be borne by the ultimate decision-
maker (the building owner), thus incentivizing resilience. 
Figure 2: 
Allocations of Costs and Benefits from Flood Resilient Building (from MMC, 2020)
BCR = benefit-to-cost ratio
Unfair allocation of costs and benefits from 
one year of new flood-resilient buildings
               Millions $USD
$2,500
$2,000
$1,500
$1,000
$500
$0
-$500
-$1000
Developer
Owner
Lender
Tenant
Community
 Construction cost   
 Property   
 ALE and direct BI 
 
 Indirect BI   
 Insurance   
 Death, Injury and PTSD
Reallocated costs and benefits 
equilibrate benefit-cost ratios
               Millions $USD
$2,500
$2,000
$1,500
$1,000
$500
$0
-$500
-$1000
Developer
Owner
Lender
Tenant
Community
 Construction cost   
 Property   
 ALE and direct BI 
 
 Indirect BI   
 Insurance   
 Death, Injury and PTSD
BCR = ∞
BCR = ∞
BCR = ∞
BCR = 2.5
BCR = 5
BCR = 5
BCR = 5
BCR = 5
BCR = 5
BCR = 5
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
17
A similar approach could be taken with system-level adaptation infrastructure—focusing on the 
potential sources of cash flows described above proportionate to the benefits and with the objective 
of influencing the decision makers. For example, in B.C.’s Lower Mainland, where significant flood risk 
exists, modelling could predict the Disaster Financial Assistance Program liabilities and/or the National 
Flood Insurance program payments that would be avoided by upgrading adaptation infrastructure, 
and these sums could then be redirected to fund the upgrades. This could be paired with tax increment 
financing charges and/or stormwater utility fees collected at the property level through a California-
style Resilience District to fund a systems-level upgrade to flood prevention in Canada’s third largest 
metropolitan area.
AGGREGATING CASH FLOWS AND PROJECTS 
Building resiliency into assets and systems often requires several—and often small—interventions (U.K. 
CCC 2023). This is especially critical in systems-based resiliency, where cascading interventions build 
upon one another to provide a strong fabric of resiliency that is more beneficial in aggregate. Once 
cash flows supporting an infrastructure project have been quantified, monetized, and harvested, 
the cash flows need to be aggregated—coalescing sufficient cash flows and other benefits to justify 
undertaking the project. It is beyond the scope of this paper to analyze how in detail cash flows might 
be aggregated—a clear opportunity for innovation.
Beyond cash flows, aggregation should also occur with the infrastructure projects themselves. 
Governments, and in particular municipalities, have several strong reasons to finance multiple adaptation 
infrastructure projects in aggregate rather than as one-offs. First, many institutional investors have 
minimum investment sizes, given the significant legal, financial, and administrative due diligence 
required for each deal. For larger institutional investors, the threshold may be in the hundreds of millions 
of dollars—significantly more than the average adaptation infrastructure project. Aggregating projects 
creates the “critical mass necessary to attract large, sophisticated financiers, builders, designers and 
operators to compete for the opportunity” (Rana 2017: 6). Second, for risk management reasons, investors 
often prefer a diversified portfolio, which has projects in different geographies that protect against 
different climate perils. A diversified project portfolio may enable more favourable credit terms. Third, 
there may be economies of scale for the public sector in tackling multiple projects simultaneously (e.g., 
in procurement, in contracting, or through uniformity in project documentation over time) (Rana 2017). 
Bundling also opens up more access to grant funding from provincial and federal governments, as one of 
the challenges with many nature-based or flood-proofing initiatives is that, as individual projects, they tend 
to not hit the minimum thresholds required to apply for the grants available. Thinking societally, there is 
another critical reason for aggregating projects: it may allow more projects to be undertaken using private 
finance, as those that are not bankable alone could be bundled with those with bankability. This bundling 
of bankable and non-bankable projects has important social equity implications, as it can help ensure that 
more vulnerable communities are able to see the benefits of adaptation infrastructure. 
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
18
The U.K.’s Climate Change Committee has recommended that “UK Public financial institutions… should 
create adaptation finance strategies, setting out they will independently and collectively ensure that no 
viable UK climate adaptation project fails for lack of finance” (U.K. CCC, 2023: 100). We believe that Canada 
should do the same. 
The federal government should identify, study, and then operationalize its most effective means for 
de-risking private investment in adaptation infrastructure. Two potential means include concessionary 
capital and guarantees. 
CONCESSIONARY CAPITAL
According to the U.K.’s Climate Change Committee, “public funding represents the most significant 
investment source for many key areas of adaptation today” (U.K. CCC 2023: 90). Whether in the form of grants 
or capital seeking below-market rates of return, concessionary capital can help de-risk projects, making 
it easier to attract private capital. In Canada, concessionary capital for adaptation infrastructure presently 
comes from various sources. 
The Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan (Government of Canada 2022a: 45–50) describes 
existing federal government actions in support of resilient infrastructure systems. Most notably, the 
flagship $2 billion, 10-year Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund (DMAF) launched in 2018 invests 
in built and natural infrastructure to help communities remain resilient in the face of extreme events. 
In 2021, an additional $1.375 billion was committed over 12 years, topped up again in 2022 with a further 
$489 million over 10 years. Even with the top-ups, this program remains woefully underfunded and 
must be scaled up. 
Also at a national level, the Canada Infrastructure Bank—the country’s publicly owned $35 billion impact 
investor—includes “green infrastructure” among its priority sectors. This could be broadened to enable 
investing in any adaptation infrastructure, unlocking further concessionary capital to layer into the capital 
stack, thus de-risking private investment. The U.K. Infrastructure Bank committed in 2023 to “incorporate 
resilience to climate change as an additional pillar” (U.K. CCC 2023: 88) in its strategic plan. 
PUBLIC FINANCE 
POLICY OPTIONS
The federal 
government should 
identify, study, and 
then operationalize 
its most effective 
means for de-risking 
private investment 
in adaptation 
infrastructure.
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
19
Some provinces also have funding programs to support adapting infrastructure to climate change 
(i.e., Alberta’s Community Resilience Program and B.C.’s Community Emergency Preparedness Fund), 
which could act as concessionary capital to de-risk supplementary private investment. At the municipal 
level, in late 2022, the federal government announced an expansion to the mandate and budget of 
the Federation of Canadian Municipalities’ Green Municipal Fund in support of community-based 
adaptation initiatives—a commitment of $530 million by 2031. 
Public funding could act as concessionary capital to leverage private capital, “allow[ing] projects to be 
deployed at greater scale and ambition” (U.K. CCC 2023: 73). Its allocation should be informed by rigorous 
analyses of where capital flows are most likely to leverage further private funding. 
GUARANTEES
Risk-averse private-sector investors, especially lenders, often request government guarantees to protect 
them from risks that may impact a project’s cash flow, in particular, risks beyond private partners’ control. 
A government guarantee is also referred to as a “sovereign guarantee” or “wrap” that provides a protective 
layer around the original agreement. When used strategically, such a guarantee proves an effective way 
to make use of private finance and leverage multiples of private capital to close infrastructure gaps.8
A guarantee could also serve as a form of differential pricing that benefits an adaptation or resilient 
infrastructure project. Differential pricing is a sophisticated strategy that sets a price based on a customer’s 
characteristics. So, while a resilient infrastructure project’s risk might be higher than a traditional 
infrastructure project, with a guarantee it could be priced lower than the traditional one, persuading 
private investors to help fund it. However, because of worsening climate impacts, there are some challenges 
with government guarantees. In many cases, governments must agree to provide a counter-guarantee, 
which they may be unwilling to do. A crisis may trigger a simultaneous payout of guarantees for multiple 
projects, and ready funding may not be available in current budgets. Furthermore, the number of projects 
that are seeking guarantees or meet development banks’ requirements may be insufficient.  
It also proves difficult to withdraw a guarantee relating to a specific risk unless the risk is eliminated. One 
way to address this is for the asset owner to update a physical risk assessment before doing a refinancing 
without a guarantee. This assumes the physical risk assessment shows the asset is less vulnerable 
to specific climate risks because climate resilience options have been implemented. Physical risk 
assessments should be repeated at significant points during an asset’s life cycle, such as the financing 
close, the end of construction, a change in ownership, a refinancing, or a major expansion.
Similarly, performance guarantees could be offered to help de-risk projects from both the municipal 
and investor perspectives. Ultimately, insurance companies may wish to occupy this space in the 
market, but until the market matures, this could be a role for governments through existing disaster 
relief funding or other budgets.
8 For a thorough primer on government guarantees that relate to private infrastructure investment, see the World Bank’s paper on this topic (Lu et 
al., 2019).
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
20
While monetizing resilience benefits is the central issue, there are additional hurdles that must be 
addressed to create a better enabling environment to mobilize private capital.9 Of particular note 
to Canada are the lack of awareness of climate risk, inertia and status quo bias, challenges with 
intergovernmental coordination, and limited government capacity, particularly at the municipal level.
PHYSICAL CLIMATE RISKS REMAIN ABSTRACT TO CANADIANS  
Regardless of the approach taken, public and stakeholder support will be critical in determining whether 
Canada can build the adaptation infrastructure required to withstand the impacts of climate change. 
One prerequisite for support is awareness and buy-in. 
At the household level, Canadians do not see themselves as personally at risk from climate impacts. A 
University of Waterloo survey conducted in 2020 found that only 6 per cent of 2,700 respondents living 
in high-risk flood areas considered themselves to be at risk—a result unchanged from when the study 
was initially conducted in 2016 (Ziolecki et al. 2020). This result may not be surprising given that many 
flood maps are outdated nationwide. However, even with better information and increasingly severe 
weather events, the motivation to act on prevention may not arise until after a catastrophic event has 
directly impacted someone. Even then, longitudinal evidence shows that collective memory about 
floods fades relatively quickly (Fanta et al. 2019). This is a challenge, as the ability to mobilize capital for 
adaptation is dependent on the climate risk awareness of Canadians, their elected officials, and those 
who are part of the infrastructure delivery ecosystem, including financiers. 
Potential homebuyers would benefit from a rating system that transparently communicates a property’s 
physical climate risk, especially risk of flooding. In fact, one realtor introduced such a system in early 2023, 
an example that could be replicated (Warren 2023). Filling this information gap should shift market and 
political demand for investment in climate resilience. The realtor and home inspection industries could 
support this change, and some may carve out a competitive advantage by becoming certified in climate 
resilience. Lenders and CMHC could also begin to use rankings to provide incentives for customers to 
9 For a more in-depth discussion of these additional challenges, see, for example, Miller and Swann (2019), Tall et al. (2021), and U.K. CCC (2023).
ADDITIONAL HURDLES 
THAT MUST BE OVERCOME
Stakeholder support 
will be critical in 
determining whether 
Canada can build 
the adaptation 
infrastructure 
required to withstand 
the impacts of climate 
change.
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
21
mitigate their property’s physical climate risk, although this is not without issues in terms of access to 
capital. Support should be provided to lower-income property owners, who may not have been aware 
of the risk at time of purchase and may be negatively affected by such a rating.
At the organizational level, while there is growing knowledge of physical climate risk throughout 
Canada, it is not evenly distributed across public entities, sectors, or organizations. There has been much 
discussion about this challenge and the need to address it; indeed, it is reflected in the Foundational 
Objectives section of Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy (Government of Canada 2022b). There have 
been some important steps forward, including the federal Flood Hazard Identification and Mapping 
Program, but more is needed. Better data sharing, including downscaled physical climate risk modelling, 
would help. Financial support is needed to educate and train “climate translators” able to bridge the 
gap between science and the operational needs of governments and organizations (Fiedler et al. 2021). 
More cross-sector collaboration would accelerate progress on this systemic challenge, and insurers, with 
their sophisticated climate risk-modelling capabilities, would be ideal partners. 
The Office of the Superintendent for Financial Institutions’ decision in March 2023 to require federally 
regulated financial institutions to assess and disclose physical and transition-related climate risks, 
including their financial and operational resilience to climate-related disasters, is an important step 
forward (OSFI 2023). Building on this requirement for financial institutions, there should be wider adoption 
of consistent and comparable climate-related financial risk disclosures across the economy, including 
among municipalities.10 Better understanding risk will drive demand for action on resilience. Furthermore, 
Canada should build a more complete picture of how climate change will affect public finances in the 
future, including integrating climate impacts into baseline economic forecasts. This will enable a more 
accurate analysis of the costs and benefits of investments in climate adaptation and is consistent with 
recent moves in other countries, notably the United Kingdom and Australia.11 In addition, Canada needs a 
more rigorous inventory quantification of the geographic areas and specific public infrastructure at risk 
from different climate hazards, along with an estimate of the total capital required to protect it. 
INSTITUTIONAL INERTIA PERSISTS IN INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENTS
There is a widely held assumption that financing adaptation infrastructure is solely the role of governments. 
For example, in a recent report, the U.K.’s Climate Change Committee provides an in-depth discussion on 
ways to crowd in private capital, only to then call for public funding “particularly for adaptation actions that 
provide distributed (public) benefits” (U.K. CCC 2023: 12). The reason for this assumption is that, as noted 
above, adaptation infrastructure does not create a cash flow for investors despite providing clear economic 
benefits to society. Another dimension of this inertia is the widely held belief “that Government will pay 
for adaptation or the costs of recovery from climate impacts” (U.K. CCC 2023: 11). These assumptions limit 
creativity and the potential solutions required to rapidly adapt Canada’s infrastructure at scale.  
Another example of institutional inertia is that public procurement processes, especially at the municipal 
level, are often bound by trade agreements and other regulatory measures, and governments tend to 
be risk-averse and often emphasize cost as the ultimate arbiter. In fact, many municipalities are legally 
10 These disclosures should be aligned with the recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures.
11 The U.K.’s Climate Change Committee recently made a similar recommendation that the U.K. Office for Budget Responsibility build upon initial 
steps to “undertake a full review of how the impacts of climate change in the UK will affect the UK’s macroeconomic performance and public 
finances … to enable a full-cost benefit analysis for public investment in adaptation” (U.K. CCC 2023: 98).
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
22
required to select the lowest-priced bid in a procurement process. Concepts like best value over life 
cycle, or total cost of ownership, are becoming more prevalent due to improved asset management 
practices and to efficiency measures that seek to reduce tangible energy use and its associated carbon 
price. But the dominant culture of public procurement is still driven by immediate cost rather than 
by the climate risks that will manifest over the life of assets that are being built or rehabilitated today. 
To address the challenges of inertia, policy makers should send unambiguous and repeated signals to the 
market that they want private capital to play a role in climate adaptation infrastructure. Policy certainty 
is critical for the private sector and is particularly important in this instance, given the innovation and 
collaboration necessary as new financial and investment models are developed. 
In addition, Canada should consider heeding a recommendation made by the U.K. Climate Change 
Committee in its 2023 report Investment for a Well-adapted UK: “Government and its implementing 
agencies should ensure that a growing fraction of their funding helps to support pioneering projects 
that seek to provide proof of concept for successful funding and delivery of adaptation actions through 
public-private partnership funding and financing” (U.K. CCC 2023: 99). 
When it comes to public procurement, municipalities in particular should be encouraged to think 
systemically about their asset upgrades and build climate resilience into their infrastructure procurement, 
rather than procuring on a piecemeal basis focused on lowest bid cost. One approach gaining traction 
is the so-called “progressive public-private partnership,” where a holistic plan is co-developed up front 
but with available off-ramps in case any party wishes to cease participation without being penalized. 
This ensures the needs of all parties are met without taking on undue risk. 
Acknowledging the sensitivities of public-private partnerships, it is worth noting that many private 
entities have mandates that are aligned squarely with the public interest, such as public pension 
plans, municipally owned utilities, and co-operative insurance companies. Such entities are obvious 
potential participants in projects in certain political environments. 
Canada’s municipalities are 
on the front lines of dealing 
with the impacts of climate 
change on infrastructure, 
but capacity gaps limit 
their ability to prepare 
and respond.
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
23
GOVERNMENTS—ESPECIALLY MUNICIPAL—LACK CAPACITY
Canada’s municipalities are on the front lines of dealing with the impacts of climate change on infrastructure, 
but capacity gaps limit their ability to prepare and respond. Municipalities own and operate 60 per cent of 
Canada’s public infrastructure but collect just 10 per cent of tax revenues, are unable to run deficits, and 
possess few revenue tools beyond property taxes (FCM 2023b). The majority of Canada’s municipalities 
are small, and many lack the staffing and internal capacity required to tackle complex, dynamic, and 
interconnected challenges such as adaptation (ICLEI Canada 2022a). Furthermore, not all municipalities 
have sophisticated, city-owned utilities that lend capacity and expertise. Oftentimes municipalities have 
not met the requirements of private capital providers when it comes to “project preparation and credit 
proposal” (Rana 2017: 3), a clear barrier to municipalities accessing private capital. 
The Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM), among others, successfully advocated that the federal 
government address this issue in Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy, which takes aim at the issue 
with the objective that “local, regional, and institutional capacity for adaptation contributes to self-
sufficiency and participation in adaptation actions” (Government of Canada 2022b: 30). ICLEI’s “Building 
Adaptive and Resilient Communities” program has provided tools and resources to support over 100 
municipalities of all sizes in adaptation planning, but much work remains (ICLEI 2022a; ICLEI 2022b).12 
To address challenges of capacity, Canadian municipalities need more support. The $530 million federal 
top-up for FCM’s Green Municipal Fund in late 2022 is a step in the right direction and should support 
municipal project development. ICLEI Canada’s climate adaptation programs have a strong track record 
and could be scaled up with financial support from the federal and provincial governments. Sustainable 
funding for the Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) Protocol—originally 
developed by Engineers Canada—should be provided to continuously improve the tool and integrate 
it into public decision-making processes. 
12 ICLEI was formerly known as the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives. It is now known as ICLEI - Local Governments for 
Sustainability.
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
24
System challenges like climate change adaptation cannot be solved by any one actor—even the federal 
government—and instead “require whole-of-society action” (Government of Canada 2022b: 34). Harnessing 
the resources and capacity of the private sector will be critical for governments at all levels to meet this 
challenge. In addition to providing capital to make the necessary investments, the private sector could 
help build adaptation infrastructure with greater speed and scale, and in some instances possibly more 
sophistication, while sharing some of the risk. As the World Bank bluntly put it: “Private sector investment 
is critical to closing the adaptation finance gap” (Tall et al. 2021: v). 
However, there are many challenges that must be overcome to unlock the significant stores of private 
capital available for adaptation infrastructure, and success will require patient and transparent dialogue, 
innovative thinking, and dedicated collaboration across sectors and orders of government. Chief 
among these challenges is developing new financial models that account for the many economic 
benefits resulting from building adaptation infrastructure. This paper outlined some potential solutions, 
presented in the spirit of further development and discussion. In addition, while outside the scope of 
this paper, it is important to note that there is a risk that the cash flows required to unlock private capital 
arise most readily in those cities with the greatest population and neighbourhoods with the highest 
property values (often located in hazardous areas like alongside water). It is therefore essential that a 
social equity lens be applied to project prioritization, in addition to considering the degree of climate 
hazard faced and other criteria. Failing to do so risks exacerbating the growing socioeconomic divide 
between groups of people and communities across Canada.
Canada possesses many of the ingredients necessary to lead on meeting the challenge of building 
resilience to climate change: a national infrastructure bank and a forward-thinking federation of 
municipalities, globally leading life insurance companies that seek long-term assets to match their long-
term liabilities, globally leading pension funds that have an interest in protecting their beneficiaries and 
their other investments in Canada, a thriving co-operative financial sector committed to sustainability and 
prepared to drive social innovation, and a National Adaptation Strategy that calls for “whole-of-society” 
action. Let’s get to work! 
In addition to providing 
capital to make the 
necessary investments, 
the private sector could 
help build adaptation 
infrastructure with 
greater speed and scale, 
and in some instances 
more sophistication, 
while sharing some of 
the risk.
CONCLUSION
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
25
REFERENCES
Alvarado, Sara and Caelan Welch. 2022. Financing Climate 
Change Adaptation and Resilience: Key Challenges Facing 
Canada and Potential Solutions. Institute for Sustainable 
Finance. https://smith.queensu.ca/centres/isf/pdfs/
ISF-BriefingNote-Adaptation.pdf 
Buchner, Baysa Naran, Pedro de Aragão Fernandes, 
Rajashree Padmanabhi, Paul Rosane, Matthew Solomon, 
Sean Stout, Githungo Wakaba, Yaxin Zhu, Chavi Meattle, 
Sandra Guzmán, and Costanza Strinati. 2021. Global 
Landscape of Climate Finance 2021. Climate Policy Initiative. 
https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/
global-landscape-of-climate-finance-2021/ 
CBI (Climate Bonds Initiative). 2019. Climate Resilience 
Principles: A Framework for Assessing Climate Resilience 
Investments. Climate Bonds Initiative. https://www.
climatebonds.net/climate-resilience-principles 
CDI (California Department of Insurance). 2021. Protecting 
Communities, Preserving Nature, and Building Resiliency. 
California Department of Insurance. https://www.insurance.
ca.gov/cci/docs/climate-insurance-report.pdf 
CDI (California Department of Insurance). 2022. California 
Sustainable Insurance Roadmap. Climate Insurance Working 
Group, California Department of Insurance. https://www.
insurance.ca.gov/01-consumers/180-climate-change/upload/
California-Sustainable-Insurance-Roadmap-2022.pdf 
City of Victoria. 2023a. “Stormwater Utility.” City of Victoria. 
https://www.victoria.ca/EN/main/residents/water-sewer-
stormwater/stormwater/stormwater-utility.html 
City of Victoria. 2023b. “Rainwater Rewards Program.” City 
of Victoria. https://www.victoria.ca/EN/main/residents/
water-sewer-stormwater/stormwater/rainwater_rewards_
program.html 
DiSabatino, Alyssa. 2023. “How Canada’s Insured Cat 
Losses Stack Up Globally.” Canadian Underwriter. 
January 25. https://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/
insurance/how-canadas-insured-cat-losses-stack-up-
globally-1004230027/ 
ECCC (Environment and Climate Change Canada). 2019. 
Canada’s Changing Climate Report. Government of 
Canada. https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/ 
EPCOR. 2023. “Community Flood Protection.” EPCOR. 
https://www.epcor.com/about/who-we-are-what-we-do/
environment-climate-change/Pages/community-resilience-
flood-protection-for-edmonton.aspx 
Fanta, Václav, Miroslav Salek, and Petr Skelnicka. 2019. “How 
Long do Floods throughout the Millennium Remain in 
the Collective Memory?” Nature Communications 10: 1105. 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-019-09102-3
FCM (Federation of Canadian Municipalities). 2023a. “Climate 
and Sustainability.” Federation of Canadian Municipalities 
https://fcm.ca/en/focus-areas/climate-and-sustainability 
FCM (Federation of Canadian Municipalities). 2023b. 
“The Canada Community-Building Fund.” Federation of 
Canadian Municipalities. https://www.fcm.ca/en/focus-areas/
infrastructure/canada-community-building-fund 
Fiedler, Tanya, Andy J. Pitman, Kate Mackenzie, Nick Wood, 
Christian Jakob, and Sarah E. Perkins-Kirkpatrick. 2021. 
“Business Risk and the Emergence of Climate Analytics.” 
Nature Climate Change 11: 87–94. https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41558-020-00984-6 
GCA (Global Commission on Adaptation). 2019. Adapt Now: 
A Global Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience. Global 
Commission on Adaptation. https://gca.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/09/GlobalCommission_Report_FINAL.pdf 
Government of Canada. 2022a. Government of Canada 
Adaptation Action Plan. Government of Canada. https://www.
canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/climatechange/
climate-plan/national-adaptation-strategy/action-plan.html 
Government of Canada. 2022b. Canada’s National 
Adaptation Strategy: Building Resilient Communities and 
a Strong Economy. Government of Canada. https://www.
canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/climatechange/
climate-plan/national-adaptation-strategy.html 
Hunter, Justine. 2022. “Cost of Rebuilding B.C. after Flooding 
Nears $9-billion.” Globe and Mail. Feb 19. https://www.
theglobeandmail.com/canada/british-columbia/article-cost-
of-rebuilding-bc-after-november-storms-nears-9-billion/ 
IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada). 2019. Eastern Canada 
Spring Flooding Caused Close to $208 million in Insured 
Damage. July 3. http://www.ibc.ca/nl/resources/media-centre/
media-releases/eastern-canada-spring-flooding-caused-
close-to-208-million-in-insured-damage
IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada) and FCM (Federation 
of Canadian Municipalities). 2020. Investing in Canada’s 
Future: The Cost of Climate Adaptation at the Local 
Level. Insurance Bureau of Canada and Federation of 
Canadian Municipalities. https://fcm.ca/en/resources/
investing-in-canadas-future 
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
26
ICLEI Canada. 2022a. Third BARC Impact Report. ICLEI Canada. 
https://icleicanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/3rd-BARC-
Impact-Report-November-2022.pdf 
ICLEI Canada. 2022b. Equitable Climate Adaptation: 
Considerations for Local Governments. ICLEI Canada. 
https://icleicanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/2022-11-
08-ICLEI-Equitable-Climate-Adaptation-Considerations-for-
Local-Governments.pdf 
Infrastructure Canada. 2019. “Government of Canada Invests 
in Protecting Residents of the Lower Laurentians from the 
Impacts of Flooding.” Press release. September 6. https://
www.newswire.ca/news-releases/government-of-canada-
invests-in-protecting-residents-of-the-lower-laurentians-
from-the-impacts-of-flooding-859453886.html 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 
2021. Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. 
Contributions of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. http://www.
ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-group-i/ 
Lu, Jason Zhengrong, Jenny Jing Chao, and James Robert 
Sheppard. 2019. Government Guarantees for Mobilizing 
Private Investment in Infrastructure. World Bank Group. 
https://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/
library/government-guarantees-mobilizing-private-
investment-infrastructure
OSFI (Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions). 
2023. Climate Risk Management. Government of Canada. 
https://www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/Eng/fi-if/rg-ro/gdn-ort/gl-ld/
Pages/b15-dft.aspx 
Miller, Alan and Stacy Swann. 2019. Driving Finance Today for 
the Climate Resilient Society of Tomorrow. United Nations 
Environment Programme and Global Commission on 
Adaptation. https://www.unepfi.org/publications/driving-
finance-today-for-the-climate-resilient-society-of-tomorrow/
Moudrak, N., B. Feltmate, H. Venema, and H. Osman. 
2018. Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural 
Infrastructure is an Underutilized Option. Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. http://assets.
ibc.ca/Documents/Resources/IBC-Natural-Infrastructure-
Report-2018.pdf 
Multi-Hazard Mitigation Council. 2020. A Roadmap to 
Resilience Incentivization. K.A. Porter and J.Q. Yuan, eds. 
National Institute of Building Sciences. https://www.nibs.org/
reports/roadmap-resilience-incentivization 
Ness, Ryan, and Sarah Miller. 2022. Toward a Safer and More 
Resilient Canada: An Independent Assessment of the Draft 
National Adaptation Strategy. Canadian Climate Institute. 
https://climateinstitute.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/
Toward-a-safer-and-more-resilient-canada.pdf 
O’Neill, Sarah Jane and Stephanie Cairns. 2016. New Solutions 
for Sustainable Stormwater Management in Canada. Smart 
Prosperity Institute. https://institute.smartprosperity.ca/
library/publications/new-solutions-sustainable-stormwater-
management-canada 
Office of the PBO (Office of the Parliamentary Budget 
Office). 2016. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for 
Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements due to 
Weather Events. Government of Canada. https://qsarchive-
archiveqs.pbo-dpb.ca/web/default/files/Documents/
Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf 
Olson, Isaac. 2019. “‘Evacuation now!’: Thousands Forced to 
Flee Sainte-Marthe-sur-le-Lac after Dike Breached.” CBC 
News. April 28. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/montreal/
sainte-marthe-sur-le-lac-dike-breach-flooding-1.5114366 
PSC (Public Safety Canada). 2022a. Canada’s National 
Disaster Mitigation Strategy. Government of Canada. https://
www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/mtgtn-strtgy/
index-en.aspx 
PSC (Public Safety Canada). 2022b. Adapting to Rising 
Flood Risk: An Analysis of Insurance Solutions for Canada. 
Government Canada. https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/
rsrcs/pblctns/dptng-rsng-fld-rsk-2022/dptng-rsng-fld-rsk-
2022-en.pdf 
Rana, Fida. 2017. Project Aggregation and Blended Risk: An 
Avenue to Explore for Canadian Municipalities? International 
Institute for Sustainable Development. https://www.ciix.ca/_
files/ugd/17dcdf_4d09c626c5cb401b8353e0547a3a839b.pdf 
Sawyer, Dave, Ryan Ness, Caroline Lee, and Sarah Miller. 2022. 
Damage Control: Reducing the Costs of Climate Impacts in 
Canada. Canadian Climate Institute. https://climateinstitute.
ca/reports/damage-control/ 
Snowdon, Wallis. 2017. “Fort McMurray Wildfire Costs to 
Reach Almost $9B, New Report Says.” CBC News. January 17. 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/fort-mcmurray-
wildfire-costs-to-reach-almost-9b-new-report-says-1.3939953 
Stolte, Elise. 2017. “Edmonton Pitches $2.6-Billion 
Flood Mitigation Plan.” Edmonton Journal. June 5. 
https://edmontonjournal.com/news/local-news/
edmonton-pitches-2-6-billion-flood-mitigation-plan 
Sullivan, Brian K. 2022. “Hurricane Fiona Moves North with up 
to $4B Economic Damages Estimated Already.” Insurance 
Journal. September 20. https://www.insurancejournal.com/
news/national/2022/09/20/685775.htm 
Tall, Arame, Sarah Lynagh, Candela Blanco Vecchi, Pepukaye 
Bardouille, Felipe Montoya Pino, Elham Shabahat, Vladimir 
Stenek, Fiona Stewart, Samantha Power, Cindy Paladines, 
Philippe Neves, and Lori Kerr. 2021. Enabling Private 
Investment in Climate Adaptation and Resilience: Current 
MOBILIZING PRIVATE CAPITAL FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
27
Status, Barriers to Investment and Blueprint for Action. 
World Bank Group. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/35203 
UCISL (University of Cambridge Institute for Sustainability 
Leadership). 2016. Investing for Resilience. University 
of Cambridge. https://www.cisl.cam.ac.uk/resources/
sustainable-finance-publications/investing-for-resilience 
U.K. CCC (U.K. Climate Change Committee). 2023. 
Investment for a Well-Adapted UK. Climate Change 
Committee. https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/
investment-for-a-well-adapted-uk/ 
UNDRR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk 
Reduction). 2015. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction 2015–2030. United Nations Office for Disaster 
Risk Reduction. https://www.undrr.org/publication/
sendai-framework-disaster-risk-reduction-2015-2030 
Vajjhala, Shalini and James Rhodes. 2015. Leveraging 
Catastrophe Bonds: As a Mechanism for Resilience 
Infrastructure Project Finance. re:focus partners. https://
www.refocuspartners.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/
RE.bound-Program-Report-December-2015.pdf 
Warren, May. 2023. “A Homebuyer’s Newest Piece of Intel: 
Check the Climate Risk Score.” Toronto Star. February 
6. https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2023/02/06/a-
homebuyers-newest-piece-of-intel-check-the-climate-risk-
score.html 
Zerbe, Johann. 2019. Update: Paying for Urban 
Infrastructure Adaptation in Canada: An Analysis of 
Current and Emerging Economic Instruments for Local 
Governments. Action on Climate Team (ACT), Simon 
Fraser University. https://www.sfu.ca/content/dam/sfu/act/
reports/2019/Paying%20for%20Urban%20Infrastructure.pdf 
Ziolecki, Anna, Jason Thistlethwaite, Daniel Henstra, and 
Daniel Scott. 2020. Canadian Voices on Flood Risk 2020. 
Partners For Action. https://uwaterloo.ca/partners-for-action/
past-projects/canadian-voices-flood-risk-2020 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A number of people contributed their time to improve this paper. Contributors and review­
ers include: Paul Manias, Special Advisor, Climate Resilient Infrastructure, Addenda Capital; 
Don Iveson, Executive Advisor, Climate Investment and Community Resiliency, Co-operators; 
Jon-Erik Lappano, Senior Sustainability Communications Consultant, Co-operators; Chad 
Park, Vice President, Sustainability & Citizenship, Co-operators; Diana Fox Carney, Independent 
Economist; Ujala Qadir, Head of Program Design, Climate Bonds Initiative; Alexandre Chavarot, 
Founder, Climate Finance 2050; Susan Ancel, Director, One Water Planning, EPCOR; Natasha 
Apollonova, Research Manager, Canada Infrastructure Bank; Andrew Posluns, Senior Director, 
Corporate Planning, Policy and Research, Canada Infrastructure Bank; Yi Liu, Senior Director, 
Client Services, Funding and Investments, Green Municipal Fund; Ewa Jackson, Managing 
Director, ICLEI Canada; Megan Meaney, Executive Director, ICLEI Canada.
