     
 
Framework for assessing the costs and benefits of  
nature-based climate solutions in Atlantic Canada 
Prepared for the New Brunswick Environmental Network 
September 21, 2023
 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................................... 2 
1 
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 3 
1.1 
Objectives...................................................................................................................................... 3 
1.2 
Scope ............................................................................................................................................. 4 
1.3 
Target audience ............................................................................................................................ 4 
1.4 
Document structure ...................................................................................................................... 4 
2 
Understanding green infrastructure and nature-based climate solutions ........................................... 5 
2.1 
Clarifying the language ................................................................................................................. 5 
2.2 
Review of literature comparing grey and green infrastructure .................................................... 7 
3 
Benefit-cost analysis framework ........................................................................................................... 9 
3.1 
Step 1: Scope the nature-based climate solution(s) ..................................................................... 9 
3.2 
Step 2: Determine the level of effort required ........................................................................... 13 
3.3 
Step 3: Select the timeframe and discount rate for the analysis................................................ 15 
3.4 
Step 4: Identify and value the benefits ....................................................................................... 18 
3.5 
Step 5: Identify and value the costs ............................................................................................ 23 
3.6 
Step 6: Compare costs and benefits ........................................................................................... 27 
3.7 
Step 7: Conduct sensitivity analysis ............................................................................................ 28 
3.8 
Step 8: Consider other non-monetary benefits .......................................................................... 29 
4 
Benefit-cost analysis illustrative example ........................................................................................... 30 
5 
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................... 36 
6 
References ........................................................................................................................................... 37 
Appendix A: Decision support methods ..................................................................................................... 41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 3 
 
1 Introduction 
A growing number of municipalities across Canada are exploring how green infrastructure (GI) can be 
leveraged to build more sustainable and climate-resilient communities. GI is increasingly recognized as a 
cost-effective complement to grey infrastructure that can deliver critical municipal services such as 
stormwater management and water filtration, as well as urban heat reduction, air quality improvements 
and habitat. The 2019 Canadian Infrastructure Report Card (Canadian infrastructure, 2019) found a 
considerable amount of built infrastructure in Canada to be in poor or very poor condition. The state of 
Canada’s infrastructure poses a financial challenge to municipalities. Based on the International Institute 
for Sustainable Development’s Sustainable Asset Valuation of 10 GI projects from around the globe, Bassi 
et al. (2021) estimated GI costs to be on average 50.6% less and generate 29.1% more value compared to 
traditional built infrastructure.  
Despite their ability to deliver services and ease the infrastructure burden for local governments, the 
adoption of GI is not widespread in Canada. This is due to a range of barriers, including: 
● lack of information and data pertaining to the services these assets provide; 
● lack of knowledge and awareness of GI opportunities; 
● lack of knowledge and experience of engineers, consultants and construction firms on how to 
properly use and integrate GI; 
● limited access to native plant nurseries, which are important for some GI projects, and  
● sense of risk and uncertainty associated with the unfamiliar approaches needed to implement GI 
projects. 
To address some of these barriers, the World Bank recently released a detailed guidance document for 
project developers on how to assess the benefits and costs of GI (van Zanten et al., 2023). The material 
presented in this report builds on the World Bank framework, adapting it to a New Brunswick and other 
Atlantic provinces context. 
1.1 Objectives 
This framework and guidance document is designed to achieve the following objectives: 
● Develop and demonstrate a benefit-cost framework for nature-based climate solution (NBCS) 
projects, a subset of GI projects which are described in the next section, with specific relevance 
to New Brunswick and the Atlantic provinces. 
● Provide supporting information so that municipal decision-makers can approximate benefits and 
costs for NBCS projects. This includes a database of benefit and cost data and a benefit-cost 
calculator tool.1  
Overall, the guidance material focuses on what data is needed to inform a benefit-cost analysis (BCA) and 
how that data can be used to inform the decision-making process. 
 
1 It should be noted that the information in the database provides point it time estimates of various cost and benefits. Values 
and prices fluctuate over time so users should be aware of this potential limitation when choosing a value. While such 
limitations cannot be avoided without doing your own detailed calculations, the database can be useful in providing a starting 
point for your assessment. 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 4 
 
1.2 Scope 
There are several decision-support methods that can be used to weigh trade-offs and decide between 
project alternatives including BCA, cost-effectiveness analysis, and multicriteria analysis. Summaries of 
these methods are provided in Appendix A. As noted above, this report focuses on BCA. 
This report focuses on NBCS to support community climate resilience. While the framework (outlined in 
section 3) is broadly applicable to many types of projects, this guidance focuses on coastal restoration 
(e.g. living shorelines) and stormwater management ponds. 
1.3 Target audience 
This report is designed to support planners, engineers, elected officials and other municipal and 
provincial decision-makers understand and explore the range of benefits and costs associated with living 
shorelines and stormwater management ponds. 
1.4 Document structure 
The remainder of this document is organized as follows: 
● Section 2 clarifies some commonly-used GI terminology and provides a general overview of the 
benefits of GI. 
● Section 3 presents the BCA framework and associated steps for NBCS. 
● Section 4 provides an overview of an illustrative example to demonstrate how the framework 
can be applied. 
● Section 5 concludes the document. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 5 
 
2 Understanding green infrastructure and 
nature-based climate solutions  
The idea that ecosystems provide a range of benefits (commonly referred to as ecosystem services) to 
humans has triggered the framing of nature as a form of capital (e.g. a natural asset). The purpose of this 
framing is to formally recognize, codify and value nature. By doing so, decision-makers can monitor, 
protect, maintain and restore natural areas to ensure the ecosystem services that communities rely on 
continue to be provided. The intent is to value a subset of services that humans receive from nature; the 
intrinsic value of nature far exceeds that which can be quantified.  
This section defines some of the common language used to describe GI. This is followed by an overview 
of the literature on the cost of GI to increase climate resiliency. 
2.1 Clarifying the language 
Figure 1, developed by Green Infrastructure Ontario (GIO) and modified by Green Analytics, demonstrates 
the relationships between terms commonly used when referring to GI. The figure distinguishes between 
three sub-types of GI (natural assets, enhanced assets and engineered assets) with examples of each. It 
also shows where NBCS fit under the umbrella of GI. 
 
Figure 1. Range of GI solutions  
These terms are defined in more detail below to help distinguish the range of possible infrastructure 
solutions between completely engineered and completely natural. All the cited text is from Canadian 
Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME), (2021) unless otherwise noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 6 
 
● Infrastructure “refers to the managed elements of interrelated systems that provide goods and      
services essential to enabling, sustaining or enhancing the living conditions of human 
communities”. 
● Grey infrastructure “refers to engineered assets made exclusively of materials such as concrete 
and steel… including bridges, dams, water treatment plants, culverts, ditches and storm drains”. 
o “Grey infrastructure elements are generally designed for singular purposes and although 
considerable expertise has accrued over time on best practices for their design and 
management, they are not highly adaptable to changing conditions such as extreme 
precipitation events and have a limited lifespan” (Sutton-Grier et al., (2015) as cited in 
CCME 2021). 
o “Further to this, grey infrastructure has a large carbon footprint given the emissions 
associated with manufacturing concrete and steel structures” (Bataille (2019) as cited in 
CCME 2021). 
● Green infrastructure “refers to the natural vegetative systems, engineered and built features, and 
green technologies that collectively provide society with a multitude of economic, environmental 
and social outcomes... At present, green infrastructure is still strongly associated with the 
planning philosophy of low-impact development (LID) and technologies that support the 
ecological and hydrological processes needed to manage rain- and stormwater in towns and cities. 
It includes three sub-types of assets ranging from ‘most’ to ‘least’ engineered: 
o Engineered (green) assets “are built or manufactured structures intended to mimic 
natural functions, particularly hydrologic functions, at the site-specific scale. They 
generally do not have a ‘green’/vegetated component”. Examples include rain barrels, 
permeable pavement and infiltration trenches. 
o Enhanced (green) assets incorporate “land, water and vegetation features alongside 
human-made elements to sustain ecosystem functions and services… the enhancement 
of conventional grey infrastructure (e.g. piped, ditch and culvert, dam and reservoir 
systems) with nature-based elements, [often] in order to achieve the active and everyday 
management of the full rainfall-runoff spectrum”. Examples include bioswales, green 
roofs, trees in built-up areas with engineered rooting environments and native topsoil 
added to developed areas (with grass and/or other groundcovers) for its water infiltration 
and retention capacity. 
o Natural assets/natural infrastructure “refers to the use of preserved, restored or 
enhanced elements or combinations of vegetation and associated biology, land, water 
and naturally occurring ecological processes to meet targeted infrastructure outcomes... 
It can be differentiated from the related category of green infrastructure based on its 
composition exclusively of natural ecosystem features and materials (e.g. water, native 
species of vegetation, sand, stone, etc.), and from grey infrastructure because it provides 
a range of co-benefits to the environment, the economy, community health and well-
being that grey infrastructure usually cannot”. Examples include:  
▪ 
grasslands that provide pollinator habitat; 
▪ 
forests created or restored for cooling and/or headwater protection functions;  
▪ 
riparian areas to watercourses for erosion control functions; 
▪ 
wetlands created or restored and maintained for water attenuation and filtration 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 7 
 
functions; and 
▪ 
coastal dunes and shorelines restored to build resilience to more frequent 
storms. 
● Nature-based solutions (NBS) or nature-based climate solutions (NBCS) “are measures that 
protect, restore and sustainably manage natural or modified ecosystems, with the aim of 
maintaining or enhancing the services provided to human communities and benefits to 
biodiversity”. 
o “[C]an be used in place of or in tandem with grey infrastructure to create a hybrid 
approach, to enhance resilience of the infrastructure asset, and provide many other co-
benefits”.  
o As illustrated in Figure 1, these include natural assets and enhanced assets, but exclude 
engineered assets that mimic natural functions using grey infrastructure to do so.  
While the framework, approaches and concepts discussed in this report could be applied to all GI types, 
this report focuses on NBCS, including natural assets and enhanced assets.  
2.2 Review of literature comparing grey and green 
infrastructure 
To investigate the cost effectiveness of GI relative to grey infrastructure, the International Institute for 
Sustainable Development compared the costs and benefits of nature-based infrastructure with grey 
alternatives using 10 sustainable asset value studies from Canada, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Italy, Senegal 
and South Africa. The study found the cost of grey infrastructure to be US$4.29 trillion yearly. Substituting 
GI for 11% of the world's infrastructure needs was estimated to result in annual savings of US$248 billion 
and extra benefits of US$489 billion (Bassi et al., 2021). 
Indeed, numerous reports have pointed out that GI can be less costly. For instance, a US Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) report that compiled 17 case studies of GI projects revealed that GI can result in 
significant savings in most cases. According to the US EPA, that capital cost reductions ranged from 15% 
to 80% when GI was implemented (US EPA, 2007). Similarly, the US EPA and the American Society of 
Landscape Architects collected 479 case studies to investigate the cost-effectiveness of GI compared to 
conventional grey alternatives. When compared to conventional stormwater management techniques, 
44% of these case studies experienced reduced costs, while nearly 30% claimed that it had no impact on 
capital costs. Less than 25% of the case studies indicated that the use of GI led to increased costs 
(American Rivers et al., 2012).  
Additionally, Zhou et al. (2009) used a case in Beijing to compare the cost of an integrated constructed 
wetland with the capital cost of conventional wastewater treatment. Their results demonstrate that a 
constructed wetland typically costs 10% to 50% of the capital cost of grey alternatives and is likely to incur 
only 10% to 25% of the operating costs of grey options (Zhou et al., 2009). Similarly, when compared to 
an all-grey infrastructure approach, the use of GI stormwater solutions, such as blue and green roofs, 
swales, tree pits, constructed wetlands and rain barrels, in New York City resulted in a US$1.5 billion 
reduction in water management costs (Culwick et al., 2016). 
Grey infrastructure options typically have much larger up-front construction costs relative to GI (Wishart 
et al., 2021; Miller, 2023). American Rivers et al. (2012) stated that GI development imposes lower capital 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 8 
 
costs, land acquisition costs and other financial burdens that are integrated into the initial construction. 
The town of Gibsons, British Columbia avoided a CAD$4 million capital expenditure to construct an 
engineered stormwater pipe by investing in a GI alternative expected to cost only CAD$0.9 million (MNAI, 
2019).  
GI projects also have reduced repair and maintenance costs, and reduced infrastructure replacement 
costs (American Rivers et al., 2012; Brears, 2018; Miller, 2023). Over time, the human-made materials and 
equipment of grey infrastructure deteriorate and wear down, which leads to increased operations and 
maintenance over time. On the other hand, GI practices improve function and resilience as vegetation 
ages and adjusts to regional biological cycles (American Rivers et al., 2012). An EPA study on enhancing 
sustainable communities with GI showed that the operation and maintenance costs associated with GI 
were less expensive compared with traditional grey infrastructure (US EPA, 2014). A similar conclusion 
was reached in a study by MNAI on natural asset management in the town of Gibsons. According to the 
MNAI, the operations and maintenance expenses for a natural asset project are anticipated to be 
significantly cheaper than a comparable grey infrastructure project (MNAI, 2019). Figure 2, from van 
Zanten et al. (2023), compares the capital expenses (CAPEX) and operating expenses (OPEX) under the 
two approaches over time. The figure demonstrates the different benefits and costs of grey and green 
infrastructure over time. 
 
Figure 2. Comparison of capital expenses (CAPEX) and operating expenses (OPEX) over time for grey and green infrastructure 
solutions (van Zanten at al., 2023)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 9 
 
 
3 Benefit-cost analysis framework  
The proposed framework for assessing the benefits and costs of NBCS builds on the work of van Zanten 
et al. (2023) published by the World Bank. The World Bank document provides guidance for project 
developers on how to assess the benefits and costs of NBCS. In this section, an overview of the BCA 
framework and steps, which have been adapted by Green Analytics for applicability to the Atlantic Canada 
context, are presented. Figure 3 provides a summary of the key steps of the BCA framework. 
 
Figure 3. Overview of the BCA framework steps (van Zanten at al., 2023) 
3.1 Step 1: Scope the nature-based climate solution(s) 
The first step in the process is to understand the context of the project. The identification, design and 
implementation of a NBCS requires a systems approach that considers landscape ecology and topography, 
existing functions of grey infrastructure and the location of the project site in the bigger ecological 
landscape (e.g. watershed). Solutions should be analyzed at the landscape, city or watershed level as 
opposed to focusing on a single site location (World Bank, 2021). For example, in the context of 
stormwater management, it is necessary to understand the collective runoff reduction provided by all 
relevant green spaces across a stormwater catchment basin as part of a city’s overall drainage 
infrastructure. 
This step also requires clearly defining the objectives of the BCA. Typically, BCA is used to systematically 
assess trade-offs among different options. Defining these options starts by understanding the issue to be 
addressed and identifying the most appropriate options for resolving that issue. 
Key questions that should be considered during this step include: 
1. What is the issue or hazard to be addressed? 
2. How is the issue or hazard influenced by the local conditions? 
3. What are the grey infrastructure options that could be used to address the issue? 
4. Are there NBCS alternatives?  
5. If NBCS exist, is it feasible for these alternatives to completely replace the grey infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 10 
 
options or should a hybrid option be considered? 
As these questions are explored, analysts should frame a series of options to assess through the BCA. For 
instance, consider a series of scenarios such as: 
● Do nothing. Define and describe what the likely outcomes or impacts might be if nothing is done 
to address the issue. 
● Use a grey infrastructure option. Define and describe what the likely outcomes or impacts might 
be if a grey infrastructure option is used to address the issue. Be as specific as possible about what 
the option is and to what degree it will solve the issue or hazard. 
● Use a NBCS option. Define and describe what the likely outcomes or impacts might be if a NBCS 
is used to address the issue. Be as specific as possible about what the option is and to what degree 
it will solve the issue or hazard. 
There is a wide range of possible NBCS that could be employed in communities across New Brunswick to 
help build climate resilience. In the World Bank report, van Zanten et al. (2023) presents 11 ‘families’ of 
GI projects (Figure 4). All families are of relevance to New Brunswick and Atlantic Canada with the 
exception of mangrove forests. 
 
Figure 4. Types of green infrastructure that build climate resilience (van Zanten et al., 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 11 
 
In Table 1, the families are scoped to five project types relevant to living shorelines and stormwater 
management in New Brunswick and Atlantic Canada.  
Table 1. NBCS of focus for living shorelines and stormwater management 
NBCS 
Family 
How does it help? 
What issue(s) does  
it address? 
Beach nourishment 
and sand 
dune restoration 
Sandy shores and 
dunes 
• Reduces erosion and flood  
• Protects against storm 
surge and high waves  
• Flooding   
• Water quality degradation  
Oyster reef 
restoration  
Reef ecosystems 
• Reduces erosion  
• Creates a barrier from 
storms and tides  
• Protects productive estuary 
waters  
• Flooding  
• Biodiversity loss   
• Water quality degradation  
Seagrass and 
seagrass meadow 
restoration   
Submerged aquatic 
vegetation 
• Reduces erosion   
• Provides shelter and food 
for animals   
• Climate change  
• Biodiversity loss  
• Water quality degradation  
Wetland and salt 
marshes 
restoration  
Inland wetlands 
Other coastal 
wetlands 
• Absorbs storm surge waters 
• Attenuates flooding  
• Stabilizes shore sediments  
• Preserves habitat 
• Flooding  
• Water quality degradation  
• Biodiversity loss   
Naturalized 
stormwater ponds   
Ponds, lakes and 
other small bodies 
of water 
Inland wetlands 
• Improves water quality   
• Increases carbon 
sequestration   
• Reduces erosion   
• Preserves habitat   
• Flooding  
• Biodiversity loss  
• Climate change   
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 12 
 
 
Scoping NBCS in New Brunswick - Examples 
1. The first example is the Shediac Bay watershed water conservation and stormwater 
management project. The growing severity of climate change impacts and increasing 
impervious surfaces (e.g. pavements, buildings and parking lots) due to human activities have 
led to increased stormwater runoff in the watershed. To protect water quality and mange 
stormwater, the Shediac Bay Watershed Association implemented the water conservation 
and stormwater management project. After reviewing options, it was decided that the 
project would consist of a bioswale at Polyvalent Louis-J.-Robichaud high school, two 
residential rain gardens (Rue Rachel and Rue Smith) and one commercial bioswale at 
Maximum Signs & Time2Shine. This example entailed consideration of the broader 
stormwater management context and pursuit of a package of projects to achieve its 
objectives. 
2. Several communities (1: Le Goulet, 2: Sainte-Marie-Saint-Raphaël, Cap Bateau, Pigeon Hill 
and 3: Shippagan and Pointe-Brûlée) on the Acadian Peninsula face intensifying flooding and 
erosion caused by storm surges. The current flooding and erosion condition has resulted in 
property damage and other financial losses. Without effective adaptation measures, floods 
are anticipated to get worse by 2100. To ease the shoreline erosion resulting from storm 
surges, a BCA approach was undertaken to estimate and compare the implementation and 
maintenance costs, as well as associated ecosystem service benefits of multiple dune 
restoration projects. In Le Goulet, three adaptation scenarios were considered: (1) dike 
construction; (2) beach nourishment; and (3) beach nourishment with breach. In the Sainte-
Marie-Saint-Raphaël, Cap Bateau, Pigeon Hill, the scenarios assessed were relocation of at-
risk homes and construction of erosion control structures. In the community of Shippagan 
and Pointe-Brûlée, two scenarios were considered. Scenario 1 considered zoning with 
reduction in existing property value. Scenario 2 considered zoning with no reduction in 
existing property values. Both alternatives involved creating a ‘retreat zone’ and an 
‘accommodation zone’, as well as permanently preserving the current retaining wall, rocks 
and boardwalk. This example demonstrates how a community can frame a range of options 
to assess through BCA. 
3. The Town of Riverview explored how to protect and enhance natural assets in a large 
development area proposed for the Mill Creek Watershed adjacent to a nature park (MNAI, 
2020). In collaboration with the Municipal Natural Asset Initiative, the community 
developed stormwater modelling scenarios for the Mill Creek watershed. This allowed them 
to estimate the value of the stormwater management services that the existing wetland 
offers, as well as the cost of creating stormwater management ponds and built wetlands 
that provide the same level of service as the existing wetland, under three future scenarios: 
(1) the development proceeds without causing harm to the wetland and takes into account 
the construction of certain designed drainage infrastructure;  (2) the current wetland is 
enhanced to counteract the elevated peak flow; and (3) the wetland is damaged to the 
extent that the community needs to construct a replacement to regulate stormwater flows. 
This illustration shows how BCA can be applied to multiple scenarios to assess the value 
proposition of each. 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 13 
 
 
3.2 Step 2: Determine the level of effort required 
BCA can be applied to a single project or used to compare several options. If the issue is large and complex 
and involves significant levels of uncertainty, it will be beneficial to explore and assess a range of potential 
solutions to ensure the proposed solution is the best one. For smaller projects or ones with limited 
uncertainty and strong links to a community strategic plan, it may be sufficient to articulate the various 
benefits and costs of the project without considering the range of alternatives.  
The World Bank guidance report identifies three tiers of analysis based on the project’s objectives and 
available resources as outlined in Figure 5 (van Zanten et al., 2023).   
 
Figure 5. Approach to choosing a level of effort required (van Zanten et al., 2023) 
The 3-Tier approach given by van Zanten et al. (2023) can be applied to each step in evaluating NBCS. The 
data collection suggestions for each analytical step under different tiers are shown in Table 2. To illustrate, 
the Tier 1 approach for evaluating the advantages of risk reduction entails utilizing a rapid assessment 
based either on data from the global ecosystems and/or land cover or using monetary or index-based 
values derived from existing datasets of risk reduction value. In addition to the data utilized in Tier 1, Tier 
2 uses natural capital accounting, such as quantifying the avoided damage cost, to increase confidence in 
the analytical conclusions. Tier 3 further amplifies the amount of data required and the amount of time 
and/or resources needed by utilizing high-resolution datasets on the ecosystem extent and conditions, as 
well as local market pricing for NBCS benefits. This three tier approach, with the possibility to mix methods 
in different tiers, can be applied to all other NBCS evaluation steps including scoping benefits, decision 
support framework, other benefit valuations and cost valuations (van Zanten et al., 2023).  
 
 
 
 
PAGE 14 
 
Table 2. Approach examples of Tiers 1,2 and 3 for BCA 
Framework 
component 
Tier 1 approaches 
Tier 2 approaches 
Tier 3 approaches 
Scoping 
Expert elicitation 
Stakeholder interview / 
workshop 
Stakeholder / community 
participatory mapping 
Benefit valuation 
Ecosystem services or NBCS 
benefits value databases 
 
Global ecosystem and/or 
land cover data 
Tier 1 datasets and natural 
capital accounts (ecosystem 
extent and condition data 
sets) or other geospatial 
national/local ecosystem 
extent and/or condition 
data 
High-resolution ecosystems 
extend and condition 
datasets (and full natural 
capital account if available), 
local market prices of NBCS 
benefits/ecosystem services 
(e.g. agricultural output, 
nature-based tourism, fish) 
and stated preference 
surveys 
Cost valuation 
NBCS CAPEX and OPEX unit 
cost estimations from other 
case studies / projects to 
inform value transfer 
Modeled opportunity cost 
data sets (spatially explicit 
or regional statistics), 
national/regional statistics 
on wages and/or material 
cost to refine CAPEX and 
OPEX cost estimates 
Estimate local wages/labour 
cost, estimate material and 
land cost based on local 
market prices and value 
disservices (if any) using 
stated preference survey 
Source: Adapted from van Zanten et al., 2023.  
While Tier 2 and Tier 3 provide more robust results with greater confidence in the analytical outcomes, 
the focus of this report on the Tier 1 level of effort. It is assumed that the users of this report will be 
dealing with limited data, time, budget and expertise. In situations where a Tier 2 or Tier 3 level of effort 
is required, communities should consider engaging subject matter experts to support the analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 15 
 
3.3 Step 3: Select the timeframe and discount rate for the 
analysis 
Step 3 involves selecting an appropriate timeframe and discount rate for the analysis. 
Discount rates account for the time value of money thereby converting future costs and benefits into 
present value terms. Generally, one discount rate is selected and held constant over time. However, the 
appropriateness of applying a uniform discount rate to NBCS has been a source of debate since doing so 
places a lower weight on future benefits. Currently, the Treasury Board of Canada recommends a default 
discount rate of 7% or a social discount rate of 3%. The social rate is recommended in certain situations 
where factors other than economic opportunity costs need to be considered, such as for human health 
and environmental goods and services. The choice of the discount rate can have a significant impact on 
the net present value of the project. A sensitivity analysis of its impact is prudent when undertaking such 
analyses.  
In addition to the choice of discount rate, the timeframe over which the BCA is undertaken is an important 
consideration. NBCS involve upfront costs that lead to long-term benefits as depicted in Figure 6. The cost 
of planting a tree (red line in Figure 6) is incurred at the start of the project. However, the benefits (blue 
line in Figure 6) take several years to reach their full potential.  
 
Level of effort for CBA in New Brunswick - Example 
A combination of Tier 2 and Tier 3 approaches was applied in the 2016 BCA of climate change 
adaptation strategies for the Acadian Peninsula. The potential risk reduction benefits from dune 
restoration and other NBCS were measured as the expected annual damages using the avoided 
flood damages approach and the avoided erosion approach.  
Avoided flood damage were estimated for four points in time (2010, 2030, 2050 and 2100) and six 
flood return periods (1 in 2 years, 1 in 5 years, 1 in 10 years, 1 in 25 years, 1 in 50 years and 1 in 100 
years). Using a comprehensive geographic database and the United States Hazus model's depth 
damage curves, damage cost values for each of these times and flood return periods were then 
determined. The prevented erosion damages, on the other hand, were calculated by determining 
the percent of land lost due to erosion and multiplying the lost land by the appropriate property 
values.  
Using a benefit transfer approach, additional ecosystem service advantages beyond risk reduction 
benefits were also established. The Tier 3 technique was used in the cost appraisal process, where 
expert consulting engineers estimated implementation costs taking into consideration local 
conditions, including materials, transportation, installation, site accessibility and drainage, as well as 
other relevant expenditures. 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 16 
 
 
Figure 6. Illustration of typical benefits versus costs over a tree’s life cycle (Peel Climate Change Partnership, 2021) 
Recent thinking suggests using declining discount rates combined with long timeframes (100+ years) when 
dealing with environmental projects (O’Mahony, 2021). O’Mahony argues that “failing to fully capture 
these long-term welfare gains and losses will distort the analysis with a bias towards those projects that 
are more carbon-intensive, or environmentally damaging”.  
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 17 
 
 
Choosing discount rates and timeframes for NBCS in New Brunswick - Examples 
Examples of the timeframes and discount rates used by recent shoreline protection BCAs are 
demonstrated in the table below. The timeframes range from 20 years to 90 years and the discount 
rates range from 1% to 10%.  
References 
Value 
Value categories 
Timeframes (T) and discount 
rate (i) 
1. Wetland and saltmarsh restoration related BCA 
i. Reguero et al., 2018 
[US Study] 
Benefits  
Storm hazard reduction 
T=20 or 40, i = 2% or 10%  
 
Costs  
Construction / maintenance 
ii. Stewart‐Sinclair et 
al. 2021 [Global] 
Benefits  
Water purification, nursery, hunting and fishing,  
fish and flood  
i = 1%, 2.5%, 3%, 3.5%, and 4.5%  
T = 30, 60 and 90 for different 
scenarios 
Costs 
Construction, capital, monitoring 
iii. Vázquez-González 
et al., 2017 [Mexican 
Study] 
Benefits  
Carbon storage 
T = 30, social discount rate (i) = 
3%obtained from Mexican 
Internal Revenue Service 
Costs 
Investment, operative, maintenance  
 
Opportunity cost, money lost or gained by 
changing land use  
2. Oyster reef restoration related BCA 
i. Hynes et al., 2022 
[Irish Study] 
Benefits  
Recreational value 
T = 20  i = 5% 
 
Costs 
Construction and maintenance, alternative grey 
approach 
ii. Reguero et al., 
2018 [US Study] 
Benefits  
Storm hazard reduction  
T=20 or 40, i = 2% or 10%  
Costs 
Construction and maintenance 
Iii. Callihan et al., 
2016 [US Study] 
Benefits  
Water quality improvement, aquatic vegetation 
enhancement, commercial and recreational 
fishing, oyster harvest, nitrogen removal, 
shoreline stabilization 
T = 30, i = 3%  
Costs 
Construction and program cost  
iv. Grabowski et al., 
2011 [US study] 
 
 
Benefits  
 
Commercial fishing, recreational fishing, 
denitrification, submerged aquatic vegetation 
enhancement 
i=3%, T=1,5, 10, 25, and 50 for 
different scenarios 
Costs 
Construction (purchasing, transportation, loading 
deploying)  
3. Seagrass restoration related BCA 
i. Stewart‐Sinclair et 
al., 2021 [Global] 
Benefits  
Food, nursery  
i = 1%, 2.5%, 3%, 3.5%, and 4.5%  
T = 30, 60 and 90 for different 
scenarios 
Costs  
Construction, capital, monitoring 
ii. Rogers et al., 2019 
[Australian study] 
Benefits 
Carbon sequestration, recreational fishing, 
recreational use 
T = 100, i = 7% 
 
 
Costs 
Replanting, reseeding  
4. Beach nourishment related BCA 
i. Reguero et al., 2018 
[US Study] 
Benefits  
Storm hazard reduction 
T=20 or 40, i = 2% or 10%  
 
Costs  
Construction / maintenance 
ii. Coelho et al., 2022 
[Portugal study] 
Benefits  
Erosion mitigation  
i = 3%, T=20 
Costs  
Collect, transport, deposit  
5. Grey alternative BCA 
i. Tiggeloven et al., 
2020 [Global] 
Benefits  
Flood risk reduction  
i = 5%, T=80 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 18 
 
 
3.4 Step 4: Identify and value the benefits 
Once the BCA has been sufficiently scoped, and appropriate timelines and discount rates identified, the 
benefits should be identified and valued. Note Steps 4 and 5 (identifying and valuing costs) can occur in 
any order, or simultaneously. To identify and value benefits, the following subsets should be undertaken: 
a) identify the range of potential benefits; 
b) understand and value the risk reduction benefits; and 
c) value other benefits. 
Step 4a: Identify the range of potential benefits 
In the context of improving a community’s resilience to climate change, the primary goal of most NBCS is 
the reduction or mitigation of risk. However, natural features provide a wide array of benefits beyond risk 
reduction or mitigation. These benefits are typically referred to as ecosystem services, which are 
commonly defined as the benefits people obtain from nature. It is important to consider the range of 
potential benefits that could arise from the NBCS being considered. Table 3 provides a summary of 
common ecosystem service outcomes associated with NBCS. The analyst should start this step by 
identifying the full range of service benefits, including risk reduction, that may result from the NBCS under 
consideration. 
Table 3. Summary of ecosystem service outcomes associated with NBCS  
Service theme 
Ecosystem service benefits 
Water quantity 
Reduced or avoided surface runoff and associated erosion 
Improved surface water storage 
Increased groundwater recharge and storage 
Improved flood protection and mitigation (inland) 
Improved flood protection and mitigation (coastal) 
Water quality 
Improved surface or ground water quality 
Carbon 
Improved carbon sequestration 
Biodiversity 
Improved or increased terrestrial habitat availability and quality 
Improved aquatic habitat availability and quality 
Improved support for local pollinators 
Socio‐economic 
Improved air quality 
Enhanced microclimate regulation 
Increased recreation or tourism opportunities 
Increased physical and mental well‐being 
Increased property or land value 
Step 4b: Understand and value risk reduction benefits 
NBCS can provide significant risk reduction benefits that contribute to the resilience and sustainability of 
communities and ecosystems. For instance, beach nourishment, oyster reef restoration and wetland 
restoration can play roles in the reduction of coastal flooding and erosion. These features provide natural 
flood protection by absorbing and retaining water, reducing the potential for stormwater runoff and 
subsequent flooding, functioning as buffers against coastal erosion and storm surges and safeguarding 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 19 
 
coastal communities and infrastructure. Since hazard and risk reduction is commonly the primary issue 
being addressed through a NBCS, it can be useful to consider these benefits separately from the other 
benefits. In addition, these benefits have an extra layer of complexity in that they require an 
understanding of the degree to which risks will be mitigated through the implementation of the project. 
Ultimately, to value the reduction in risk associated with a particular project, it is necessary to first 
understand the current level of risk and how that risk will change after the implementation of the project. 
It may also be useful to explore how each of the defined scenarios (e.g. do nothing, consider options) 
might be impacted by climate change. For instance, how does the community’s risk exposure change over 
time, and to what degree do the options being considered mitigate those changing risks?   
Depending on the complexity of the project, a separate hazard and risk assessment might be required to 
establish this understanding. A hazard and risk assessment will help establish what the current baseline 
risk exposure is from a given hazard. This type of assessment can also explore how hazard and risk 
exposure will change as a result of the project being considered. Such a risk assessment could use 
hydrologic modelling and mapping techniques to define the degree of flood risk currently being faced, 
how that risk might change over time as a result of climate change and/or the implementation of NBCS. 
Providing detailed guidance on how to conduct a hazard and risk assessment is outside the scope of this 
document. If such an assessment is deemed necessary, a subject matter expert should be engaged.  
The Rivière-à-la-Truite watershed case study, written by Paradis-Léger et al. (2022), provides an excellent 
example of hazard and risk assessment. Recent catastrophic spring flooding in the Rivière-à-la-Truite 
watershed has generated significant economic and environmental challenges for communities within the 
watershed. Following the identification of the resources and land uses in and around the Rivière-à-la-
Truite watershed, flood risk modelling was used to demonstrate that for 20- and 100-year flood events 
the flooded areas will total 0.6 km2 and 0.8 km2, representing 1.1 million m3 and 1.4 million m3 of water 
volume, respectively. In addition, three out of six bridges in the flooded area lacked the hydraulic strength 
to resist the flood volumes. Nearly 30% of the population of people over 65, are thought to be at a higher 
risk. More significantly, the existence of nearby wastewater treatment facilities and a lagoon on the flood 
plain increases the potential of downstream water pollution. 
Once the reduction in risk is understood and/or quantified, the monetary value of that risk reduction 
should be established. There are several methodologies that may be used to quantify risk reduction 
values. Common approaches include contingent valuation, choice experiment, hedonic pricing, 
replacement cost and avoided damage cost. Ultimately, each of these methods are attempting to place a 
value on the change in risk exposure to a given community. Each method approaches the value of this risk 
reduction slightly differently. Table 4 summarizes the methods and describes how value can be attributed 
to risk reduction. It should be noted that the first three methods (contingent valuation, choice 
experiments and hedonic pricing) require very specific data inputs gathered through a carefully designed 
survey (in the case of contingent valuation and choice experiments) or through a carefully constructed 
dataset of property values (in the case of hedonic pricing). These methods fall under a Tier 3 level of effort 
(see section 3.2).  As such, it is anticipated that these approaches are outside available capacity, and likely 
impractical, for many NBCS projects. However, understanding how these approaches establish value can 
be helpful in building a benefit argument. In the context of a Tier 1 level of effort, value transfer, described 
in detail below, can be used. 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 20 
 
Table 4. Summary of approaches to measure risk reduction benefits associated with NBCS  
Valuation 
method 
Approach to valuing risk reduction 
Examples 
Contingent 
valuation 
Estimates the value of risk reduction by asking residents how 
much they would be willing to pay to reduce their risk 
exposure (e.g. reduce the risk of flooding by 25%) 
He et al., 2016 [Quebec 
study] 
 
Mingle, 2017 [Manitoba 
study] 
Choice 
experiment 
This approach is similar to contingent valuation. However, 
instead of directly asking residents what their willingness to 
pay for risk reduction is, they are asked to choose between 
competing options (e.g. to choose their preferred option). 
Each choice is associated with a specific cost and risk 
reduction along with other attributes deemed important for 
each option. 
He et al., 2016 [Quebec 
study] 
 
Ureta et al., 2021 [US study] 
Hedonic pricing 
This approach estimates the value of risk reduction by 
examining the difference in property values between 
properties that are located within flood prone areas and 
those outside of flood prone areas. 
Abdelhalim, 2020 [Quebec 
study] 
 
Bélanger et al., 2018 
[Quebec study] 
Replacement 
cost 
This approach is most appropriate for contexts where the loss 
of an existing natural feature that is actively providing risk 
reduction benefits can be avoided. The natural feature (e.g. 
wetland) can be valued based on what it would cost to 
replace the risk reduction services through an engineered 
alternative. 
Riverview, NB (Example box 
below) 
Avoided cost 
This approach requires a detailed hazard and risk assessment 
that documents which specific assets or damage costs are 
impacted by the given hazard and how those change as a 
result of the project. For instance, if the project will reduce 
flood risk and the hazard and risk assessment has determined 
the properties or other assets that will now be exposed to 
less flooding resulting in less property damage. These avoided 
damage costs are an estimation of the value of risk reduction. 
Acadian Peninsula, NB 
(Example box below) 
 
Replacement cost example – Riverview, NB 
The Town of Riverview, in collaboration with the Municipal Natural Asset Initiative, conducted a study 
to assess and inventory the condition of natural assets. The replacement cost approach was used to 
investigate the ecosystem service benefits of existing wetland (MNAI, 2020). The costs of completely 
replacing the total storage capacity of the existing wetlands using stormwater management ponds or 
constructed wetlands were established as the benefits of preserving the existing natural wetland, 
estimated under different development and climate assumptions. 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 21 
 
 
For a Tier 1 level of effort, estimating the risk reduction benefits using methods described in Table 4 will 
not be feasible. Tier 1 level of effort is commensurate with value transfer approaches. Value transfer 
approaches make use of quantitative ecosystem service estimates from existing studies and ‘transfer’ 
them to the local context. There are several ways these values can be transferred. The simplest approach 
is to estimate or establish an average unit value from the source study and apply that to the project site. 
Average values from a comprehensive literature review on the provision of ecosystem service benefits 
from NBCS are provided in Tables 5 and 6. Details on these values are contained in an accompanying 
database. The database allows users to customize value estimates from studies deemed most relevant to 
their context. 2  
Table 5 focuses on values related to risk reduction and provides average values for flood and erosion 
control benefits. These values may be useful in the absence of a site-specific hazard and risk assessment. 
Note that the values presented in Table 5 capture a combination of key risk reduction ecosystem service 
benefits described in Table 4: 
● reduced/avoided surface runoff and associated erosion; 
● improved flood protection and mitigation (inland); and  
● improved flood protection and mitigation (coastal). 
 
2 It should be noted that the information in the database provides point it time estimates of various cost and benefits. Values 
and prices fluctuate over time so users should be aware of this potential limitation when choosing a value. While such 
limitations cannot be avoided without doing your own detailed calculations, the database can be useful in providing a starting 
point for your assessment. 
Avoided cost example – Acadian Peninsula, NB  
The Acadian Peninsula dune restoration project, which Green Analytics was involved with, used an 
avoided damage method to estimate the potential benefits from NBCS adoption. This project involved 
using a BCA study in three communities on the Acadian Peninsula, aiming to reduce the danger of 
coastal erosion and floods. These communities are 1) Le Goulet, 2) Sainte-Marie-Saint-Raphaël, Cap 
Bateau, Pigeon Hill and 3) Shippagan and Pointe-Brûlée.  Avoided erosion damages was chosen as the 
indicator to determine the benefits of reduced erosion from GI adoption. It was calculated by 
estimating the percentage of land lost and multiplying by the assessed property value. To assess the 
potential benefits of reduced flooding, the avoided flood damages was calculated using the following 
equation:  
𝐸𝐴𝐷= ∑𝐷𝑖× 𝑃𝑖 
 
 
 
 
where 𝐸𝐴𝐷 = expected annual damage costs 
 
 
 
 
 
𝐷𝑖   = damage costs for event i 
 
 
 
 
 
𝑃𝑖   = probability for event i 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 22 
 
Table 5. Average flooding and erosion control benefits from NBCS (values in 2022 $C) 
Types of NBCS 
Flooding and erosion control related benefits  
1. Beach nourishment  
$40,468/ha/year 
2. Oyster reef  
$1,672/ha/year 
3. Wetland and salt marshes  
$3,737/ha/year 
4. Seagrass restoration  
$225/ha/year 
5. Naturalized stormwater management  
$3,628/ha/year 
 
Step 4c: Value other benefits 
In addition to estimating the value of reduced risks, it is necessary to establish estimates of the value of 
other services provided by the NBCS under consideration (e.g. those identified in Step 4a). There are a 
number of ways to establish such estimates. For instance, door-to-door surveys and stated preference 
approaches were used to quantify the possible environmental and social impacts of NBCS for the Acadian 
Peninsula dune restoration projects. To gauge survey participants' willingness to pay to remain in their 
existing communities, the contingent valuation approach was used. Choice experiment approaches were 
chosen to investigate survey participants’ preferences on protection trade-offs, recreational 
opportunities, natural coastal habitat, ocean views and increases in property taxes.  
Value transfer approaches can also be employed. Average benefit values from NBCS obtained from 
existing literature are summarized in Table 6. Within the five major categories of living shoreline NBCS 
being investigated, wetland and salt marshes and stormwater management demonstrate the highest and 
most diverse ecosystem service values, based on available information. 
Once the anticipated benefits have been identified (Step 4a), the average values presented in Table 6 can 
be used to approximate benefit values. The database that accompanies this report can also be used to 
identify studies and values of relevance to the project under consideration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 23 
 
Table 6. Average ecosystem service benefits from NBCS, (values in 2022 $ C) 
Other benefits (in 
2022 $C) 
Beach 
nourishment 
related 
Oyster reef 
related 
Wetland and 
salt marshes 
related 
Seagrass 
restoration 
related 
Stormwater 
management 
related 
Primary benefits (linked to services from Table 3) 
Improved water 
storage and recharge 
‐ 
‐ 
$3,407/ha/yr 
‐ 
$868/ha/yr 
Improved surface or 
ground water quality 
‐ 
$6,294/ha/yr 
$4,063/ha/yr 
$1,000/ha/yr 
$548/ha/yr 
Improved carbon 
sequestration 
‐ 
‐ 
$170/ha/yr 
$143/ha/yr 
$3,035/ha/yr 
Improved aquatic 
habitat availability and 
quality 
‐ 
‐ 
$1,802/ha/yr 
$33,225/ha/yr 
‐ 
Improved air quality 
‐ 
‐ 
$3,685/ha/yr 
‐ 
‐ 
Increased recreation 
and tourism 
opportunities 
$14,408/ha/yr 
$1,517,538/ha/
yr 
$3,244/ha/yr 
$87/ha/yr 
$38,489/ha/yr 
Other potentially relevant benefits from the literature 
Education, research 
and cultural value 
‐ 
‐ 
$2,351/ha/yr 
$0.65/ha/yr 
$226/ha/yr 
Aesthetic information 
‐ 
‐ 
‐ 
‐ 
$209/ha/yr 
Soil fertility 
‐ 
‐ 
‐ 
$126,464/ha/yr 
‐ 
Existence and bequest 
value 
‐ 
$1,942/ha/yr 
$46/ha/yr 
‐ 
$5,690/ha/yr 
Moderation of 
extreme event 
‐ 
‐ 
‐ 
‐ 
$5,050/ha/yr 
Fishery and food value 
‐ 
‐ 
$3,876/ha/yr 
$508/ha/yr 
 
 
3.5 Step 5: Identify and value the costs 
As summarized by van Zanten et al. (2023), there are generally five types of costs associated with NBCS. 
These are described below and summarized in Table 7. 
1. Capital costs (CAPEX) are the up-front payments required to construct the NBCS. Before a 
construction project begins, there are normally expenses related to project design, as well as costs 
for building permits. If land needs to be purchased before construction, there will also be land 
acquisition expenses. Other capital expenditures include community resettlement costs and site 
preparation costs. Once the land is ready for construction, there will be construction costs 
(material, labour and equipment cost) and vegetation purchasing and planting costs.  
2. Operation and maintenance costs (OPEX) are costs incurred throughout the lifecycle of the NBCS. 
For instance, monitoring and maintenance activities need to take place to make sure the restored 
areas are doing what they were designed to do. Other operating expenses include tree and 
vegetation maintenance, invasive species removal and land use and land protection cost.  
3. Transaction costs are defined as the “time, effort, and resources needed to search out, initiate, 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 24 
 
negotiate and complete a deal [for land conservation or restoration]” (Lile et al., 1998). In the case 
of NBCS, transaction costs may include the time and money spent engaging and negotiating with 
landowners, stakeholder and government (Gray et al., 2019; van Zanten et al., 2023; Deely et al., 
2020). 
4. Opportunity costs are defined as the forgone benefits of not using the land for the second-best 
alternative use. For example, if the land is being restored as wetland instead of being used for 
crop and livestock farming, then benefits, including monetary gains from the sales of agricultural 
products, that are forfeited because of the construction of the NBCS are considered opportunity 
costs.    
5. Disservices are costs that are incurred when the constructed NBCS results in negative externalities 
(Toledo-Gallegos et al., 2022; Thapa et al., 2023; van Zanten et al., 2023). For example, a restored 
wetland or constructed stormwater pond might cause unintended consequences to the 
neighbouring communities, such as a higher number of mosquitos during summertime, induced 
noise or air pollution and increased traffic congestion during the construction phase. Other 
common ecosystem disservices include encroachment of dangerous or unpleasant animals such 
as snakes or rodents (Thapa et al., 2023), increased damages to crops by tree-dwelling birds 
(Thapa et al., 2023) and potentially higher levels of pests including spiders, cockroaches and ants 
(Toledo-Gallegos et al., 2022).  
 Table 7. NBCS cost types (van Zanten et al., 2023) 
CAPEX 
OPEX 
Transaction Costs 
Opportunity Costa 
Disservices 
Design and planning 
Securing permits  
Land acquisition  
Community 
resettlement  
Site preparation  
Construction  
Time planting 
Monitoring labour 
and Technology 
Tree and vegetation 
maintenance 
Invasive species 
removal 
Land use (e.g. rent 
or other payments 
to landowners) 
Land protection, 
including managing 
and controlling 
access 
Scoping studies and 
other technical 
assistance  
Community 
engagement / 
stakeholder 
outreach  
Goal setting and 
prioritization  
 
Value of using land 
for other purposes 
such as agriculture 
or residential / 
commercial 
development  
Opportunity cost of 
local labor and 
material used for 
implementing the 
NBCS project  
 
Negative impacts 
from NBCS (e.g. 
mosquitoes, pests)  
 
a. Avoid double counting between opportunity cost and CAPEX/OPEX cost components. For example, do not include land 
acquisition costs in CAPEX and the opportunity cost of land.  
Cost estimates should reflect the specific project and local conditions. It may be useful to engage with 
experts to obtain cost estimates. For example, local engineers were able to help estimate the 
implementation costs for the Acadian Peninsula restoration project, including supplies, transportation, 
construction, engineering and unforeseen expenditures. Drawing cost estimates from comparable 
projects carried out in places with comparable characteristics and risk conditions may also be useful.  
 
 
 
 
PAGE 25 
 
Accompanying this report, a database of cost values provides average costs for NBCS. The living shoreline 
costs database was constructed based on information found in existing literature, from information 
gathered through a series of interviews and data from a previously established NBCS cost database 
(Bayraktarov, E. et al., 2020).3 CAPEX and OPEX Costs are summarized in Table 8.  
Table 8. CAPEX and OPEX of living shoreline NBCS, obtained from literature. Values in 2022 $C 
Category of living shoreline NBCS 
Unit Cost (in 2022 $C) 
Beach nourishment and sand dune  
CAPEX: $0.39 ‐ $193/m3 
Average CAPEX: $23/m3 
Oyster reef  
CAPEX: $ 1,352.7 ‐ $2,883,267/ha 
Average CAPEX:  $379,120/ha 
OPEX*: $788/m/year 
Seagrass restoration and seagrass meadow 
CAPEX: $2298.44 ‐$8,031,325/ha 
Average CAPEX:  $606,296/ha 
OPEX*: $250/m/year 
Wetland and salt marshes 
CAPEX: $518.47 ‐ $7,359,347/ha 
Average CAPEX: $680,514/ha 
OPEX*: $3673/ha/year 
Stormwater management 
CAPX: $1.48 ‐ $324/m3 of runoff reduction 
Average CAPEX:  $42/m3 of runoff reduction 
* Limited OPEX data was identified 
 
 
 
3 It should be noted that the information in the database provides point it time estimates of various cost and benefits. Values 
and prices fluctuate over time so users should be aware of this potential limitation when choosing a value. While such 
limitations cannot be avoided without doing your own detailed calculations, the database can be useful in providing a starting 
point for your assessment. 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 26 
 
 
Stormwater management cost example – Sackville, NB 
The Lorne Street stormwater mitigation project implemented in the Town of Sackville provides an 
interesting reference for the costs of a larger stormwater management system using a hybrid of grey 
infrastructure with a NBCS. Lorne Street and the nearby neighborhoods are susceptible to catastrophic 
floods due to their location, rising seas and increasing rainfall events, with four severe flooding events 
happening in the past ten years. The situation has been made worse by stormwater infrastructure that is 
insufficient, congested and partially obstructed. To alleviate the situation, the Lorne Street stormwater 
mitigation project was put in place between Lorne Street and the Tantramar River.  
This project was carried out in three phases. Phase I involved completely reconstructing Lorne and Saint 
James streets to update the aging and deteriorating infrastructure, including sewage lines, storm drainage 
systems, sidewalks, curbs and ditches. The capital cost associated with Phase I was $5.5 million. Funding 
for this project came from all levels of government (27% from municipal sources, 24% from provincial 
sources and 49% from federal sources). These costs were primarily associated with upgrading the existing 
grey infrastructure.  
In phase II, the Lorne Street retention pond and Ducks Unlimited compound were enhanced to retain the 
water during the high tide and allow the water to discharge. In addition, the existing ditch was upgraded 
(including enlargement and re-alignment) to allow for stormwater to drain from the Lorne Street area to 
the Tantramar River. A new 1,200mm and 900mm diameter stacked aboiteau structure with flap gate was 
also built to replace the existing wooden aboiteau. To route the stormwater flows through the upgraded 
ditches to the aboiteau, the existing roadway crossings were upgraded and, in some cases, new crossings 
were built. Phase II of the project was completed in 2019, with a total cost of $2.9 million (25% coming 
from provincial and municipal governments and 50% from the federal government).  
The project is in its third phase, which involves the construction of additional retention ponds and 
recreational walking trails. With the recently granted $2.4 million provincial funding, a new aboiteau will 
be built in the Sackville industrial park to reduce tidal water flooding and transfer freshwater from 
retention ponds to the Tantramar River. To transport stormwater to the aboiteau, a sizable retention pond 
with culverts, pipelines and ditches will be built behind the community gardens on Charles Street. A 
retention pond has also been established in the old Sackville quarry to manage runoff that runs towards 
Lorne Street. Additionally, new retention ponds will have walking paths built around them. Phase III of the 
project is estimated to cost approximately $5.5 million (40% from federal funding, 33% from provincial 
funding and 27% from municipal funding).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 27 
 
3.6 Step 6: Compare costs and benefits  
Once the costs and benefits have been estimated, the next step is to compare them. This is done by 
mapping the cost and benefits over the lifespan of the project. It is important to consider the timing of 
benefits and costs. For instance, capital costs are likely to be incurred upfront, while operation and 
maintenance costs will be spread out over time. It will be necessary to think critically about the timing of 
the anticipated benefits. The annual service benefits from Table 4 are not likely to begin immediately after 
the project has been completed. In some cases, it may take several years to fully realize the annual service 
values. This can be addressed by making an assumption about the length of time it will take for the project 
to reach maturity and exploring how those benefits can be phased in over time. Figure 7 demonstrates 
different assumptions about how to phase annual ecosystem service benefits over time assuming that full 
ecosystem service flows are reached at year 20. The all-or-nothing assumption is the most conservative 
and will result in the lowest estimate of benefits.  The straight-line assumption is the least conservative 
and will results in the largest benefit estimates.  
 
Figure 7. Sample approaches to phase in benefit values over time  
If the benefit outcomes have been monetized, then a net present value (NPV) (e.g. present value of 
benefits minus present value of cost) can be determined. The net present value equation can be 
summarized as follows: 
𝑁𝑃𝑉= ∑𝐵𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑡
(1 + 𝑖)𝑡
𝑇
𝑡=1
−∑𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑡
(1 + 𝑖)𝑡
𝑇
𝑡=1
 
 
 
 
 
     where T = number of years  
 
 
 
 
                  i  = discount rate 
The best way to operationalize this formula is to map out the anticipated benefits and costs for each time 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Assumed % of Ecosystem Service Annual Value 
Flow
Time Period
Straight-line
Step-wise
All-or-nothing
 
 
 
 
PAGE 28 
 
period over the established timeframe. The benefits and costs for each time period can then be summed. 
The total benefit and cost in each time period can then be discounted based on the chosen discount rate 
(i) and the number of years (T) into the future that period is. Once the discounted benefits and costs for 
each time period have been estimated, estimating the NPV is a matter of summing the discounted benefits 
and subtracting the sum of the discounted costs. Projects with a positive NPV are those where the benefits 
outweigh the costs. If multiple project options have been assessed, the project that generates the greatest 
NPV is the one with the strongest business case. Alternatively, a benefit-cost ratio (BCR) can be estimated 
where the present value of benefits is divided by the present value of costs.  
𝐵𝐶𝑅=
∑
𝐵𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑡
(1 + 𝑖)𝑡
𝑇
𝑡=1
∑
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑡
(1 + 𝑖)𝑡
𝑇
𝑡=1
 
                           Where T = number of years  
 
 
 
 
                          i  = discount rate 
Using this approach, any project with a BCR greater than one indicates a project where benefits outweigh 
the costs.  The option with the largest ratio is the one with the strongest business case.  
There are many available resources that provide detailed guidance on how to conduct BCA. This document 
provides a general overview of the key components from the context of a NBCS project. For a more 
comprehensive treatment of these methods, see the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat’s Cost-Benefit 
Analysis Guide, which provides detailed guidance on how to analyze costs and benefits of proposed 
regulations (Canada’s Cost-Benefit Analysis Guide for Regulatory Proposals - Canada.ca). Other useful 
references include Pearce et al., (2006), Hanley et al., (2009) and Nas (2016). 
 
3.7 Step 7: Conduct sensitivity analysis 
This step is about testing key assumptions to assess the degree to which they influence the final BCA 
outcome. It is useful to test the impact of changing the assumptions that are associated with the lowest 
confidence. Common examples of variables to test in a sensitivity analysis include: 
● Benefit assumptions: 
o Was value transfer used? If an average value was employed, analysts might want to 
explore using a minimum value and a maximum value. If a single source of information 
was used, it may be informative to lower and raise the value by some % (e.g. 20% or 30%) 
to account for any uncertainty related to the transferred value.  
o How were the ecosystem service benefits assessed over time?  
▪ 
Consider extending or shortening the assumption of how long it takes ecosystem 
services to reach their full potential value. 
▪ 
Consider using an alternate assumption on phasing in the ecosystem service 
benefits. It could be useful to use the step-wise assumption as the main 
assumption and use the other two as the sensitivity analysis (e.g. the all-or-
nothing assumption as a minimum or lower bound and the straight-line 
assumption as a maximum or upper bound). 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 29 
 
● Cost assumptions: 
o Were cost assumptions established using detailed project specifications? If so, it may only 
be necessary to test minor variations (+/- 5% or 10%). If value transfer was used it will be 
important to test other assumptions. Consider establishing a minimum (e.g. the lowest 
reasonable cost anticipated) and a maximum (e.g. the largest reasonable cost 
anticipated). 
● Other assumptions: 
o Consider exploring alternative discount rates. 
o Consider exploring how the timing of certain benefits and costs might influence the 
overall business case. 
 
3.8 Step 8: Consider other non-monetary benefits 
The final step is to acknowledge other benefits that cannot be monetized and incorporated into the cost 
benefit analysis. Many benefits of NBCS can be challenging to monetize. For instance, certain biodiversity 
benefits or the sense of improved community safety and well-being that is generated from a project can 
be challenging to value. For some benefits, applying a monetary estimate may be inappropriate. For 
instance, it may not be appropriate to place a dollar value on certain Indigenous and cultural values. 
Other benefits should be described qualitatively by identifying the various groups or individuals receiving 
the benefits. In some cases, it may be possible to quantify (but not monetize) other non-monetary 
benefits. For instance, analysts might be able to demonstrate anticipated improvements in biodiversity 
such as: 
● area of new species at risk habitat; 
● increased connectivity to other natural areas; or 
● restored areas of endangered or sensitive ecosystems.  
At a minimum, analysts will want to list and describe these benefits.  
One of the major limitations of BCA is that anything not measured in dollar values tends to get ignored. 
This often results in decisions being made based on a false sense of what the net benefits or costs are. 
Therefore, it is essential to acknowledge the full range of non-monetary benefits in the BCA conclusions. 
In cases where the costs slightly outweigh the benefits, and a host of benefits have been identified but 
not quantified, analysts might conclude or recommend that despite the results of the BCA, the total 
benefits outweigh the costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 30 
 
4 Benefit-cost analysis illustrative example 
This section presents an example of a benefit-cost analysis to demonstrate how the framework presented 
in the sections above can be applied to a NBCS. For this illustrative example, assume there is a New 
Brunswick community located in the lower portions of a watershed. The community was built within the 
flood plain of the river system. The forested area in the upper portions of the watershed is regularly 
harvested and other portions of the watershed have been cleared for agricultural production. As a result 
of historical land use developments combined with increasing rainfall from a changing climate, the 
community is experiencing increased flood risk in the lower portion of the watershed.  
In the upper half of the watershed there is a strategic area that has been identified for enhancing and 
enlarging existing wetlands, as well as creating new wetlands that would restore natural features and 
functions to rural areas. The restoration of existing wetlands and creation of new wetlands can 
significantly mitigate storm and flood waters that flow from the upper watershed down through urbanized 
areas.  
Beginning with Step 1, in the sub-sections below the BCA framework is applied to the example described 
above.  
Step 1: Scope the NBCS 
As noted in Section 3.1, this step is about establishing the key context and project specifics that will help 
inform the assessment of costs and benefits. 
For this illustrative example, the following information has been determined through an initial scoping 
and planning exercise. 
1. What is the issue or hazard to be addressed?  
The primary goal of the project is to reduce downstream flood risk to residential and commercial 
properties. Land use throughout the watershed combined with increasing intense rainfalls is resulting in 
increased flood risk and flood damages. The increased flood risk and damages are anticipated to continue 
to worsen over the next 30 to 50 years as a result of changing climate conditions.  
2. How is the issue or hazard influenced by the local conditions?  
Clearing of forest land and the loss of wetlands within the watershed has limited the watershed’s ability 
to capture, store and slowly release stormwater. 
3. What are the grey infrastructure options that could be used to address the issue?  
The increased flood risk could be dealt with using traditional flood control infrastructure. Specifically, a 
4.5 hectare stone revetment could be built to provide similar flood reduction benefits. 
4. Are there green infrastructure alternatives? If so, is it feasible for these alternatives to completely 
replace the grey infrastructure option or should a hybrid option be considered?  
Within the watershed there is the potential to create 110 hectares of unique natural features made up of 
marshy fields and woodlots, as well as create new wetlands that would restore natural features and 
functions. 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 31 
 
Expanding on this information, the use of inland wetlands to manage stormwater is further defined and 
scoped. These details align with establishing a NBCS option: 
• 
The restoration project will create 110 hectares of unique natural features made up of marshy 
fields and woodlots. The watershed drains roughly 3,000 hectares of land, implying the new 
natural features represent approximately 3.7% of the watershed area. 
o The new wetland complex can hold 600,000 m3 of water. By restoring and improving 
historic wetlands, 300 mixed residential and commercial properties would benefit from 
reduced downstream flooding. 
• 
The primary goal of the project is to reduce downstream flood risk to residential and commercial 
properties.  
• 
Secondary goals are to enhance community well-being through the development of recreational 
opportunities and support biodiversity by creating new wildlife habitat that connect to other 
natural areas. 
o A new conservation area with recreational features (e.g. trails, boardwalks, picnic tables, 
etc.) will create opportunities for hiking, birding and cross-country skiing or snowshoeing 
in the winter. 
o The newly created habitat is estimated to provide home to 50 species of breeding birds. 
• 
The project construction will take three to five years to complete. 
An alternative grey-infrastructure solution has been identified as a possible option to address the primary 
issue. 
• 
Assume a 4.5 hectare stone revetment could be built to provide similar flood reduction benefits 
as the nature-based climate solution. 
• 
Secondary benefits (e.g. recreation, water quality or biodiversity) would not exist. 
Step 2: Determine the level of effort required 
At this stage, some initial planning and scoping has been completed, which has provided a rough sense of 
some options to be considered and established some anticipated outcomes.  
Before a project of this magnitude is undertaken, more detailed hydrologic modelling will likely be needed 
to confirm and verify the assumptions. However, at this stage an initial BCA is needed to help build the 
economic case for the project and develop support for exploring the project in more detail. Therefore, a 
Tier 1 assessment has been identified as an appropriate first step. 
Step 3: Select the timeframe and discount rate 
For the illustrative example, the discount rate is set to 3% and the assumed planning timeframe is 50 
years.   
Step 4: Identify and value the benefits  
For the illustrative example, benefits are estimated based on values from the Green infrastructure benefits 
and costs database that accompanies this report. All values are in 2022 Canadian dollars and are assumed 
to incur annually.  
The following steps are used when selecting benefits values from the database: 
1) 
Go to the living shoreline benefit sheet in the database to search the benefit values. 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 32 
 
2) 
Look for the GI column and use a filter to select the appropriate type of green infrastructure that 
will be used. Wetland and salt marsh should be chosen for this illustrative example. 
3) 
Pick the relevant ecological service categories in the ecosystem type column. For instance, 
ecosystems such as carbon sequestration and flood reduction were chosen in this scenario. 
4) 
From the list that is generated, select the most aligned benefit value from the 
benefits_2022_CAD$ column. The 2022-dollar values were used instead of the original value 
amount. 
5) 
If avoided grey infrastructure cost is also regarded as a benefit, go to the grey alternative cost 
sheet. 
6) 
Select the appropriate grey infrastructure type from the type of grey infrastructure column. Use 
a filter and select a value that most closely aligns with the situation.  
The database calculations show that the project is anticipated to create the following five benefits: 
• 
Reduced flood risk  
o $313/ha/year, a total of $34,430 per year for a 110-hectare of area.  
o Source: Saskatchewan Smith Creek Drainage Basin flood reduction value (Pattison-
Williams et al., 2018). 
o Assume there is no flood reduction benefits for the first five years, which corresponds to 
the completion of the wetland restoration project. 
• 
Increased recreational opportunity 
o $491/ha/year, a total of $54,010 per year for a 110-hectare of area.  
o Source: Ontario Walpole Island Marsh recreational fishing value (Elliot & Mulamoottil, 
1992). 
o Assume there is no recreational benefits for the first 10 years, which allows for five years 
of growth after the completion of the wetland restoration project. 
• 
Increased carbon sequestration 
o $38/ha/year, a total of $4180 per year for a 110-hectare of area.  
o Source: carbon sequestration value from estuarine and coastal ecosystem services in 
United States  (Barbier et al., 2011). 
o Assume there is no carbon benefits for the first 10 years, which allows for five years of 
growth after the completion of the wetland restoration project. 
• 
Improved water quality 
o $7,449/ha/year, a total of $819,390 per year for a 110-hectare of area. 
o Source: United States New Jersey, water purification values from salt marsh restoration 
(Adams & Benosky, 1998). 
o Assume there is no water quality benefits for the first 10 years, which allows for five years 
of growth after the completion of the wetland restoration project. 
• 
Increased biodiversity protection 
o Coastal biodiversity protection value of $10,185 /ha/year, a total of $1,120,350 per year 
for a 110-hectare of area. 
o Source: Coastal protection from estuarine and coastal ecosystem services (Elliot & 
Mulamoottil, 1992).  
o Assume there is no biodiversity benefits for the first 10 years, which allows for five years 
of growth after the completion of the wetland restoration project. 
In addition, there is an economic benefit from avoiding the construction of the grey alternative. The 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 33 
 
alternative to investing in the NBCS is conventional grey flood attenuation infrastructure capital 
investment. This conventional engineering solution providing built infrastructure with similar flood 
mitigation benefits is estimated to cost approximately $3.2 million. 
• 
The cost of the stone revetment is $700,290/ha, which corresponds to a total cost of 
approximately $3.2 million. 
o Source: United States Virginia Assateague Bay Stone Revetment (Abt Associates, 2019). 
• 
We further assume that the stone revetment, if constructed, will be completed within five  years, 
and the majority of the costs would be incurred in the beginning of the construction. The annual 
cost of construction follows pattern as follow: 50%, 25%, 15%, 5%, and 5% of the total cost. 
Therefore, the annual construction costs are $1,600,000, $800,000, $480,000, $160,000 and 
$160,000 for years one to five respectively.  
Step 5: Identify and value the costs 
Like the benefit values used for this illustrative example, the cost values are also obtained from the Green 
Infrastructure benefits and costs database that accompanies this report.  Similar steps are followed when 
selecting cost values from the database: 
1. Go to the living shoreline cost sheet in the database to search for the cost values. 
2. Look for the GI (Green infrastructure) column, select the appropriate type of green infrastructure 
that will be used as a filter. Wetland and salt marsh was chosen in this instance. 
3. Pick the relevant cost categories in the cost category column. For instance, capital expenditure 
(CAPEX), operational expenditure (OPEX) and opportunity cost were chosen in this scenario. 
4. From the list that is generated, select an appropriate cost value from either the total 
cost_CAD$_2022 column or the unit cost_CAD$_2022 column, depending on which category 
applies. The 2022-dollar values were used instead of the original value amount. 
The project is anticipated to result in the following costs:  
• 
Capital expenditure (CAPEX) 
o Total construction cost of $16,800/ha. 110 hectare of wetland restoration project will 
result in a total cost of $1,848,000.  
▪ 
Source: Ontario Wetland Restoration Scenarios in Lynn River Subwater of Norfolk 
County (Hopkins, 2019). 
o Based on the assumptions, the project is expected to complete within three to five years. 
Conservatively, we make further assumption that most of the capital expenditure would 
be clustered in the first couple of years, and then decline annually.  To be more specific, 
the annual capital expenditure would follow the pattern as follow: 30%, 25%, 20%, 15%, 
and 10% of the total cost. This implies the yearly capital expenditure would be 
approximately $554,430, $462,024, $369,620, $277,215, and $184,810 for year one to 
year five, respectively.  
• 
Operational expenditure (OPEX) 
o Management cost of $4,200/ha/year. 
o Administration cost of $2,100/ha/year. 
o A total of $6300/ha/year, or $693,000 per year for a 110-hectare of area. 
▪ 
Source: Ontario Wetland Restoration Scenarios in Lynn River Subwater of Norfolk 
County (Hopkins, 2019). 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 34 
 
• 
Opportunity Cost  
o Opportunity cost of foregone cropping return of $3,010 - $3,807/ha/year (average = 
$3,409 /ha/year]. Total opportunity cost calculated using the averaging yielding $374,990 
per year for a 110-hectare of area. 
▪ 
Source: Ontario Wetland Restoration Scenarios in Lynn River Subwater of Norfolk 
County (Hopkins, 2019). 
 
Step 6: Compare costs and benefits 
After all the essential information has been determined, the economic effectiveness of the proposed 
project can be evaluated using either NPV or BCR. The costs and benefits of the proposed project can be 
compared by discounting all these values to the present. The present value of costs equals to $24,663,76, 
and the present value of the benefits equals to $38,118,634. NPV and BCR are $13,454,872, and 1.5, 
respectively.  
Inputting all the information determined in step 3 to step 5 into the benefit cost analysis calculator that 
accompanies this report will automatically perform the NPV calculation.  
Step 7: Conduct sensitivity analysis 
To demonstrate how sensitivity analysis could be used, explore the impact of changing assumptions 
related to how soon the benefits are generated by the NBCS. The different assumptions can be 
summarized as follows: 
• 
Baseline: assumptions used for the analysis 
o Assume there are no flood reduction benefits for the first five years. 
o For recreation, carbon, water quality and biodiversity, assume no benefits for the first 10 
years. 
• 
Sensitivity A: more conservative assumptions 
o Assume there are no flood reduction benefits for the first 10 years. 
o For recreation, carbon, water quality and biodiversity, assume no benefits for the first 15 
years. 
o No avoided grey infrastructure included in the benefits. 
• 
Sensitivity B: less conservative assumptions 
o Assume all benefits linearly increase from zero to their full values over the first 10 years. 
Table 9 summarizes the impact to the results of varying the timing of the benefits assumptions. 
Table 9. Summary of ecosystem service outcomes associated with NBCS  
Sensitivity scenario 
Net present value 
Benefit cost ratio 
Baseline 
$13.5 Million 
1.5 
Sensitivity A 
$3.5 Million 
1.1 
Sensitivity B 
$20.8 Million 
1.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 35 
 
Step 8: Consider other non-monetary benefits 
For the final step in this illustrative example, other known non-monetary benefits are documented. In this 
case, it has been assessed that the newly created habitat could provide a home to 50 species of breeding 
birds. This outcome should be acknowledged.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 36 
 
5 Conclusion 
NBCS provide cost-effective, resilient alternatives to some built infrastructure but they are frequently 
overlooked due to lack of information on the value of the services they deliver. In 2021, the International 
Institute for Sustainable Development reported that governments normally default to grey (built) 
infrastructure to meet infrastructure needs for coastal protection, water supply, energy and 
transportation due to lack of understanding of the cost savings and added benefits associated with NBCS 
(Bassi et al., 2021). To help inform decisions in communities in New Brunswick and across the Atlantic 
provinces, this document provides guidance on how to identify, quantify and value the costs and benefits 
provided by NBCS with a particular focus on coastal restoration (e.g. living shorelines) and naturalized 
stormwater management ponds.  
While this document, and the accompanying databases, does not cover all possible outcomes or 
interventions, the overarching approach can be applied to a broad range of contexts and settings. In all 
cases, it will be necessary to factor in local conditions and scale and adjust for time and risk considerations.  
A paramount strength of NBCS is their ability to deliver multiple services. These need to be articulated 
and valued, to the extent practical and feasible, as part of establishing a business case for such 
investments. According to Brill et al (2021), practitioners should focus on the benefit outcomes that are 
most relevant to stakeholders and for which there is the highest likelihood of delivery.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 37 
 
6 References 
Abt Associates. (2019). Case study: Cost-effectiveness of reducing coastal erosion through living 
shorelines in the Hurricane Sandy Coastal Resilience Program. 
Abdelhalim, M. (2020). Estimating flood impact on residential values (housing price): the case of Laval 
(Canada), 1995-2007 (Doctoral dissertation, Université Laval). 
Adams C.S. & Benosky C.P. (1998). 2,400 hectares of salt marsh wetland restoration. Proc Proceedings of 
the 1998 ASCE Wetlands Engineering River Restoration Conference. ASME 
American Rivers, Water Environment Federation, American Society of Landscape Architects, and 
ECONorthwest. (2012). Banking on green: A look at how green infrastructure can save municipalities 
money and provide economic benefits community-wide. American Society of Landscape Architects. 
Barbier, E.B., Hacker, S.D., Kennedy, C., Koch, E.W., Stier, A.C., & Silliman, B.R. (2011). The value of 
estuarine and coastal ecosystem services. Ecological monographs, 81(2), 169-193. 
Bassi, A.M., Bechauf R., Casier L., & Cutler, E. (2021). How Can Investment in Nature Close the 
Infrastructure Gap? International Institute for Sustainable Development. 
Bayraktarov, E., Brisbane, S., Stewart-Sinclair, P. J., Van Herwaarden, A., Stark, K., Hagger, V., Smith, C. 
S., Wilson, K. A., Lovelock, C.E., Gillies, C., Steven, A.D.L., & Saunders, M. I. (2020). Priorities and 
motivations of marine coastal restoration research [Dataset]. Dryad. 
https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.zgmsbcc81 
Bélanger, P., Bourdeau-Brien, M., & Dumestre, M. (2018). The impact of flood zones on residential 
property prices: The case of Canada. Journal of Sustainable Real Estate, 10(1), 135-162. 
Brears, R. C. (2018). From traditional grey infrastructure to blue-green infrastructure. In Blue and Green 
Cities: The Role of Blue-Green Infrastructure in Managing Urban Water Resources. Palgrave Macmillan 
(pp. 1-41). 
Bridges, T. S., King, J. K., Simm, J. D., Beck, M. W., Collins, G., Lodder, Q., & Mohan, R. K. (2021). 
International Guidelines on Natural and Nature‑Based Features for Flood Risk Management. U.S. Army 
Engineer Research and Development Center. 
Brill, G., Shiao, T., Kammeyer, C., Diringer, S., Vigerstol, K., Ofosu-Amaah, N., Matosich, M., Müller-
Zantop, C., Larson, W., & Dekker, T. (2021). Benefit Accounting of Nature-Based Solutions for 
Watersheds: Guide. United Nations CEO Water Mandate and Pacific Institute.  
Callihan, R., Depro, B., Lapidus, D., Sartwell, T., & Viator, C. (2016). Economic analysis of the costs and 
benefits of restoration and enhancement of shellfish habitat and oyster propagation in North Carolina. 
RTI International. 
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME). (2021). Natural Infrastructure Framework: 
Key Concepts, Definitions and Terms. (pp. 52.)  
Canadian infrastructure. (2019). Canadian Infrastructure Report Card 2019: Monitoring the State of 
Canada’s Core Public Infrastrucutre. http://canadianinfrastructure.ca/downloads/canadian-
infrastructure-report-card-2019.pdf 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 38 
 
Coelho, C., Lima, M., & Ferreira, M. (2022). A Cost–Benefit Approach to Discuss Artificial Nourishments 
to Mitigate Coastal Erosion. Journal of Marine Science and Engineering, 10(12), 1906. 
Culwick, C., Bobbins, K., Cartwright, A., Oelofse, G., Mander, M., & Dunsmore, S. (2016). A framework for 
a green infrastructure planning approach in the Gauteng City-Region (Vol. 4). Gauteng City Region 
Observatory (GCRO). 
Deely, J., Hynes, S., Barquín, J., Burgess, D., Finney, G., Silió, A., Álvarez-Martínez, J.M., Bailly, D. & Ballé-
Béganton, J. (2020). Barrier identification framework for the implementation of blue and green 
infrastructures. Land Use Policy, 99, 105108. 
Elliot, L. & Mulamoottil, G. (1992). Agricultural and marsh land uses on Walpole Island: Profit 
Comparisons. Canadian Water Resources Journal, 17(2), 111-119. 
Grabowski, J., Piehler, M. F., & Peterson, C. H. (2011). Assessing the Long Term Economic Value and 
Costs of the Crab Hole and Clam Shoal Oyster Reef Sanctuaries in North Carolina. University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Institute of Marine Sciences. 
Gray, E., Ozment, S., Altamirano, J. C., Feltran-Barbieri, R., & Morales, A. G. (2019). Green-Gray 
Assessment: how to assess the costs and benefits of green infrastructure for water supply systems. World 
Resources Institute. 
Hanley, N., Barbier, E. B., & Barbier, E. (2009). Pricing nature: cost-benefit analysis and environmental 
policy. Edward Elgar Publishing. 
He, J., Dupras, J., & Poder, T.G., (2016). The value of wetlands in Quebec: a comparison between 
contingent valuation and choice experiment, Journal of Environmental Economics and Policy, DOI: 
10.1080/21606544.2016.1199976 
Hopkins, L. (2019). Evaluating the Cost-Effectiveness of Wetland Restoration Scenarios in the Lynn River 
Subwatershed of Norfolk County, Southern Ontario (Doctoral dissertation, University of Guelph). 
Hynes, S., Burger, R., Tudella, J., Norton, D., & Chen, W. (2022). Estimating the costs and benefits of 
protecting a coastal amenity from climate change-related hazards: nature based solutions via oyster reef 
restoration versus grey infrastructure. Ecological Economics, 194, 107349. 
Lile, R. D., Powell, M. R., & Toman, M. (1998). Implementing the Clean Development Mechanism: lessons 
from US private-sector participation in Activities Implemented Jointly. RFF Working Paper Series, 
Resources for the Future. 
Miller, C. (2023). Planning for Longstanding Sustainability: Addressing the Downfalls of Green 
Infrastructure Planning. (Doctoral dissertation, Vancouver Island University). 
Mingle, J. (2017). Economic Analysis of Beneficial Management Practices in Southern Manitoba. 
(Doctoral dissertation, University of Saskatchewan). 
Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI). (2019). Advancing municipal natural asset management 
through financial planning and reporting: Learning from the town of Gibson’s experience. Decision 
making summary. https://mnai.ca/media/2019/07/SP_MNAI_Report2_June2019.pdf 
Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI). (2020). Cohort 2 National Project Final Technical Report: 
Town of Riverview, New Brunswick. https://mnai.ca/media/2020/04/MNAI_Riverview-iD2.pdf 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 39 
 
Nas, T. F. (2016). Cost-benefit analysis: Theory and application. Lexington Books. 
Nelson, E. (2022). Assessing the suitability of living shoreline techniques for coastal erosion in Prince 
Edward Island, Canada. (Thesis, Saint Mary’s University). 
O'Mahony, T. (2021). Cost-Benefit Analysis and the environment: The time horizon is of the essence. 
Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 89, 106587. 
Paradis-Léger, S., Gasser, D., Vidal, L., Fairchild, G., Dhane, F., Lang-Lavoie, A., & Labelle, T. (2022). 
Nature-based strategies for flood risk mitigation in the context of climate change: Rivière-à-la-Truite 
Watershed Case Study.  
Pattison-Williams, J.K., Pomeroy, J.W., Badiou, P., & Gabor, S. (2018). Wetlands, flood control and 
ecosystem services in the Smith Creek Drainage Basin: A case study in Saskatchewan, Canada. Ecological 
economics, 147,36-47. 
Pearce, D., Atkinson, G., & Mourato, S. (2006). Cost-benefit analysis and the environment: recent 
developments. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and development. 
Peel Climate Change Partnership. (2021) Best Practices and Strategies for Urban Forest in a Climate 
Change Context, Peel Region Urban Forest Best Practice Guide. Peel Region. 
Reguero, B. G., Beck, M. W., Bresch, D. N., Calil, J., & Meliane, I. (2018). Comparing the cost 
effectiveness of nature-based and coastal adaptation: A case study from the Gulf Coast of the United 
States. PloS one, 13(4), e0192132. 
Rogers, A. A., Burton, M. P., Statton, J., Fraser, M. W., Kendrick, G., Sinclair, E., Gorman, D., Vanderklift, 
M., Verduin, J., & McLeod, I. M. (2019). Benefits and costs of alternate seagrass restoration approaches. 
Report to the National Environmental Science Programme, Marine Biodiversity Hub, 43. 
Stewart‐Sinclair, P. J., Klein, C. J., Bateman, I. J., & Lovelock, C. E. (2021). Spatial cost–benefit analysis of 
blue restoration and factors driving net benefits globally. Conservation Biology, 35(6), 1850-1860. 
Tiggeloven, T., de Moel, H., Winsemius, H. C., Eilander, D., Erkens, G., Gebremedhin, E., Diaz Loaiza, A., 
Kuzma, S., Luo, T., Iceland, C., Bouwman, A., van Huijstee, J., Ligtvoet, W., & Ward, P. J (2020). Global-
scale benefit–cost analysis of coastal flood adaptation to different flood risk drivers using structural 
measures. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 20(4), 1025-1044. 
Thapa, P., Torralba, M., Bhaskar, D., Nagendra, H., & Plieninger, T. (2023). Green in grey: ecosystem 
services and disservices perceptions from small-scale green infrastructure along a rural-urban gradient 
in Bengaluru, India. Ecosystems and People, 19(1), 2223307. 
Toledo-Gallegos, V. M., My, N. H., Tuan, T. H., & Börger, T. (2022). Valuing ecosystem services and 
disservices of blue/green infrastructure. Evidence from a choice experiment in Vietnam. Economic 
Analysis and Policy, 75, 114-128. 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). (2014). Enhancing sustainable communities 
with green infrastructure. https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-08/documents/green-
infrastructure.pdf 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). (2007). Reducing Stormwater Costs through 
Low Impact Development (LID) Strategies and Practices. https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-
 
 
 
 
PAGE 40 
 
10/documents/2008_01_02_nps_lid_costs07uments_reducingstormwatercosts-2.pdf 
van Zanten, B., Goizueta G.G., Brander, L., Reguero, B. G., Griffin, R., Macleod, K.K., Alves, A., Midgley, 
A., Herrera, L. D., & Jongman, B. (2023). Assessing the Benefits and Costs of Nature-Based Solutions for 
Climate Resilience: A Guideline for Project Developers. World Bank.  
Vázquez-González, C., Moreno-Casasola, P., Hernández, M. E., Campos, A., Espejel, I., & Fermán-Almada, 
J. L. (2017). Mangrove and freshwater wetland conservation through carbon offsets: a cost-benefit 
analysis for establishing environmental policies. Environmental Management, 59, 274-290. 
Wishart, M., Wong, T., Fumage, B., Liao, X., Pannell, D., & Wang, J. (2021). Valuing the Benefits of 
Nature-Based Solutions: A Manual for Integrated Urban Flood Management in China. World Bank. 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/486911622787803268/pdf/Valuing-the-Benefits-of-
Nature-Based-Solutions-A-Manual-for-Integrated-Urban-Flood-Management-in-China.pdf. 
World Bank. (2021). A Catalogue of Nature-Based Solutions for Urban Resilience. World Bank. 
Zhou, J. B., Jiang, M. M., Chen, B., & Chen, G. Q. (2009). Energy evaluations for constructed wetland and 
conventional wastewater treatments. Communications in nonlinear science and numerical simulation, 
14(4), 1781-1789. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 41 
 
Appendix A: Decision support methods 
Making decisions between alternative options for improving climate and disaster resilience always 
involves trade-offs. These trade-offs require deliberate consideration. Several different decision support 
mechanisms exist to help explore such trade-offs by providing a structured way to organize information 
and other relevant decision-making factors. As described in van Zanten et al. (2023), the most common 
decision support frameworks used are: 
1. Cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) – A method of decision-making that prioritizes the project with 
the lowest cost over a project lifetime to achieve a given risk level. This approach does not require 
the measurement of benefits and can therefore be less analytically complex. This can be a useful 
tool in situations where a given risk reduction is required. In other words, if everyone agrees that 
something must be done then CEA can be used to identify the alternative that achieves the 
desired outcome at the lowest cost. However, the multi-benefit nature of many GI projects means 
that the lack of benefit estimation could undervalue the strength of such projects when compared 
against grey infrastructure. 
2. Benefit-cost analysis (BCA) – A method that involves defining and measuring the benefits and 
costs of a project relative to a baseline or ‘no project’ condition. Benefits and costs that occur at 
different points in time can be made comparable by discounting to generate a present value of 
benefits and costs. This approach requires directly measuring the benefits and costs of different 
project options and choosing the options with the greatest net benefit.   
3. Multicriteria analysis (MCA) – This approach provides a framework for integrating and comparing 
a range of different information using different metrics. It can be particularly beneficial when 
needing to account for benefits that cannot be valued in monetary terms. A MCA essentially 
involves identifying criteria with relevant stakeholders, determining a score for each criterion, 
establishing a weight for each criterion and creating an aggregate score for each alternative. 
These decisions support frameworks are highlighted in Table 10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 42 
 
Table 10. Decision support framework (van Zanten et al., 2023) 
Decision Support 
Framework 
Application 
Strengths 
Challenges 
Cost-effective 
Analysis 
Identifies lowest cost NBS 
options to achieve a given 
risk level 
Does not require 
assessment of benefits and 
is analytically less complex 
Limited applicability given 
the multi-benefit nature of 
NBS of establishing 
identical risk levels across 
options  
Benefit-Cost 
Analysis 
Estimates the societal net 
benefits of NBS options in 
monetary units  
Rigorous framework for 
directly comparing benefits 
and costs 
Requires that all costs and 
benefits be quantified in 
monetary terms; important 
other objectives 
(nonmonetary) may be 
omitted 
Multicriteria 
analysis 
Ranks alternative NBS 
options 
Allows the inclusion of 
qualitative effects and 
plural values 
Potentially relies on the 
subjective judgement of the 
analytical team 
 
 
 
