Natural Asset 
Management
Challenge Dialogue 
October 2023
M A K I N G  N AT U R E  CO U N T
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
Table of Contents
1 	
Introduction .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1
2 	
Summary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  2
Figure 1: Main areas of concentration categorized as templates and tools, 
marketing and communication, integration and collaboration, requirements 
and regulation, and engagement and inclusion.  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3
3 	
Discussion .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 4
Templates and tools .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4
Marketing and communication .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5
Integration and collaboration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5
Requirements and regulation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6
Engagement and inclusion .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 6
4 	
Recommendations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7
5 	
Conclusion  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
Appendix  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 9
Methods .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  9
Results  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  10
Figure 2: Illustration of one breakout group in MURAL.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
Educational and professional perspectives .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
Table 1: Selected workshop quotes from professionals that related to 
‘professions’ and ‘requirements’  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
Sentiment index .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  12
Figure 3: Starting Points  .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12
Figure 4: Leverage Points .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
Figure 5: Opportunities and Partnerships .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14
Word frequency .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15
Figure 6: Word Cloud associated with all breakout group responses  
by workshop participants where greater prominence illustrates  
greater frequency.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
Figure 7: Word Cloud associated only with workshop participants working  
in education where greater prominence illustrates greater frequency.  .   .   .   .   16
Figure 8: Word Cloud associated only with workshop participants  
working in professional practice where greater prominence illustrates  
greater frequency. .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17
Thematic coding .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
Figure 9: Matrix of coded instances according to capacity building phases on 
the left axis and enabling strategies along the top axis. .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .   .  .  .  .  . 17
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
Acknowledgements.
Thank you to all the people who took the time to consider and respond to 
this Challenge Dialogue that the Ethelo Platform hosted online from February 
15 to March 31, 2022 and participate in the virtual workshop hosted by the 
Resilience By Design Lab at Royal Roads University on September 23, 2022 that 
clarified understandings and planned strategic actions. Thanks to Keith Jones 
of the Challenge Dialogue System® for guidance throughout the project. These 
insights and comments responding to the challenging 
statements explore key issues that affect natural asset 
management (NAM) capacities and practices in Canada.
Champion Organizing Team:
	
 Dena Kae Beno, Challenge Dialogue System Network
	
 Roy Brooke, Executive Director NAI 
	
 Dr. Liese Coulter, Royal Roads University
	
 Dr. Robin Cox, Royal Roads University
	
 Dr. Michael Drescher, University of Waterloo
	
 Joanna Eyquem, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation,  
University of Waterloo 
	
 Vivian Forssman, Royal Roads University
	
 Keith Jones, Challenge Dialogue System Network
	
 Dr. Susan Nesbit, Environmental Engineering Program, UBC
	
 Melina Scholefield, Professional engineer
	
 Jeff Walker, CSA Group
Special thanks to the workshop facilitator Erica Crawford from Shift Collaborative and Donna 
Chiarelli, Joanna Eyquem, Vivian Forssman, Susan Nesbit and Margo Ursic for their invaluable 
support.
Capacity Building Illustration © Trueffelpix Dreamstime.com 
This project was sponsored by: 
Royal Roads University’s Resilience By Design Lab and the Natural Assets Initiative (NAI).
Please cite this report as:  
Coulter, L., Cox, R. S., Forssman, V., & Brooke, R. (2023). Natural Asset Management Challenge 
Dialogue: Final report. Resilience by Design Lab and Natural Assets Initiative. Victoria BC.  
www.naturalassetsinitiative.ca
M A K I N G  N AT U R E  C O U N T
1
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
1 	Introduction
Nature-based Solutions (NbS) are increasingly being adopted as part of a just 
transition to a low carbon society that is better prepared to meet the challenges 
of a changing climate1. In practice, NbS are creating new employment and 
work activities which require new services and re-employment training2. The 
increased need for skilled workers, professionals and training programs3 is 
especially challenging for small local governments with limited resources4.
NI must necessarily connect with existing built infrastructure, therefore existing 
training and practice programs need to develop new pathways to educate the 
21st-century engineer5. For example, Engineering and Geoscientists of British 
Columbia (EGBC) worked with the NAI to develop directives that guide the 
inclusion of NAM into professional practice. Such examples are rare, but with 
a clearer articulation of the required combinations of competencies, and how 
these translate into professional practice, they can increase.
This is a final report on research engaging a multi-stakeholder/rights holder 
group in a survey process (Challenge Paper questionnaire) and a subsequent 
virtual dialogue (Challenge Dialogue Workshop). The Challenge Dialogue6 
explored and responded to a proposed set of natural infrastructure (NI) and 
Natural Asset Management (NAM) norms, identified core competencies, and 
explored user-needs related to NAM training. Working with the Natural Assets 
Initiative (NAI), this work builds on the efforts of the Adaptation Learning 
Network project led by Dr. Robin Cox and the Resilience By Design lab at (RRU). 
Details of the research methods and results are included in the appendix. 
The long-term goal of the project is to contribute to the ongoing evolution of 
the field of natural asset management through identifying a map forward for 
education and training curricula that will help mainstream the practice across 
Canada. Ultimately, we hope this work will inform the design and development 
of learning opportunities that will contribute to upskilling a workforce to 
implement and mainstream NAM more effectively.
1    Warren, F. J., & Lulham, N. (Eds.). (2021). Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa. doi.org/https://doi.org/10.4095/328384.
2    Reid, Hannah, Gabriela Balvedi Pimentel, and Mon Castillo. Decent Work in Nature-Based 
Solutions. (International Labour Organization and UNEP, 2022). www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/
public/---ed_emp/documents/publication/wcms_863035.pdf.
3    Sarabi, S., Han, Q., Romme, A. G. L., de Vries, B., Valkenburg, R., & den Ouden, E. (2020). Uptake 
and implementation of Nature-Based Solutions: An analysis of barriers using Interpretive 
Structural Modeling. J Environ Manage, 270, 110749. doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110749
4    Méthot, J., & Rawluk, A. (2023). The State of Play Report for Natural Infrastructure on the 
Canadian Prairies. International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD). www.iisd.org/
system/files/2023-05/state-of-play-natural-infrastructure-canadian-prairies.pdf
5    Nesbit, S., Ellis, N., & Ostafichuk, P. (2017). Working with “Others”: Developing Sustainability 
Skills in the First Year Engineering Classroom. Proceedings of the Canadian Engineering 
Education Association (CEEA). doi.org/10.24908/pceea.v0i0.10191
6    Details available at: www.challengedialoguesystem.net
2
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
2 	Summary
Natural Infrastructure (NI) and Natural Assets Management (NAM) face a 
wide range of well-identified inter-related barriers to becoming mainstream 
practices. One such barrier is the lack of skilled workers, professionals and 
training programs to develop the skills needed for climate resilient NI which is 
the foundation of NAM. In addition, the roles and responsibilities associated 
with NAM are not well understood or defined. Despite the growing availability of 
funding opportunities for NI, smaller local governments may lack the staff time 
and technical training to plan, fund or implement NI projects.
A Challenge Dialogue is one methodology for gathering stakeholder / rights 
holder views on a complex issue such as the foregoing7. Within this context, 
a NAM-related Challenge Dialogue was framed by a statement regarding a 
potential, desirable future end-state. The statement is that for there to be 
Canada-wide NAM, natural assets will be appreciated alongside built assets as 
integral to community infrastructure, and that local governments want to initiate 
NAM with the help of existing firms and organizations. The statement also 
added that widespread capacity to deliver NAM will depend on the availability 
of trained professionals working from norms, standards and certifications that 
makes their practices effective, comparable, and replicable. This report is an 
assessment of responses received through a Challenge Dialogue process (a 
survey and workshop) to these statements. 
The NAM Challenge Dialogue workshop was structured around three capacity 
building focal areas: Starting Points, Leverage Points and Partnership 
Opportunities. Participants identified themes that are grouped into five 
dominant enabling strategies. In order of participant emphasis these are: 
1) Templates and tools; 2) Marketing and communication; 3) Integration and 
collaboration; 4) Requirements and regulation; and 5) Engagement and Inclusion 
(Figure 1).
The results from this workshop is intended to support the efforts of a range of 
stakeholders involved in NAM, develop effective interventions to increase its 
uptake.
Recommendations from the workshop
1/	 Templates and tools: Share case studies
Develop NAM case studies as teaching and learning materials that can address 
all phases of NI projects and represent the range of transdisciplinary actors 
who must collaborate across the ongoing life of natural assets. Make learning 
materials open-access while regulating credentials. 
7    Details available at: www.challengedialoguesystem.net
3
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
2/	 Marketing and communication: Increase demand
NI and NAM are emerging fields and there are valid questions regarding the 
speed and extent of demand for related education and skills training. Without 
requirements to shift to greener infrastructure through legislation or regulation, 
a substantial government funding stream linked directly to NI would be needed 
to increase demand for training and education.
3/	 Integration and collaboration: Network knowledge
Develop and make freely accessible, enabling devices such a tools and 
templates to share common understandings of NAM and transfer knowledge 
across networks. Address the skills and abilities needed to evaluate co-benefits 
of NI, applying principles for integration with grey infrastructure and sharing 
knowledge across existing professional and cultural boundaries. 
4/	 Requirements and regulation: Standardize guidance
Develop and share good-practice guidance at introductory and intermediate 
levels that can be applied by multiple professions. In addition to basic 
principals for NI, more specialized skills and competencies will usually be 
developed and accredited by professional associations such as those for 
engineers and planners, for example.
5/	 Engagement and Inclusion: Build on relationships
Strengthen existing relationships within organizations and partnerships, as 
well as reaching out to new partners. Build inclusive working relationships with 
professions, skilled workers and administrators to support NAM and develop 
new champions. Support NAM professional development opportunities across a 
wide range of roles in education, community and employment.
Figure 1: Main areas of concentration categorized as templates and tools, marketing 
and communication, integration and collaboration, requirements and regulation, and 
engagement and inclusion.
4
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
3 	Discussion
The key questions asked of all Challenge Dialogue participants concerned 
opportunities to increase natural asset management education and skills. 
Participants involved in education showed a different focus compared to those 
involved in professional practices aligned with natural infrastructure and 
natural asset management. The main avenues forward identified by educators 
were through developing curriculum material and learning opportunities to 
increase knowledge for engaged students. Professionals were more focused 
on credentials and meeting regulatory requirements, either set by government 
through legislation, or by professional associations. However, across all 
participants there was a clear focus on case studies as a key educational tool 
for NI and NAM, and public works projects as appropriate subjects to engage an 
invested audience.
Templates and tools
Above all, participants focused on educational and professional materials and 
resources that can assist to build capacity in NI and NAM. Templates and tools 
are especially important to leverage existing guidance for regulation and policy, 
public and professional communication materials and educational programs. 
Updating existing materials recognizes the importance of using familiar 
channels of communication and aligning with professional and policy norms 
of information access and acceptance. This included calls for standards and 
regulations to increase drivers for participation in NAM. These resources were 
also seen as vital to information sharing to support partnership opportunities 
and to update professional standards. NAM case studies were often cited to 
support both training and practice, and to increase demand by supporting 
marketing and communication. Creating new curriculum and training materials 
were also mentioned to address changing risk and hazard profiles that will shift 
with climate change impacts and social and economic change.
Participant suggestions include:
	
 Restoration Case studies: Contextual issues as well as specific outcome.
	
 Establish and advertise platforms for data sharing.
	
 Existing resource collections (e.g., Green Infrastructure Ontario) -- bring 
these together, make them accessible to different communities.
	
 Use of CVC Return on Investment Tool to promote NAM.
	
 Create curriculum material to develop case studies (share in education 
and PD).
5
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
Marketing and communication
Increasing understanding and awareness of NAM through communication was 
commonly called for as a starting place, especially with an aim to create greater 
demand, which is a fundamental aspect of marketing. Many suggestions aimed 
to promote awareness of the multiple benefits of ecosystem services through 
well informed communication, again highlighting the need for case studies. 
There was significant crossover with templates and tools especially as leveraging 
points to link with current education and professional resources. References to 
NA valuation generally aimed to promote NAM by communicating the economic 
benefits, rather than as useful for other purposes, such as monitoring. 
Participant suggestions include:
	
 Why do it? articulate this clearly (CAOs, councils need to see rationale, 
value added) -- case studies helpful.
	
 Educational opportunities targeting municipalities, asset managers, 
public servants etc. -- create demand.
	
 Facilitate access to education resources through awareness building.
	
 CASE STUDIES that illustrate co-benefits across value systems & 
emphasis the economic benefits.
	
 CONFERENCES - multi-disciplinary info exchange e.g. BCWWA8.
Integration and collaboration
When considering NAM opportunities and potential partnerships, integration 
and collaboration were a common theme. Again, the focus on how to achieve 
this was largely on templates and tools, seen as enabling devices to share 
common understandings and transfer knowledge. Skills were mentioned 
here with calls for greater recognition of skilled workers beyond professional 
associations. Collaborations were also seen as important leveraging points 
where ongoing efforts can be aligned to support NbS and NAM. Integration 
referenced both knowledge synthesis across disciplines and areas of expertise 
and more cultural inclusion of nature and indigenous communities as NAM is 
developed in practice.
Participant suggestions include:
	
 Collab with colleges/univ to set up co-op programs /early work terms.
	
 Need to bring skill sets together --- not just technical training.
	
 Integrating within changes in registration being required for 
Reconciliation (relation to nature is part of this).
	
 Co-benefits of NBS -- integration with grey infrastructure.
	
 Something similar to the IRP9 designation - broader set of integrated, 
connected skills (engineering).
8    BC Water & Waste Association (BCWWA).
9    In 2015, Engineers Canada launched the Infrastructure Resilience Professional (IRP) 
designation for Canadian engineers.
6
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
Requirements and regulation
Regulation was seen most often as a leverage point, rather than a place to 
start. Regulation was referenced as a tool for integration into common practice 
and as a method to increase demand for NAM. Rather than government 
legislation, regulation was usually discussed in the form of professional 
credentials that can be developed and monitored through self-regulating 
associations. Professional associations related to infrastructure management 
(i.e., engineers, asst managers, planners) were seen as offering the most 
direct and immediate leverage points to increase uptake of NAM. Continuing 
professional development (CPD) was specifically mentioned in all breakout 
groups, supporting inclusion of NAM in current and new credentials, and their 
education programs. The terms of reference (TOR) and requests for proposals 
(RFP) that define requirements for projects were acknowledged as regulating 
instruments in professional practice, reflecting back on the educational value of 
updated templates and tools.
Participant suggestions include:
	
 RFP requirements or criteria (requires clients to be trained).
	
 Mainstream this in accreditation programs (there’s a lot of demand 
across areas).
	
 CPD programs run through professional associations.
	
 PROF ASSOCIATIONS - having (engineering) standards drives - specialist 
designations, credential programs.
	
 Room for cohort-based learning in a professional accreditation setting 
or professional development.
Engagement and inclusion
While workshop participants focused more on the how-to of upscaling NAM 
rather than the question of who is involved, engagement with partners was 
seen as a significant opportunity and effective starting point. Motivations for 
engaging with others include to gain funding and program support from all 
levels of government, to combine efforts by developing a community of practice 
with a local or professional focus, to be more inclusive of diverse communities 
and skill sets, and to gain economies of scale in sharing new knowledge 
supporting NAM. Building on existing partnerships was connected to more long-
range thinking with immediate opportunities seen to support NAM champions in 
local government, indigenous communities and professional associations.
Participant suggestions include:
	
 Educational opportunities targeting municipalities, asset managers, 
public servants etc.
	
 Support Champions: elected officials & others -- could push LGs along, 
build support for training.
7
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
	
 Partnerships to do restoration & protection project with Indigenous 
groups, municipalities, etc.
	
 Governments of Canada (all have educational departments aimed at 
civil servants).
	
 Partner with public works associations & particularly operators – gap.
4 	Recommendations
1/	 Templates and tools: Share case studies
Develop NAM case studies as teaching and learning materials that can address 
all phases of NI projects and represent the range of transdisciplinary actors 
who must collaborate across the ongoing life of natural assets. Make learning 
materials open-access while regulating credentials. 
2/	 Marketing and communication: Increase demand
NI and NAM are emerging fields and there are valid questions regarding the 
speed and extent of demand for related education and skills training. Without 
requirements to shift to greener infrastructure through legislation or regulation, 
a substantial government funding stream linked directly to NI would be needed 
to increase demand for training and education.
3/	 Integration and collaboration: Network knowledge
Develop and make freely accessible, enabling devices such a tools and 
templates to share common understandings of NAM and transfer knowledge 
across networks. Address the skills and abilities needed to evaluate co-benefits 
of NI, applying principles for integration with grey infrastructure and sharing 
knowledge across existing professional and cultural boundaries. 
4/	 Requirements and regulation: Standardize guidance
Develop and share good-practice guidance at introductory and intermediate 
levels that can be applied by multiple professions. In addition to basic 
principals for NI, more specialized skills and competencies will usually be 
developed and accredited by professional associations such as those for 
engineers and planners, for example.
5/	 Engagement and Inclusion: Build on relationships
Strengthen existing relationships within organizations and partnerships, as 
well as reaching out to new partners. Build inclusive working relationships with 
professions, skilled workers and administrators to support NAM and develop 
new champions. Support NAM professional development opportunities across a 
wide range of roles in education, community and employment.
8
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
5 	Conclusion
This Challenge Dialogue was framed by the statement regarding a potential 
future end-state, namely, that for there to be Canada-wide municipal natural 
asset management (NAM), natural assets will be appreciated alongside built 
assets as integral to municipal infrastructure, and that local governments are 
motivated to initiate NAM with the help of existing firms and organizations. The 
statement also added that widespread capacity to deliver NAM will depend on 
the availability of trained professionals working from norms, standards and 
certifications that makes their practices effective, comparable, and replicable. 
The recommendations were informed by the dominant enabling strategies 
identified by the workshop participants: 1) Templates and tools; 2) Marketing 
and communication; 3) Integration and collaboration; 4) Requirements and 
regulation; and 5) Engagement and Inclusion.
When considering these recommendations, it is important that the capacity 
building focal areas of Starting Points, Leverage Points and Partnership 
Opportunities are not seen as a linear progression following sequentially from 
one stage to the next. For systemic change in how natural infrastructure is 
understood and developed, it will be an ongoing process to identify and act on 
new starting and leverage points and to initiate and nurture partnerships, and 
the opportunities they provide..
9
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
Appendix 
Methods
Participant responses were focused on a set of six statements related to 
identified education and training challenges for NAM and potential forward 
steps to address these challenges. The statements were developed with expert 
guidance for educators and professional familiar with the skills needed to 
develop natural infrastructure (NI) and manage natural assets.
Participants were challenged to respond to these six options as ways forward:
	
 Develop a roadmap that describes a desired future state and the tactics 
to achieve it over time
	
 Develop a resource directory which describes what organizations are 
doing.
	
 Determine top priorities for continuing professional development 
learning topics.
	
 Formalize a NAM community of practice.
	
 Develop a competency framework for NAM
	
 Conduct an indexed inventory of NAM-related academic programming, 
training and certifications across Canada 
The Challenge Dialogue System (CDS™) offers a framework to help diverse 
groups collaborate and innovate to accomplish complex tasks for change and 
transformation. Structured discussions allow groups to test the nature of the 
challenge, its context, crucial assumptions, and expectations. With this shared 
clarity, groups can better align on impactful strategies and clear action plans. 
Participants responded to an online- questionnaire hosted by a Canadian-
based engagement platform called Ethelo. In this questionnaire they were asked 
to read a Challenge paper that outlines a suggested national pathway forward 
for education. Results of the survey were reported in a progress report and 
informed the virtual workshop which was convened on 23 September 2022 to 
clarify understandings and plan strategic actions.
The workshop included plenary presentations and four facilitated breakout 
discussion groups, three of which involved participants mainly from related 
professions and one which involved participants mainly with educational 
affiliations. In the breakout groups, data was collected through the online 
collaboration tool MURAL. To broaden considerations beyond the initial 
challenge statements, discussions were focused on three strategic topics: 
starting points, leverage points, and partnership opportunities.
Responses were entered as text into the qualitative research analysis software, 
NVivo, and coded to identify thematic patterns. In addition to thematic coding, 
word frequency and sentiment analysis were used to confirm inferences and 
contribute to the formation of recommendations.
10
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
Results
The data was collected through two framing perspectives. First, inputs were 
framed by the ways in which interventions might be best suited to start new 
efforts, leverage new or existing efforts, or develop partnerships that can 
be initiated, supported or expanded to benefit from opportunities (Figure 
2). Second, the inputs were grouped through breakout groups base on the 
participants’ background with a greater focus as a practitioner or as an 
educator. Notably, there were three professional breakout groups and one 
educational group, so results are described by group and in combination.
Figure 2: Illustration of one breakout group in MURAL.
Staring points, leverage points and partnership opportunities
Colour coding for the topic areas was:
	
 Blue indicated STARTING POINTS: START
	
 Yellow indicated OPPORTUNITIES AND PARTNERSHIPS: OPPS/PARTNERS
	
 Pink indicated LEVERAGE POINTS: LEVER
All input recorded in Mural was added to NVIVO as a data set with the fields: 
TEXT, and GROUP. TEXT responses were open ended while the GROUP field is 
labelled by either E for Educational focus or P for Professional focus, and an 
initial (E-S, P-M, P-D, P-). The report-back summary notes were labelled O-E. 
Each topic area was imported as a case following one of the three options 
detailed above: START, OPPS-PARTNERS and LEVER. 
11
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
Educational and professional perspectives
While the number of participants was too small to develop statistically 
significant data, there were noticeable and perhaps unsurprising differences 
between the two groups in their education focus. Professionals overwhelmingly 
focused on professional activities and operations associated with NAM 
education, taking a largely practice-based view. In contrast, the only comment 
from educational sources that related to “public sector and professional 
associations”, was concerned “to make sure we have not over-priced our 
educational products to the point we have lost students”.
Build on existing accreditations to develop “sub-accreditation” in NAM
Aggregate good practices from the field and share in courses for designations
Assessment of training demand with different associations Build relationships with professional 
associations Training for GFOABC Training for PGO Training for CIP
CNAM - integrate
CPD requirements (a specific category of what is required) Professional Practice Standards
Credential Programs
Developing sub-accreditations for Engineers, Planners, Landscape Architects, Asset Managers,
Engage with regulators to embed in their requirements CPD for professional associations (range of 
disciplines)
Existing certification systems (embed points for natural assets) e.g. LEED, BOMA
GFOABC - Professional Development EGBC continued work
Infiltrating other training offerings by allies Tailoring of CPD offerings based on needs
opportunity to build NAM considerations into risk assessment of practice for engineers
professional practice guideline helps to normalize NAM but not sufficient
Professional registration requirements
Regulation that professionals have to respond to (Ontario model of asset management) regulation)
Standards - eg CSA Standards - good linkage between Engineers and Geoscientists ...
Table 1: Selected workshop quotes from professionals that related to ‘professions’ and 
‘requirements’
12
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
Sentiment index
Spider graphs were automatically generated through NVivo and offer a 
preliminary insight into the rich information that was captured as participants 
responded to a key question.
STARTING POINTS: What “next wise actions” should we take to begin building a 
pathway for NAM education and upskilling in Canada? (Figure 3) Starting points 
were considered more positive than negative, offering a moderately positive 
sentiment index. The strongest responses related to case studies, followed 
by good practices and associations. There were also significant mentions of 
infrastructure, curriculum material, guest lecturers, resources, people, demand 
and transdisciplinary research.
Figure 3: Starting Points
 
13
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
LEVERAGE POINTS: Where in the system is there the most potential for 
improvements and changes in NAM education and upskilling? (Figure 4) 
Leverage points were considered neither positive nor negative, offering a 
neutral sentiment index. Public works were seen as especially significant 
opportunities for leverage. Other commonly mentions leverage points were 
accreditation, information sharing, managers, development and similarly to 
starting points, case studies.
Figure 4: Leverage Points
14
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
OPPORTUNITIES AND PARTNERSHIPS: What existing initiatives, trends and 
partnerships offer opportunities to advance NAM education and/or upskilling? 
(Figure 5) Opportunities and partnerships were considered neither positive nor 
negative, offering a neutral sentiment index. Similarly, to starting points, public 
works were seen as significant opportunities for partnerships, followed by 
infrastructure assets, then operators and professional associations.
Figure 5: Opportunities and Partnerships
15
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
Word frequency
The workshop responses were considered for the frequency that key words 
and topics were mentioned as an indicator of general priorities. The criteria for 
assessing frequency included stemmed words because the words themselves 
were not as important as the ideas they represent. For example, the count 
for ‘requirements’ included similar words, such as required, requirement and 
requires.
Across the four breakout groups, the most common words found in all 
participant response were development, training, professional, need, asset, 
integration, works, practices and requirements (Figure 6). The second tier of 
frequent terms included standards, integration, education, requirements, 
resources, need and works.
 
Figure 6: Word Cloud associated with all breakout group responses by workshop 
participants where greater prominence illustrates greater frequency. 
16
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
When only educational sources were considered across all topics, participants 
focused on the curriculum resources, especially through case studies with a 
sustainability focus (See Figure 7).
 
Figure 7: Word Cloud associated only with workshop participants working in education 
where greater prominence illustrates greater frequency. 
17
FINAL REPORT  
October 2023
Natural Asset Management Challenge Dialogue
After frequent mention of professional requirements as important motivators 
and methods to increase NAM knowledge and abilities, participants focused on 
topics of policy, government, technical skills and applications and NAM concepts 
(See Figure 8).
 
Figure 8: Word Cloud associated only with workshop participants working in professional 
practice where greater prominence illustrates greater frequency.
Thematic coding
Overall, five main areas were identified as important: templates and tools, 
marketing and communication, integration and collaboration, professional 
and policy regulation, and engagement and participation. Their relevance, 
which varied across the focal areas of starting points, leveraging points and 
developing partnership opportunities (Figure 5), is explored in the discussion. 
The matrix figure of coded instances is organized according to capacity building 
phases on the left axis and enabling strategies along the top axis. Cooler colours 
indicate relatively stronger presence and hotter colours indicate relatively less 
common occurrence. The table was generated through NVivo software.
Figure 9: Matrix of coded instances according to capacity building phases on the left axis 
and enabling strategies along the top axis.
Natural Assets Initiative 
M A K I N G  N AT U R E  CO U N T
