MNRF’S NATURAL 
RESOURCE CLIMATE 
ADAPTATION STRATEGY
(2017–2021)
Naturally 
Resilient
Table of Contents
1	 Introduction: Taking Action	
2
1.1.	 Natural resources in Ontario are vulnerable 
to climate change	
2
2	 The Strategy 	
6
2.1.	 Assessment of the Vulnerability of MNRF’s Mandate 
to Climate Change	
8
2.2.	Indigenous Communities and Climate Change	
10
3	 Strategy Goals and Actions: 2017–2021	
11
Goal 1:	 Mainstream Adaptation	
12
Goal 2:	Build Resilience and Biodiversity	
14
Goal 3:	Increase Science, Research and Knowledge 	
17
Goal 4:	 Increase Awareness and Motivation	
21
Goal 5:	Optimize Services and Response 	
22
4	 Implementing the Strategy	
23
5	 Related Resources	
25
Appendix	
26
Goals & Actions at a Glance	
26
Glossary	
27
References	
28
1	
INTRODUCTION: TAKING ACTION
The climate is changing and these changes are impacting natural 
resources across Ontario, including species, ecosystems and other 
components of the biodiversity that underpins a healthy environment. 
Healthy and biodiverse natural resources are important to the well-
being of the people of Ontario. They provide important environmental, 
economic and social benefits including food, clean water, storm 
protection, products, jobs and recreational opportunities. 
The Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry 
(MNRF) is responsible for protecting Ontario’s 
biodiversity and managing its natural resources 
in an ecologically sustainable way – its forests, 
fisheries, wildlife, lands, waters, aggregates and 
petroleum resources. This includes providing 
stewardship over provincial parks and protected 
areas, supporting outdoor recreation opportun­
ities, promoting economic opportunities in the 
resource sector, and managing provincially 
assigned emergency types.
The ministry’s role also includes promoting 
knowledge, strengthening management through 
innovation, supporting partnerships, and increas­
ing First Nation and Métis participation in natural 
resource management. 
MNRF is already beginning to observe the 
impacts of climate change during everyday work. 
Climate change is creating an increasingly com­
plex operating environment and introducing 
additional uncertainty for the ministry in fulfillment 
of its responsibilities. Further impacts of climate 
change have the potential to present significant 
challenges for delivery of the ministry’s mandate.
Naturally Resilient will ensure the ministry is 
well positioned to reduce its vulnerabilities, 
fulfill its mandate, and address the impacts of 
climate change – thereby safeguarding valuable 
resources and the services they provide, as well 
as the communities and economies that depend 
on them.
1.1.	 NATURAL RESOURCES IN 
ONTARIO ARE VULNERABLE 
TO CLIMATE CHANGE
Ontario’s climate has experienced significant 
changes over the last 40 years. Since 1970, the 
province has observed an increase in minimum 
temperatures, with a 2.6°C rise in Northern 
Ontario and a 1.4°C warming in Southern Ontario. 
Parts of the province have become slightly wetter 
and more winter precipitation is falling as rain. 
Drier summer conditions are being felt in some 
regions as a result of reduced snow accumulation, 
soil moisture and spring runoff. Warming temper­
atures, increased frequency of weather 
anomalies, changing precipitation patterns and 
other climatic changes are putting stresses on
the environment and the communities and econ­
omies that depend on the natural world.
2	
INTRODUCTION: A CALL TO ACTION
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
3
Research suggests that climate change will 
very likely impact natural resources in Ontario 
under a range of possible future scenarios. For 
example, Figure 1 depicts potential impacts to 
natural resources in the 2050’s, under a business-
as-usual greenhouse gas emissions scenario. 
The impacts of climate change are expected to 
vary across the province, with differing implica­
tions for Northern and Southern Ontario, and
for communities located in rural or urban areas. 
As part of its commitment to a healthy and 
naturally diverse environment, MNRF has taken 
significant steps to respond to climate change. 
For more than 20 years, the ministry has 
advanced research, monitoring, partnership 
and natural resource management initiatives to 
support climate change mitigation and adaptation. 
Due to the uncertainty associated with predicting 
future climate conditions and the adaptive cap­
acity of natural systems, MNRF’s work is guided 
by a precautionary approach, including the need 
for adaptive management. This approach can 
be effective across multiple potential scenarios. 
Naturally Resilient builds on this foundation 
and renews MNRF’s commitment to addressing 
the impacts of climate change. It sets out for­
ward-thinking goals and actions that complement 
the ministry’s current adaptation initiatives 
and provide a framework for introducing 
new initiatives.
4	
INTRODUCTION: A CALL TO ACTION
OBSERVED ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE IN ONTARIO
f
Trees and other plants such as wild blueberries are experiencing earlier leaf production, longer growing 
seasons, and bud, flower, and fruit damage, due to more spring freezes and expanded ranges of insect 
pests and pathogens.
f
Native species known to live in certain parts of the province are expanding into new areas, resulting in 
new species interactions, such as cross-breeding and the introduction of hybrid species. 
f
Reduced ice seasons are affecting biodiversity in coastal wetlands and nearshore habitat, reducing 
ice fishing opportunities, making food less available for polar bears, and rendering shorelines more 
susceptible to damage from extreme storm events in winter. 
f
Lyme disease, a bacteria spread by some species of tick which once had limited range in Ontario due 
to temperature, is emerging as a serious health risk in new areas. 
f
Fire seasons have ended later in the year over recent decades, resulting in overall longer fire seasons, 
and lightning-caused fires in the northwest have increased.
f
Increased frequency of extreme weather and changing precipitation patterns are creating more frequent 
low and high water level situations in Ontario, resulting in increased requests for provincial disaster 
assistance and associated costs.
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
5
MOVEMENT OF ECOREGION 6E CLIMATIC CONDITIONS BY 2050
A2 scenario, applied to downscaled CGCM2 
AN EXAMPLE OF CLIMATE NICHE MODELLING FOR WHITE PINE  
BY 2060
A2 scenario, applied to 3 General Circulation Models
CHANGE IN AVERAGE ANNUAL TEMPERATURE – 2050s
RCP 8.5 scenario, applied to downscaled ensemble of 4 Earth  
Systems Models
Figure 1: Modelling potential impacts of climate change to natural resources in the 2050s 
LOOKING AHEAD: 2050s UNDER A 
BUSINESS-AS-USUAL EMISSIONS 
SCENARIO 
Climate modeling is an evolving science but projections remain 
relatively consistent, even as models and the ability to interpret 
them improve. The three impact models in Figure 1 show 
examples of changes in the 2050s under a business-as-usual 
greenhouse gas emissions scenario, based on Ontario climate 
research efforts.
f
Increasing temperatures, changing precipitation: 
Southern Ontario is projected to experience a 
4 – 4.5 °C increase in annual temperature, with greater 
increases in winter months compared to summer months. 
Northern Ontario would experience a more significant 
increase of 4.5 – 6 °C. Precipitation could increase 
minimally in some parts of the province, with more lake-
effect precipitation and more frequent extreme weather 
events including heavy rains, wind and ice storms. 
f
Shifting climatic conditions affecting biodiversity: 
Climatic conditions, such as temperature and precipitation, 
drive how ecosystems are formed and function. As the 
climate changes, the climate conditions that support plants, 
animals and other organisms in Ontario are expected to 
shift northward, influencing the amount of suitable habitat 
for these species and affecting biodiversity in unique and 
novel ways. For example, in the middle map, climate 
conditions suitable to support the species of Ecoregion 6E 
in South-central Ontario are projected to shift northward 
and fragment (full climate envelope), with the best rep­
resentation of suitable conditions centered near the Sault 
Ste. Marie area (core climate envelope). 
f
Impacts to commercial and recreational fish species: 
Shifting climate conditions such as those presented in the 
middle map could have particularly significant impacts for 
fish species in Ontario. Fish habitats would be altered as 
water warms, stream flows change and oxygen levels 
decrease. Coldwater species such as brook trout and lake 
trout, may see a 50-60% decline in habitat, while cool and 
warmwater species, such as walleye and smallmouth bass, 
may see a 50-80% increase. 
f
Impacts to tree species and forest ecosystems: As 
climate conditions shift, the types of trees that will 
do best in a given location are expected to gradually 
change over time. Some southern populations of eastern 
white pine, Ontario’s provincial tree, may no longer 
experience the climate they regenerated in. In these 
locations, it is expected that white pine will gradually 
be replaced by faster growing southern species 
moving north. 
2	 THE STRATEGY 
NATURALLY RESILIENT:
f Provides a strategic framework that will enable MNRF to fulfill its 
sustainable natural resource management mandate in a changing 
climate. This includes taking actions to maintain, enhance and 
restore the resilience of natural resources and ecosystems 
in Ontario. 
This strategic, coordinated five-year framework 
ensures that MNRF can adapt ministry business to 
address the key climate change vulnerabilities to 
its natural resource management mandate. It 
outlines the specific types of actions the ministry 
is advancing to respond to a changing climate, 
focuses science and research efforts, and sup­
ports the implementation of policy and program 
initiatives across the ministry.
The actions outlined in Naturally Resilient build on 
MNRF’s existing climate change adaptation efforts 
and will support Ontario in moving towards a new 
provincial adaptation approach that builds on the 
Climate Ready (2011–2014) adaptation plan. 
The strategy also complements Ontario’s Climate 
Change Strategy and Action Plan, which outline 
the province’s climate change mitigation efforts – 
actions that reduce, sequester or prevent 
emissions of greenhouse gases into the atmos­
phere and build a low-carbon economy (Figure 2).
Figure 2: Provincial Climate Change Initiatives 
6	
THE STRATEGY 
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
7
THE ROLE OF NATURAL RESOURCES IN CLIMATE 
CHANGE MITIGATION 
Forests, lands and healthy diverse ecosystems play a unique role in climate change 
mitigation. Trees, plants and soils all naturally store and release carbon over time. 
The process of storing carbon is called “carbon sequestration”. As trees and plants 
grow, they absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere through photosynthesis and 
store the carbon in their leaves, stems and roots. Carbon is also stored in soil when 
trees and plants decompose. 
Areas of forests and lands that sequester more carbon than they release are known 
as carbon sinks. Wetlands and peatlands are particularly important in reducing 
greenhouse gas concentrations because they have the potential to sequester and 
store significant amounts of carbon. 
Long-lived harvested wood products such as furniture and wood used in construc­
tion can also store carbon and act as carbon sinks; keeping the carbon out of the 
atmosphere for the lifetime of the structure or longer if the wood is reclaimed and 
re-used or remanufactured into other products. The way forests are managed can 
influence the amount of carbon that is released into the atmosphere and that is 
stored in trees and harvested wood products.
Forests and lands can also be carbon sources, meaning they emit more carbon 
than they sequester. This can occur through natural disturbances such as forest 
fires, disease, insect infestations and mortality of trees in older forests, or through 
human disturbances such as conversion of wetlands to other land uses.
MNRF is contributing to climate change mitigation efforts in Ontario’s Climate 
Change Strategy and Action Plan by:
f
Working with partner ministries to develop a land use carbon inventory to assess 
the potential of agriculture, forestry and other land uses to emit, remove and 
store carbon;
f
Assessing the role managed Crown forests can play in mitigating the effects of 
climate change and reducing greenhouse gases; 
f
Supporting programs to guide and enhance wetland and grassland conservation, 
restoration and management;
f
Advancing a mass timber buildings research program to advance building 
science, technologies, materials, and designs needed to meet emission reduc­
tion goals for the buildings sector, and supporting development of a wood stove 
exchange program to retrofit existing, inefficient wood stoves, furnaces and 
boilers with more efficient wood heating appliances in northern communities;
f
Continuing to plant trees across the province through Ontario’s 50 Million Tree 
Program to restore forest cover on suitable lands, including a doubling of the 
number of trees planted within the boundaries of urban municipalities;
f
Supporting development of offset programs and protocols to promote participa­
tion in both the compliance and voluntary offset markets; and
f
Releasing a draft Far North Land Use Strategy to provide guidance to support 
preparation of community based land use plans in the Far North of Ontario and 
integration of matters beyond the scale of individual plans, such as climate change.
8	
THE STRATEGY 
2.1.	 ASSESSMENT OF THE 
VULNERABILITY OF MNRF’S 
MANDATE TO CLIMATE CHANGE
Taking into consideration the latest science and 
research, MNRF conducted a ministry-wide 
assessment in 2016 to determine its vulnerability 
to the impacts of climate change and ability to 
effectively meet its mandate and organizational 
goals in the future.
The results indicated that climate change could 
have far-reaching, numerous and diverse impacts 
on the ministry’s ability to do so. The assessment 
also revealed that a suite of adaptation actions by 
the ministry and its partners is needed to reduce 
its vulnerability. 
The assessment explored the potential impacts 
on ministry business from a series of climate 
stressors, including warmer air and water, sea level 
rise, extreme events and changing precipitation 
(Figure 3)1. It reflected the broad range and divers­
ity of potential impacts, including those with slow 
onset, sudden onset and variability regarding 
intensity and timing (short [2020] and long [2050] 
terms), as well as whether impacts would be felt 
more severely in specific parts of the province. 
Types of vulnerabilities varied from those 
associated with MNRF’s mandate for maintaining 
infrastructure and ensuring public safety, to
conserving biodiversity, delivering services, 
sustainably developing resources and providing 
opportunities for recreation.
In order to focus the ministry’s adaptation efforts 
over the coming five years, the areas of MNRF’s 
mandate with the greatest vulnerability to climate 
change were identified, assessed, and prioritized. 
 
Key MNRF Mandate Areas Vulnerable to Climate Change
FROM THE MANDATE AREAS POTENTIALLY VULNERABLE TO CLIMATE CHANGE, 11 KEY AREAS WERE IDENTIFIED:
Conserving biodiversity 
Conserving wetlands, including Far North peatlands 
Maintaining the ecological integrity and ecotype representation of protected areas 
Managing Crown forests sustainably
Managing fish and wildlife sustainably
Managing water resources sustainably
Operating and maintaining Crown-owned dams and other public infrastructure 
Preventing, detecting and responding to invasive species 
Protecting and recovering species at risk
Providing socioeconomic benefits of natural resource use and development
Responding to provincially assigned emergency types and natural hazard management
1	
Stressors derived from general climate change projections presented in the fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change for the three main drainage basins in Ontario.
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
9
Figure 3: Areas of MNRF’s Mandate Vulnerable to Climate Change – Grouped by 
Primary Stressor
10	
THE STRATEGY 
2.2.	 INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES 
AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Climate change has the potential to impact many 
First Nation and Métis communities. For example, 
communities in Northern Ontario rely on ice roads 
for access and provision of essential products and 
services. Warmer winters disrupt travel on winter 
roads, impacting the ability of communities to 
bring in materials, including building supplies
and the diesel fuel some communities continue 
to rely on for electricity generation. 
MNRF is committed to working collaboratively 
with Indigenous peoples to exchange knowledge 
and experiences, and find potential solutions
for adapting to climate change. For example, in the 
Far North of Ontario, traditional knowledge
is a foundation for land use plans that are being 
jointly prepared by First Nations and MNRF. 
Appropriate sharing and use of traditional know­
ledge about peoples’ relationship to and use of 
the land can also inform climate change
adaptation approaches. 
Engagement with Indigenous peoples will 
continue to be a focus for the ministry. First Nation 
and Métis observations and understanding of 
changes in land, ecosystems and species add 
critical information to the climate change know­
ledge base. In working toward the goals and 
actions in this strategy, MNRF will seek to explore 
opportunities to learn from Indigenous commun­
ities and incorporate traditional knowledge in the 
understanding of climate change and potential 
adaptation actions. MNRF is also committed 
to respecting Aboriginal and treaty rights, and 
meeting any constitutional or other obligations 
including the duty to consult that may arise due 
to government action on climate change. 
As MNRF carries out the actions identified in 
Naturally Resilient, the ministry intends to consider 
opportunities to improve Indigenous peoples’ 
quality of life, support capacity building within 
communities, expand sharing of information 
and data between government and Indigenous 
peoples, and identify collaborative endeavours 
for adaptation.
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
11
3	
STRATEGY GOALS AND ACTIONS: 
2017–2021
Naturally Resilient is organized around five goals that advance 
a series of actions needed to address MNRF’s key areas of 
vulnerability and deliver on its mandate. 
THE GOALS ARE:
f
Mainstream Adaptation
f
Build Resilience and Biodiversity
f
Increase Science, Research and Knowledge
f
Increase Awareness and Motivation 
f
Optimize Services and Response
The adaptation actions outlined in the strategy 
commit MNRF to undertaking initiatives over the 
next five years that will ensure progress towards 
the goals, including activities in the areas of policy, 
information, operations and service delivery. 
Many of the actions are already underway and 
involve a wide range of the ministry’s core business 
areas, from sustainable natural resource develop­
ment, emergency response, natural hazard 
management and recreational opportunities, to 
enhancing nature’s ability to withstand climate 
change through stewardship of biodiversity and 
resilient environments and communities.
Implementation may be carried out on a provincial, 
regional or local basis depending upon the scale
of the vulnerability to MNRF’s mandate, the distinct 
qualities of the potential impacts and the type of 
actions required to address those impacts. MNRF 
will continue to work toward the goals throughout 
the five-year period of the strategy, as ongoing 
adaptation initiatives are extended and new initia­
tives are introduced.
Some actions will require a straightforward 
approach, while others may take longer to 
complete and involve sequential steps and a 
number of partners. MNRF is committed to work­
ing collaboratively with all levels of government 
and identifying opportunities to continue collabor­
ation with the public and partners to pursue the 
goals of Naturally Resilient. 
Taking action to accomplish the goals of the strat­
egy will benefit MNRF in delivering its mandate and 
will also provide benefits to the people of Ontario, 
including those who rely on natural resources for 
traditional, recreational and economic purposes. 
For example, First Nation and Métis communities’ 
access and use of natural resources for traditional 
medicines, food supplies, cultural purposes and 
economic opportunities could be affected by 
climate change. Planning for resilience, improving 
emergency services, enhancing outreach and 
collaboration, and increasing the potential benefits 
to these communities.
12	
STRATEGY GOALS AND ACTIONS: 2017–2021
GOAL 1:	
MAINSTREAM ADAPTATION
CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IS INTEGRATED INTO POLICY, PLANNING, 
PROGRAMS AND PRACTICES.
ACTIONS:
1.1: Work Within Government – Encourage 
consideration of natural resource climate change 
adaptation as part of provincial initiatives
1.2: Planning and Strategy – Take into account 
climate impacts and adaptation options in the 
development and implementation of broad 
scale strategies and land-use plans
1.3: Policy Framework – Incorporate climate 
change considerations and adaptation options 
when evaluating existing and developing new 
natural resource management policies, guides, 
and management plans
1.4: Technical Guidance – Develop technical 
guidance, products and tools that provide 
direction for considering and adapting to the 
impacts of climate change
1.5: Work with Partners – Work with organizations, 
communities, and Indigenous peoples to integrate 
climate change adaptation into local plans 
and projects
Climate change adaptation should be considered 
when making sustainable natural resource 
management decisions. 
By considering best available science and
integrating climate change adaptation into daily 
business and participation in provincial initiatives, 
MNRF will be able to continue to sustainably 
manage natural resources while addressing the 
current and future implications of changes in 
fish and wildlife abundance and behaviour; 
increased prevalence of invasive species; 
increased forest fire, natural disturbances and 
emergencies; threats to biodiversity; species 
at risk; and difficulties in providing the benefits
of natural resource use and access. 
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
13
TOOLS FOR MAINSTREAMING 
CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION
MNRF is currently taking action to put in place the 
right tools to ensure climate change adaptation is 
a key consideration when developing or updating 
policies and programs. This includes:
f
a climate lens that provides MNRF policymakers 
and natural resource managers with guidance on 
how to consider and integrate climate change 
adaptation into natural resource management 
planning, policy development, programs and 
practices
f
specific tools and technical guidance to support 
the integration of climate change adaptation 
considerations into management planning for 
provincial parks and conservation reserves 
TECHNICAL GUIDANCE FOR 
FLOODING HAZARDS
MNRF is exploring potential options to expand the 
climate change considerations in its technical 
guide – River & Stream Systems: Flooding Hazard 
Limit, which is used for managing flood susceptible 
lands across the province. The guide provides 
standardized approaches to support municipal 
implementation of the natural hazard policies in the 
Provincial Policy Statement of the Planning Act, and 
development of management plans to limit public 
health and safety risks related to exposure to 
flooding hazards. 
MNRF relies on the technical guide to assist in the 
municipal land use planning approval process and to 
explain, or if necessary defend, methods for flood 
plain delineation. As science and technology have 
evolved since the guide’s 2002 release, the ministry 
is investigating opportunities to expand the guide to 
include information that supports floodplain manage­
ment and mapping in a changing climate. 
PLANTING THE RIGHT TREES IN THE RIGHT PLACES
The potential for rapid changes in climate may mean that some ecosystems and species could have difficulty 
adjusting to the changing conditions. 
If climate change significantly alters local growing conditions for populations of native tree species, these trees 
may not be able to keep pace by adapting or migrating naturally to more suitable regions.
As climate conditions shift and the types of trees that will do best in a given location change, Ontario’s forest 
managers will be challenged to ensure they are planting trees that suit local growing conditions and continue 
to deliver the social, economic and ecological benefits of sustainable forest management. Traditionally, planting 
the right trees has meant using seed from local sources, however as climate change progresses it may become 
necessary to consider using seed from further away to match the new growing conditions.
To address this challenge, MNRF is reviewing the province’s tree seed and nursery stock transfer policies. By 
ensuring these policies are based on the best available forestry and climate science, MNRF can provide forest 
managers with the flexibility necessary to adapt to climate change.
14	
STRATEGY GOALS AND ACTIONS: 2017–2021
GOAL 2:	
BUILD RESILIENCE AND BIODIVERSITY
MANAGING FOR RESILIENCE IS SUPPORTED ACROSS A VARIETY OF GEOGRAPHIES, 
TO MAINTAIN AND ENHANCE BIODIVERSITY AND HELP LANDSCAPES, ECOSYSTEMS 
AND SPECIES WITHSTAND CHANGES IN CLIMATE.
ACTIONS:
2.1: Ecosystem Resilience – Maintain and 
improve ecosystem resilience by conserving 
biodiversity, identifying and reducing pressures, 
restoring degraded ecosystems and mitigating 
the impacts of land uses
2.2: Landscape Resilience – Enhance 
landscape integrity and connectivity through 
land use planning, sustainable natural resource 
management and conservation activities to 
enable landscape-level resilience to withstand 
climate change
2.3: Species Resilience – Reduce the impacts 
of climate change on vulnerable species by 
undertaking and supporting activities that 
enhance and rehabilitate habitat, encourage 
genetic diversity and facilitate natural movement
Climate change and biodiversity are 
interconnected. While climate change 
presents a serious threat to Ontario’s 
biodiversity, the conservation of biodiversity 
can play an important role in adapting to a 
changing climate. Naturally Resilient supports 
the vision, goals and objectives set out in 
Ontario’s Biodiversity Strategy, 2011 and the 
commitments in Biodiversity: It’s In Our 
Nature, Ontario Government Plan to 
Conserve Biodiversity 2012–2020.
By planning and managing for resilience of 
landscapes, ecosystems and species, MNRF 
can improve the ability of Ontario’s natural 
environment to withstand climate change 
impacts and continue providing ecosystem 
services that communities rely on for social, 
economic and health benefits. 
Efforts to reduce existing pressures and follow 
resource management practices that maintain 
species diversity, support healthy terrestrial and 
aquatic ecosystem function and provide for 
connectivity of natural features are important 
objectives for achieving biodiversity conserva­
tion goals. These management practices can 
reduce impacts (e.g. changes in land cover, 
shifts in wetlands extent and composition, 
increased beach erosion and storm surges, 
melting permafrost and loss of protective ice), 
facilitate the movement of species, maintain 
ecological integrity and help support the 
resilience of natural systems.
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
15
BUILDING RESILIENCE AND BIODIVERSITY THROUGH NATURAL COVER
Taking steps to increase the overall amount of natural 
cover in Ontario is essential if we are to assist native 
species and ecosystems in adapting to climate change. 
MNRF is currently identifying opportunities and undertak­
ing initiatives to improve ecosystems and biodiversity 
through conservation, restoration and enhancement 
programs. This includes the:
f
50 Million Tree Program: In partnership with Forests 
Ontario, MNRF is continuing to support a commit­
ment to plant 50 million trees across the province by 
2025, including 2 million trees within the boundaries 
of urban municipalities
f
Ontario Grasslands Stewardship Initiative: MNRF 
is working to develop and implement a program 
to create, maintain, and enhance 30,000 hectares 
of grassland in Ontario by 2036, with a target of 
creating 22,500 hectares in the first 10 years
f
Wetland Conservation Strategy:  A Wetland 
Conservation Strategy for Ontario 2017–2030 
includes a vision, goals and outcomes, and a 
comprehensive list of actions that the Ontario 
government will take to advance wetland conserv­
ation across the province. Priority actions include 
improving Ontario’s wetland inventory and mapping, 
developing conservation approaches and policy 
tools to prevent net loss of wetlands, and improving 
guidance for evaluating the significance of wetlands. 
Continuing to work with partners to restore wetlands 
is recognized as vital to supporting healthy, resilient 
ecosystems and communities. The strategy further 
supports climate change adaptation through actions 
that expand programs to assess the response and 
vulnerability of wetlands and wetland species to 
climate change, support research into the role of 
wetlands in adaptation and climate resiliency, and 
ensure that wetland conservation integrates adap­
tation considerations. Taken together, these actions 
will advance efforts to increase wetland area and 
function by 2030.
COMBATTING INVASIVE SPECIES
MNRF recognizes that climate change is expected to 
increase the number of species that will be able to 
survive in Ontario, as well as the potential for native 
species to be displaced in some circumstances. Taking 
steps to prevent the introduction of new invasive 
species into Ontario and where possible reduce the 
impacts of those that are already here, will allow 
species and ecosystems to better withstand and 
recover from climate change related stresses. 
In response to this challenge, MNRF released the 
Ontario Invasive Species Strategic Plan in 2012 and 
passed the Invasive Species Act in 2015 to provide 
a policy and legislative framework for combatting 
invasive species in Ontario. The ministry is also 
assessing the likelihood that non-native species 
may survive in Ontario and potentially become 
invasive under predicted climate conditions, and 
is incorporating this information into regulatory 
decisions under the Invasive Species Act. 
16	
STRATEGY GOALS AND ACTIONS: 2017–2021
BUILDING RESILIENCE IN THE FAR NORTH OF ONTARIO
An objective of Ontario’s Far North Act is to protect at least 225,000 square kilometres of the Far North in an 
interconnected network of protected areas. 
Through the Far North Land Use Planning Initiative, MNRF is engaged in a planning process with local First Nations 
to jointly prepare and approve community based land use plans that will designate the areas for protection, as 
well as areas that will be open for sustainable economic development. 
By working with First Nations to designate protected areas in the Far North, MNRF is conserving ecological 
systems and improving ecosystem, landscape and species resilience to climate change.
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
17
GOAL 3:	
INCREASE SCIENCE, RESEARCH AND KNOWLEDGE 
SCIENCE, RESEARCH AND KNOWLEDGE ABOUT THE ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE, THE RESPONSE OF THE NATURAL WORLD AND POTENTIAL ADAPTATION 
MEASURES, IS CONTINUALLY EXPANDED TO BETTER INFORM AND IMPROVE THE 
CONSIDERATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN DECISION-MAKING.
ACTIONS:
3.1: Economics and Valuation – Improve 
knowledge of the economic implications of 
climate change for natural resource management 
and ecosystem resilience
3.2: Modelling – Undertake new modelling and 
build on existing modelling studies to improve 
data on the predicted impacts of climate change
3.3: Monitoring – Advance monitoring and 
reporting programs to collect data on climate 
change impacts and review existing indicators 
to identify opportunities for enhancement
3.4: Partnerships – Support partnerships 
and collaborations that advance the collective 
understanding of climate change impacts and 
opportunities for adaptation 
3.5: Vulnerability Assessment – Conduct 
studies to better understand and estimate climate 
change vulnerabilities, assess risk and inform 
adaptation efforts
3.6: Study Vulnerable Species and Habitat – 
Improve knowledge and information about the 
impacts of climate change on vulnerable species 
and habitats, their capacity to adapt to climate 
change and the potential for increasing resilience 
and coping mechanisms
3.7: Local, Community and Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge – Develop processes 
to increase understanding about climate 
change from local, community and traditional 
knowledge sources 
It is essential for MNRF to continue building 
organizational understanding of the potential 
environmental changes, associated impacts and 
increased demands on ministry capacity as a 
result of climate change. 
Adaptation of natural resource management and 
decision making needs to be underpinned by the 
best available knowledge and information about 
the changing climate and predictions about the 
response of natural resources to those conditions. 
MNRF will be able to inform increasingly effective 
adaptation actions across the ministry’s mandate 
by more closely examining existing information, 
addressing information gaps, assessing vulner­
ability and response to climate shifts, and seeking 
local, community and traditional sources of know­
ledge. The ministry will also explore opportunities 
to improve provincial monitoring programs (e.g. 
fisheries, forests, wildlife) to take stock of climate 
change impacts. 
Increasing science, research and knowledge 
will underpin and support the advancement of
all five goals of Naturally Resilient.
18	
STRATEGY GOALS AND ACTIONS: 2017–2021
ECONOMICS OF CLIMATE CHANGE AND NATURAL 
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Ecological systems and natural resources are essential for human wealth and well-being. Climate change 
has the potential to have a negative impact on natural systems, the benefits these systems provide to humans 
(ecosystem services) and the wealth they generate.
To provide a better understanding of the economics of climate change from a natural resources perspective, 
MNRF is exploring applications of natural capital accounting and the value of ecosystem services.
The ministry is also conducting research projects, including working with partners to determine the potential for 
wetlands to reduce costs associated with flooding. Initial findings from a pilot study found that costs associated 
with damage to buildings could be reduced by maintaining wetland functions in their natural state. 
MULTIPLE STRESSORS ON 
AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMS
Evidence of the negative impact of climate change 
on aquatic ecosystems in Ontario is increasing, 
with significant consequences for Ontario’s commer­
cial and recreational fisheries. While it is well known 
that climate change can exacerbate the effects 
of other stressors, the interactions among these 
multiple stressors and their cumulative effects 
of is not well understood. 
To support effective conservation and management 
of aquatic ecosystems in a changing climate, 
MNRF is researching the interactions among 
multiple stressors such as invasive species, 
resource exploitation and habitat degradation, 
and their potential cumulative effects. 
This research will provide a framework for 
adaptation, conservation and management 
decisions for inland fisheries. The framework 
will be based on an understanding of how 
stressors interact with each other.
UNDERSTANDING PERMAFROST
Permafrost is defined as a state of the ground, 
whether soil or rock, that remains at or below a tem­
perature of 0 °C for at least two consecutive years. 
Permafrost is estimated to occupy 1-10% of Ontario’s 
Far North, in a discontinuous distribution which 
varies with latitude, topography, geology, vegetation, 
and climate.
Model predictions show that this discontinuous 
permafrost zone is sensitive to thawing as a result of 
climate change. A warming climate could lead to the 
thawing and disappearance of permafrost in some 
areas, resulting in the potential for increased landslide 
activity and erosion of river banks and coastlines. 
Permafrost thaw also has the potential to increase 
greenhouse gas emissions, further contributing to 
climate change.
MNRF scientists are working in Ontario’s Far North 
to delineate and map permafrost; assess changes in 
it since the 1950’s, monitor ongoing dynamics; and 
develop the first detailed inventory and accounting of 
the permafrost zone. The ministry is also developing 
climate change vulnerability assessments related to 
permafrost and peatlands thawing, including links to 
water resources connectivity. 
This research will result in new tools, datasets and 
products to support land use planning in Ontario’s 
Far North as the climate continues to warm.
Figure 4 illustrates the four permafrost zones of 
Ontario’s Far North. Most of the permafrost occurs in 
the Hudson Bay Lowlands, with isolated patches in 
the southernmost areas and increasing abundance 
through the discontinuous and continuous zones.
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
19
Figure 4: Current permafrost zones of Ontario
20	
STRATEGY GOALS AND ACTIONS: 2017–2021
PREDICTING NATURAL 
HAZARD RISKS
As the climate changes, efficient and effective 
adaptation interventions will rely on the ability to 
predict and prioritize areas at high risk for climate 
impacts. To improve understanding of the potential 
impacts of climate change on emergencies driven by 
natural hazards, MNRF is undertaking an assessment 
to produce a Natural Hazard Vulnerability Map and 
database which will help to visualize these risks 
across Ontario. 
The tool will enable MNRF to identify which areas 
are at the highest risk from natural hazards both now 
and in the future, as hazard risks evolve with climate 
change. Communities across Ontario will be able to 
make use of this tool for land use planning, public 
safety planning and targeting areas for more detailed 
assessment, hazard mapping and adaptation 
measures. 
CONSIDERING TRADITIONAL 
ECOLOGICAL KNOWLEDGE
MNRF recognizes that Indigenous peoples have a 
long history centred on their relationship with the 
land. First Nation and Métis perspectives, including 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK), are a valu­
able resource in understanding climate change and 
the potential impacts of changes to land, ecosystems 
and species. MNRF will work with First Nation and 
Métis communities to continue to deepen our 
understanding of climate change and potential 
adaptation actions.
To enable appropriate consideration of information 
from TEK sources, MNRF is developing guidance for 
the ministry to include TEK in natural resource 
management, including climate change adaptation 
approaches.
FOCUSING ON VULNERABLE SPECIES AND HABITATS
MNRF is taking action to improve knowledge and 
information about specific species and habitats known 
to be vulnerable to the effects of climate change. 
These focused studies provide detailed information 
on potential climate impacts, coping mechanisms, 
the ability to naturally adapt and implications for 
management decisions to enhance resilience. 
Studies currently underway include:
f
Expanding understanding of genetic diversity 
among major tree species (white and black spruce, 
jack and eastern white pine, eastern larch and red 
oak) and the relationship to environmental factors, 
to determine vulnerability and enhance productivity 
in a changing climate
f
Examining climate effects on site productivity of 
jack pine, black spruce, red pine, white spruce, 
and white pine plantations to predict growth and 
yield changes in a changing climate
f
Researching the effects of climate change on the 
long-term decline of the Algonquin Provincial Park 
gray jay population
f
Surveying the southern Hudson Bay polar bear 
subpopulation and assessing whether abundance 
has decreased as a result of climate change
f
Developing tools to support the creation of 
a landscape scale furbearer management frame­
work to ensure sustainable fur harvesting in a 
changing climate 
f
Reviewing the state of knowledge on climate 
change impacts to white-tailed deer to better 
understand ecosystem impacts, inform potential 
adaptation opportunities and enhance the 
sustainability of deer populations 
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
21
GOAL 4:	
INCREASE AWARENESS AND MOTIVATION
EDUCATION, OUTREACH AND INFORMATION SHARING EFFORTS ARE DEVELOPED 
AND ADVANCED, TO COMMUNICATE INFORMATION ABOUT ADAPTING TO THE 
IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
ACTIONS:
4.1: Communication Through Existing 
Programs – Use existing ministry programs 
and reports to share climate change adaptation 
information with partners, stakeholders and 
the public 
4.2: Education and Participation Opportunities – 
Facilitate opportunities for communities to 
become involved with adaptation planning, 
actions and projects
4.3: Industry Liaison – Work with industry 
partners to communicate best management 
practices for adapting natural resource 
development to a changing climate
4.4: MNRF Understanding – Build awareness 
and understanding within MNRF, through climate 
adaptation information and training
4.5: Public Awareness – Promote public awareness 
of climate impacts and adaptation options through 
broad communications products
Climate change has the potential to significantly 
impact the ecological services provided by natural 
resources (e.g. clean air and water, pollintation, 
wildlife and plant habitat), as well as opportunities 
for the people of Ontario to use and enjoy natural 
resources for recreational and economic purposes.  
It also has the potential to impact Indigenous 
communities’ access and use of natural resources 
for food and cultural purposes. 
Changes to the extent and thickness of lake ice, 
shifts in hunting, fishing and forestry seasons, 
species abundance and distribution, and more 
difficulty controlling water pathogens and insect-
borne diseases, will require a greater public 
understanding of changing environmental 
conditions and participation in efforts to adapt. 
MNRF can support the people of Ontario by 
increasing motivation, communicating opportunities 
to participate, and ensuring awareness of manage­
ment rules and regulations. 
COMMUNICATING WHY 
BIODIVERSITY MATTERS 
IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
Biodiversity and climate change are strongly connected. 
Climate change has the potential to impact biodiversity 
and associated ecosystem services, while biodiversity 
has the ability to help in both mitigating and adapting to 
climate change.
To support increased public awareness of these 
connections, MNRF together with key partners has 
developed a guide that highlights best practices 
for communicating messages about biodiversity 
conservation and climate change adaptation. It will 
also include key messages to assist in understanding 
the connection. The guide is accompanied by the 
BiodiversityMakesUs outreach campaign, which 
includes tools and resources that organizations can 
use to develop biodiversity and climate messaging 
and engage the public in actions that support 
biodiversity conservation.
22	
STRATEGY GOALS AND ACTIONS: 2017–2021
GOAL 5:	
OPTIMIZE SERVICES AND RESPONSE 
PREPAREDNESS FOR NATURAL HAZARD MANAGEMENT, EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
AND SERVICE DELIVERY IS OPTIMIZED TO ENSURE EFFECTIVENESS IN A 
CHANGING CLIMATE
ACTIONS:
5.1: Ensure Sufficient Capacity – Develop 
strategies and contingency plans to maintain 
sufficient ministry capacity to respond to 
predicted increases in severe and variable 
natural events
5.2: Interjurisdictional Cooperation – Support 
resource sharing between jurisdictions and 
development of multi-jurisdictional response 
plans to address escalating emergencies 
5.3: Work Proactively – Work proactively to 
assess increased risks to service delivery posed 
by climate change, identify response priorities, 
and ensure preparedness
Climate change is likely to result in more intense 
and frequent extreme events, including forest 
fires, ice and winter storms, flooding, wind dam­
age, drought and coastal erosion or inundation. 
Such events present challenges for MNRF where 
the ministry is responsible for the safe operation 
and maintenance of parks, public infrastructure, 
buildings and roads. 
Variability in water quantity, reduced spring and 
summer river flows, and changes in timing and 
magnitude of spring melt can also create risks
for the ministry in managing water resources, 
protecting the Great Lakes, and preventing or 
reducing the impacts of natural hazards to 
ensure resilient communities. 
By optimizing approaches to natural hazard 
management, emergency response and service 
delivery, MNRF can ensure these programs 
remain effective in the future.
ENHANCING EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE CAPACITY
As the climate changes, natural hazard events have the 
potential to become increasingly severe and variable. 
MNRF is taking action to increase the ministry’s ability 
to respond to emergencies by enhancing the amount 
of trained and capable staff available to respond 
during extreme natural hazard events.
The MNRF Emergency Response Staffing Strategy 
will provide a long-term and sustainable approach for 
training, activating and deploying staff to respond to 
emergencies. By building stronger partnerships and 
common standards across the ministry, this strategy 
will help MNRF become more connected in adapting 
to climate change.
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
23
4	 IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY
The complex and uncertain nature of climate change impacts on the 
natural environment demands continued evaluation, learning and 
adjustments to courses of action. To ensure effective implementation, 
coordination and reporting, MNRF will align Naturally Resilient with 
broader provincial adaptation efforts and monitor the progress of the 
strategy over time. 
MNRF will assess and report on its progress in 
meeting the goals of the strategy and will integrate 
this learning into identification of future actions. 
Table 1 provides an outline of the outcomes against 
which success will be measured.
MNRF also recognizes that Naturally Resilient 
represents one piece of an expanding focus on 
climate change adaptation across various levels 
of government, sectors and communities. As the 
strategy is implemented, MNRF is committed to 
working with partners in Ontario and other jurisdic­
tions, as well as Indigenous communities, to foster 
collaboration, coordinated action and information 
sharing which will enhance progress towards the 
goals of Naturally Resilient and support adaptation 
more broadly.
24	
IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY
Table 1: Naturally Resilient Goal Outcomes
Strategy Goal
Goal Outcome 
1. 	 Mainstream 
Adaptation
MNRF’s natural resources management direction reflects consideration 
of climate change adaptation and best available science
2. 	Build Resilience 
and Biodiversity
MNRF’s natural resource management actions improve ecosystem, 
landscape and species resilience to climate change
3. 	Increase Science, 
Research and 
Knowledge 
MNRF has an increased knowledge of the ecological impacts of climate 
change and the effectiveness of potential adaptation options
4.	 Increase Awareness 
and Motivation
The people of Ontario have access to information about climate 
change impacts on natural resources that leads to participation 
in adaptation action
5. 	Optimize Services 
and Response 
MNRF’s preparedness for natural hazard management, emergency 
response and service delivery is optimized to support effectiveness 
in a changing climate
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
25
5	RELATED RESOURCES
Ontario is taking a leadership role in understanding the potential 
impacts of climate change and establishing policies and programs to 
lessen those impacts. Learn more about MNRF’s current climate 
change efforts and recent provincial initiatives.
REFERENCES AND USEFUL LINKS: 
⊲
⊲
Climate change in Ontario:
https://www.ontario.ca/page/climate-change 
⊲
⊲
Ontario’s Climate Change Strategy:
https://www.ontario.ca/page/climate-change-strategy 
⊲
⊲
Ontario’s Climate Change Action Plan:
https://www.ontario.ca/page/climate-change-action-plan 
⊲
⊲
Climate change and Ontario’s natural resources: 
https://www.ontario.ca/page/climate-change-and-natural-resources 
⊲
⊲
Natural resource management and climate change: 
https://www.ontario.ca/page/natural-resource-management-and-climate-change 
⊲
⊲
Ontario’s managed forests and climate change: 
https://www.ontario.ca/page/managed-forests-and-climate-change 
⊲
⊲
Current and future climate change impacts by ecoregion: 
https://www.ontario.ca/environment-and-energy/climate-change-ecoregions 
⊲
⊲
Current and future climate change impacts by regions and districts:
https://www.ontario.ca/environment-and-energy/climate-change-regions-and-districts 
⊲
⊲
MNRF Climate Change Research Report series:
http://www.climateontario.ca/scripts/MNR_Pub/mnr_publication.php 
⊲
⊲
A Practitioner’s Guide to Climate Change Adaptation in Ontario’s Ecosystems: 
http://www.climateontario.ca/doc/Tools/A%20Practitioners%20Guide%20to%20ClimateChange%20
Adaptation%20in%20Ontario’s%20Ecosystems%20Ver%201%202011.pdf
⊲
⊲
A Wetland Conservation Strategy for Ontario 2016-2030: 
http://apps.mnr.gov.on.ca/public/files/er/a-wetland-conservation-strategy-for-ontario-2017-2030.pdf 
⊲
⊲
Ontario’s Crown Forests: Opportunities to Enhance Carbon Storage? A Discussion Paper: 
http://apps.mnr.gov.on.ca/public/files/er/mnrf-16-244-discussion-paper.pdf 
26	
RELATED RESOURCES
APPENDIX
GOALS & ACTIONS AT A GLANCE
GOAL 1: MAINSTREAM ADAPTATION
1.1: Work Within Government 
1.2: Planning and Strategy 
1.3: Policy Framework
1.4: Technical Guidance 
1.5: Work with Partners 
GOAL 2: BUILD RESILIENCE AND BIODIVERSITY
2.1: Ecosystem Resilience 
2.2: Landscape Resilience 
2.3: Species Resilience 
GOAL 3: INCREASE SCIENCE, RESEARCH AND KNOWLEDGE
3.1: Economics and Valuation 
3.2: Modelling 
3.3: Monitoring 
3.4: Partnerships 
3.5: Vulnerability Assessment 
3.6: Study Vulnerable Species and Habitat 
3.7: Local, Community and Traditional Ecological Knowledge 
GOAL 4: INCREASE AWARENESS AND MOTIVATION
4.1: Communication Through Existing Programs 
4.2: Education and Participation Opportunities 
4.3: Industry Liaison 
4.4: MNRF Understanding 
4.5: Public Awareness 
GOAL 5: OPTIMIZE SERVICES AND RESPONSE
5.1:	 Ensure Sufficient Capacity 
5.2: Interjurisdictional Cooperation 
5.3: Work Proactively 
NATURALLY RESILIENT: MNRF’S NATURAL RESOURCE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY (2017–2021)	
27
GLOSSARY
Adaptive management: a systematic process
for continually improving management policies 
and practices, including learning from and being 
responsive to the outcomes of past programs and 
policies, as well as building flexibility into policy 
through monitoring and analysis of current and 
changing circumstances. 
Biodiversity: the variability among living 
organisms from all sources, including terrestrial, 
marine and other aquatic ecosystems, and the 
ecological complexes of which they are a part; 
this includes diversity within species, between 
species and of ecosystems.
Carbon sequestration: the removal and storage 
of carbon from the atmosphere in carbon sinks 
(such as wetlands, oceans, forests or soils) 
through physical or biological processes, such 
as photosynthesis.
Climate change adaptation: an adjustment in 
natural or human systems in response to actual 
or expected climatic stimuli or their effects that 
moderates harm or exploits beneficial 
opportunities.
Climate change mitigation: an intervention 
intended to reduce adverse human influence 
on the climate system; it includes strategies 
to lower greenhouse gas emissions and to 
enhance greenhouse gas sinks.
Conservation: actions that are intended to
establish, improve or maintain good relations 
with nature. This can include protection, restora­
tion, rehabilitation, management, stewardship
and wise use.
Ecosystem: a dynamic complex of plant, 
animal and micro-organism communities 
and their physical environment functioning 
as an ecological unit.
Ecosystem services: the services that humans 
derive from ecological functions, such as photo­
synthesis, oxygen production, water purification.
Landscape: complexes of ecosystems in 
geographically defined areas.
Mainstreaming: the process of incorporating a 
concept as part of regular business in everyday 
actions, programs and policies.
Precautionary approach: making decisions about 
the environment when risks are suspected but
not known with certainty. The 1992 Declaration 
on Environment and Development states: “In 
order to protect the environment, the precaution­
ary approach shall be widely applied by States 
[i.e., jurisdictions] according to their capabilities. 
Where there are threats of serious or irreversible 
damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not
be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective 
measures to prevent environmental degradation.”
Resilience: the capacity of a community, business, 
or natural environment to anticipate, prevent, 
withstand, respond to, and recover from a climate 
change related disruption or impact. 
28	
RELATED RESOURCES
REFERENCES
Allen, G. 2007. Moist – Fresh Tallgrass Prairie 
[Digital Image]. Accessed 6 December 2016.
Alofs, K., D. Jackson and N. Lester. 2013. 
Ontario freshwater fishes demonstrate differing 
range-boundary shifts in a warming climate. 
Diversity and Distributions. 20: 1–14.
Brown, J. et al., 1998 (revised February 2001). 
Circum-arctic map of permafrost and ground 
ice conditions. Boulder, CO: National Snow 
and Ice Data Center. Digital media. 
Catling, P.M., and M. J., Oldham. 2011. Recent 
expansion of Spiranthes cernua (Orchidaceae) 
into northern Ontario due to climate change? 
Canadian Field Naturalist 125(1): 34–40
Chu, C., N.E. Mandrak and C.K. Minns. 2005. 
Potential impacts of climate change on the 
distributions of several common and rare 
freshwater fishes in Canada. Diversity and 
Distributions. 11: 299–310.
Department of Fisheries and Oceans. 2013. 
Projections of Future Physical and 
Biogeochemical Conditions in Hudson 
and Baffin Bays from CMIP5 Global Climate 
Models. DFO, Mont-Joli, Québec.
Douglas, A., C. Lemieux, G. Nielson, P. Gray, V 
Anderson and S. MacRitchie. Responding to the 
Effects of Climate Change in the Lake Simcoe 
Watershed: A Pilot Study to Inform Development 
of an Adaptation Strategy on a Watershed Basis. 
OMNRF CCRR-37.
Garroway, C., J. Bowman, T. Cascaden, G. 
Holloway, C. Mahan, J. Malcolm, M. Steele, G. 
Turner, P. Wilson, 2010. Climate Change Induced 
Hybridization in Flying Squirrels. Global Change 
Biology. 16(1): 113-121.
Hunt, L.M. and B. Kolman. 2012. Selected Social 
Implications of Climate Change for Ontario’s 
Ecodistrict 3E-1 (The Clay Belt). OMNRF CCRR-29
Gleeson, J., P. Gray, A. Douglas, C.J. Lemieux, and 
G. Nielsen. 2011. A Practitioner’s Guide to Climate 
Change Adaptation in Ontario’s Ecosystems. 
Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and 
Adaptation Resources. Sudbury, Ontario. 
Gunn, J.M and E. Snucins. 2010. Brook charr 
mortalities during extreme temperature events
in Sutton River, Hudson Bay Lowlands, Canada. 
Hydrobiologia. 650:79-84.
Joyce, D.G. and G.E. Rehfeldt. 2013. Climatic 
niche, ecological genetics, and impact of climate 
change on eastern white pine (Pinus strobus L.): 
Guidelines for land managers. Forest Ecol. Manag. 
295: 173-192.
Man, R., G. Kayahara, S. Foley and C. Wiseman. 
2013. Survival and growth of eastern larch, balsam 
fir, and black spruce six years after winter brown­
ing in northeastern Ontario. Forestry Chronicle 
89(6): 777-782.
McDermid, J, Fera, S and Hogg, A. 2015. Climate 
change projections for Ontario: An updated 
synthesis for policymakers and planners. OMNRF 
CCRR-44.
McKenney, D.W., M.F. Hutchinson, P. Papadopol,
 K. Kawrence, J.H. Pedlar, K. Campbell, T. Owen. 
2011. Customized spatial climate models for 
North America. American Meteorological 
Society:1611-1622.
McKenney, D.W., J.H. Pedlar, K. Lawrence, P.A. 
Gray, S.J. Colombo and W.J. Crins. 2010. Current 
and Projected Future Climatic Conditions for 
Ecoregions and Selected Natural Heritage Areas 
in Ontario. OMNRF CCRR-16. 
Minns, C. K. B.J. Shuter, B.J. and S. R. Fung. 2014. 
Regional projections of climate change effects on ice 
cover and open-water duration for Ontario lakes 
using updated ice-date models. OMNF CCRR-40.
Moudrak, N.; Hutter, A.M.; Feltmate, B. 2017. When the 
Big Storms Hit: The Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban 
and Rural Flood Damage. Prepared for the Ontario 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry. Intact 
Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. 
Online accessible at http://www.intactcentreclima­
teadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/
When-the-Big-Storms-Hit.pdf.
Nutich, L and Bowman, J. 2013. Community-level 
effects of climate change on Ontario’s terrestrial 
biodiversity. OMNRF CCRR-36.
Ontario Biodiversity Council. 2015. State of Ontario’s 
Biodiversity [web application: http://sobr.ca/]. Ontario 
Biodiversity Council, Peterborough, Ontario.
Packalen, M.S. et al., 2016. Climate and peat type in 
relation to spatial variation of the peatland carbon 
mass in the Hudson Bay Lowlands, Canada. J. 
Geophys. Res. Biogeosci., 121, doi: 1002/2015/
JG002938.
Ste.-Marie, C., E.A. Nelson, A. Dabros and M.E. 
Bonneau. 2011. Assisted Migration: Introduction 
to a Multifaceted Concept. The Forestry Chronicle 
87(6): 724–730.
Zhang, T. et al., 2008. Statistics and characteristics of 
permafrost and ground-ice distribution in the northern 
hemisphere. Polar Geogr., 31(1-2), 47-68.
