S TA N D A R D S  R E S E A R C H
Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal 
and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk 
Management
October 2021
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
2
csagroup.org
Authors
Ivana Vouk, National Research Council Canada
Vahid Pilechi, National Research Council Canada
Mitchel Provan, National Research Council Canada
Enda Murphy, National Research Council Canada
Advisory Panel
Danika van Proosdij, Saint Mary’s University
James Bornemann, New Brunswick Southeast Regional Service Commission
Joanna Eyquem, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo
John Sommerville, Natural Resources Canada
Laurence Forget-Dionne, Infrastructure Canada
Michelle Molnar, Municipal Natural Assets Initiative
Natalia Moudrak, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo
Ana-Maria Tomlinson, CSA Group
Hélène Vaillancourt, CSA Group
Kenneth Clogg-Wright, CSA Group (Project Leader)
Disclaimer
This work has been produced by the National Research Council of Canada (NRC) as a service to, and is licenced to, the 
Canadian Standards Association (CSA). The information contained in this report is for general information purposes only in 
regards to the subject matter covered. The NRC and CSA make no representations or warranties of any kind, express or implied, 
about the completeness, accuracy, reliability, suitability or availability with respect to the report or the information, products, 
services, or related graphics contained in the report for any purpose. Any reliance you place on such information is therefore 
strictly at your own risk.
In no event shall the NRC be liable for any claim, or any direct, indirect, special or consequential damages, or any damages 
whatsoever (including, but not limited to, procurement of substitute goods or services; loss of use, data, or profits; or business 
interruption) howsoever caused and on any theory of liability, whether in an action of contract, strict liability, or tort (including 
negligence or otherwise) arising in any way out of or in connection with this report or the use of this report, even if the NRC is 
advised of the possibility of such damage. You will not make claims of any kind whatsoever upon or against the NRC, either on 
your own account or on behalf of any third party, arising directly or indirectly out of your use of the e-guide.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
3
csagroup.org
Foreword 
Technical Guidance Propels Action
Throughout the world, countries and their citizens are having to confront more risks and uncertainties than at any 
other time in modern history. Hazards derived from a changing climate are now globally observed and experienced 
every day. With so many communities now facing an unprecedented number of threats, more must be done to 
reduce risk while embracing a more compatible existence with our planet. This message is growing louder each 
passing year with actions now emanating from organizations in all sectors – private, public, non-government, 
and academia – and the adoption of Nature-based Solutions (NbS) as a means of reducing risk is a logical 
manifestation of messages being turned into action.
The application of NbS to reduce impacts from coastal and riverine flood hazards represents a growing opportunity 
for achieving greater community resilience while simultaneously accruing environmental and social co-benefits. 
Thanks to the efforts of countless scientists, engineers, landscape architects, resource managers, academicians, 
practitioners, and others, the availability of guidance supporting the implementation of NbS has increased. In 
my role with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, it is a great privilege to collaborate with individuals from around 
the world that are leading practice in this area and developing the case studies, technical guidance (including 
standards), peer-reviewed manuscripts, tools and technologies that are revolutionizing and accelerating our ability 
to construct natural infrastructure. While these outcomes do represent significant progress, even more is needed 
to meet increasing demands and to be well-positioned for the uncertainties and challenges of tomorrow. Multi-
disciplinary collaboration is at the heart of these efforts. Only by leveraging diverse expertise and skillsets in a 
collaborative way can we expect to derive sustainable NbS that will be embraced and subsequently implemented.
This review paper titled, “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk Management”, 
is a wonderful addition to a growing body of publications that are advancing the use of NbS around the world. 
This work features a synthesis of NbS recommendations, case studies, project photos, design illustrations, and a 
compilation of referenced technical guidance documents from around the world. The information provided in this 
paper will be of great value to those in search of the proverbial key that unlocks knowledge and makes available 
additional NbS resources. In fact, the foresight of my Canadian colleagues to integrate an international grouping 
of guidance documents is noteworthy. Not only does this review paper provide the reader with a single source of 
substantive information, it further integrates knowledge and publicly available resources from a diverse grouping of 
international practitioners – another important contribution.
Building upon this theme of collaboration and technical guidance, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers published a 
1000-page international guidance document in September 2021 titled, “International Guidelines on Natural and 
Nature-Based Features for Flood Risk Management.” Over 180 practitioners, researchers, and academicians from 
more than 70 organizations around the globe were part of a collaborative team that worked on this project. It is our 
hope that the internationally authored, Natural and Nature-Based Features (NNBF) Guidelines will equip decision 
makers, project planners and practitioners with solutions to reduce flood risk to local communities while providing 
a range of other social, environmental and economic benefits.
Through the combined examples offered here and those of others, more technical guidance on NbS and NNBF is 
being produced, and therefore, helping to propel future action.
Jeffrey K. King, Ph.D., P.E.
Deputy National Lead and Program Manager, 
Engineering With Nature® Program
US Army Corps of Engineers 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
4
csagroup.org
Table of Contents
Executive Summary	
6
1 Introduction	
8
	
1.2 Nature-Based Solutions – Overview and Definition	
8
	
1.3 Objectives	
10
2 Methods	
	
10
3 Nature-Based Solutions – Principles, Concepts and Benefits	
11
	
3.1 Guiding Principles	
11
	
3.2 Adopting a System-Based Approach	
11
	
3.3 Broad Perspectives and Collaborative Approaches	
13
	
3.4 Grey to Green – the NbS Spectrum	
14
	
3.5 Benefits of NbS	
14
	
3.6 Nature-Based Solutions through Strategic Planning	
17
	
	
3.6.1 Integrated Water Resources Management	
17
	
	
3.6.2 Integrated Coastal Zone Management	
18
	
	
3.6.3 Strategic Flood Risk Management	
20
	
	
3.6.4 Land Use Regulation	
20
	
	
3.6.5 Restoration	
21
	
	
3.6.6 Natural Asset Management	
22
	
	
3.6.7 General Considerations	
22
4 Nature-Based Features 	
23
	
4.1 Coastal Environments	
23
	
4.2 Riverine Environments	
25
	
	
4.2.1 Floodplain and River System Preservation and Restoration	
27
	
	
4.2.2 Wetland Preservation and Restoration	
29
	
	
4.2.3 Two-Stage Channels	
29
	
	
4.2.4 Relief Channels	
30
	
	
4.2.5 Instream Features	
30
	
	
4.2.6 Vegetation	
31
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
5
csagroup.org
5 Technical Guidance and Best Practice	
31
	
5.1 Summary of Technical Guidance	
31
	
	
5.1.1 International Guidance	
31
	
	
5.1.2 Canadian Guidance	
33
	
5.2 Synthesis of Current Best Practice	
35
	
	
5.2.1 Engagement and Consensus-Building	
35
	
	
5.2.2 Project Planning and Design	
35
	
	
5.2.3 Construction / Implementation	
38
	
	
5.2.4 Maintenance, Monitoring and Adaptive Management	
38
6 Challenges and Opportunities for Nature-Based Systems in Canada	
39
	
6.1 Overview	
39
	
6.2 Distinct and Varied Environmental Conditions 	
41
	
6.3 Planning and Land Use Strategy	
42
	
6.4 Regulation and Governance	
42
	
6.5 Funding and Financing	
44
	
6.6 Monitoring Performance	
44
	
6.7 Perceptions	
45
	
6.8 Technical Expertise	
46
	
6.9 Post-Flood Recovery	
47
7 Knowledge Gaps and Research Needs	
47
	
7.1 Monitoring	
47
	
7.2 Predicting Performance	
47
	
7.3 Planning/Decision-Making Frameworks	
48
	
7.4 Technical Guidance	
48
	
7.5 Inclusivity and Collaboration	
48
8 Conclusion	
48
References	 	
49
Appendix A – Stakeholder Interview Questionnaire	
59
Appendix B – Review of Available Guidance Documents and Manuals  	
60
	
B.1 International	
60
	
B.2 Canada	
65
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
6
csagroup.org
Executive Summary
Canadian communities and infrastructure are vulnerable to coastal and riverine flood hazards. The risks associated 
with coastal and river flooding are escalating as a result of development in river floodplains and coastal zones, 
and the effects of climate change on flood and erosion hazards. There is growing interest in the potential for 
Nature-based Solutions (NbS) to play a role in managing these risks, owing in part to Canada’s co-leadership 
of the Nature-based Solutions Action Track of the Global Commission on Adaptation. Despite this increasing 
interest in NbS for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management, they remain relatively underutilized in 
Canada. Standards and guidelines can contribute to mainstreaming NbS by clarifying the underlying concepts and 
principles, raising awareness, and educating practitioners, potential project proponents, and the public. This review 
and synthesis of published literature and interviews with stakeholders and experts was conducted to:
	• Assess how NbS can be used to manage flood and erosion risks in coastal and riverine environments in Canada; 
and 
	• Determine needs and opportunities for standards to support deployment of NbS to reduce coastal and riverine 
flooding and erosion risks.
NbS for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management are strategies or measures that depend on, 
or mimic, natural system processes to provide flood and erosion risk management function, while delivering a 
suite of environmental and other societal co-benefits. NbS embrace the principles of “whole system” analysis, 
adaptive management, multi-disciplinary teams, innovation, and long-term planning for uncertainty. They can 
be deployed through sustainable planning and regulatory frameworks that recognize the value of natural assets 
and infrastructure in supporting risk management objectives (e.g., Integrated Water Resources Management 
and Integrated Coastal Zone Management), and/or the targeted deployment of nature-based features to provide 
specific flood and erosion risk management functions. Nature-based features can deliver flood and erosion risk 
management benefits in a variety of ways, for example:
	• In coastal regions – beaches/dunes, reefs, and wetlands provide buffers against wave action, storm surges, and 
erosion;
	• In river watersheds – wetlands, reconnected floodplain areas, and restored river channels enhance groundwater 
infiltration, reduce or delay runoff, and attenuate peak flood flows and water levels; and
	• In estuaries – marsh and wetland systems can be preserved, expanded, or restored to provide additional hydraulic 
storage and attenuate waves.
NbS span a continuum of human intervention from green (least intervention) to grey (traditional hard 
infrastructure); from simply conserving or protecting existing natural systems (e.g., floodplain preservation), to 
enhancing or restoring natural processes (e.g., beach nourishment), to hybrid or grey-green solutions that integrate 
hard engineering or structural measures with more natural features (e.g., buried revetments), to “greening” 
traditional infrastructure (e.g., by incorporating features to enhance ecological value or provide habitat).
Although there are Canadian examples of NbS for flood and erosion risk management that date back to the 
1970s, they remain relatively underutilized today. Key barriers to broader uptake include challenges in predicting 
performance of NbS in distinct and varied Canadian regional settings, a paucity of data demonstrating the 
performance and track record of NbS, a shortage of highly qualified professionals, stakeholder perceptions 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
7
csagroup.org
that NbS are more uncertain or less effective than (hard engineering) alternatives, project funding models that 
disincentivize NbS, undervaluation of the co-benefits of NbS in conventional economic analyses and financing 
models, a lack of authoritative technical guidance, and complex governance and regulatory environments.
The growth in research and interest surrounding NbS has led to the proliferation of numerous reports and guidance 
documents relevant to the implementation of NbS for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management. With 
a few exceptions, the majority of guidance is relatively high-level, and lacks either the technical detail or region-
specific contexts needed to support effective design and implementation of NbS for coastal and riverine flood 
and erosion risk management across Canada. Collectively, however, available and emerging guidance provides a 
sound foundational basis for working towards implementation of best practices through future Canadian national 
standards and design guides. The benefits of national standardization and guidance would include mainstreaming 
of NbS principles, education of stakeholders and potential proponents on factors affecting the performance of 
NbS, and increased investor confidence in NbS projects. In particular, monitoring and evaluation protocols for NbS, 
and frameworks supporting evaluation and deployment of NbS represent potential short-term opportunities for 
standardization to facilitate wider adoption.  
Knowledge and research gaps to be addressed to enable the development of Canadian guides and standards for 
NbS in coastal zones and river watersheds include:  
	• Evidence of NbS performance across distinct and varied Canadian coastal and river settings, particularly 
northern environments, where NbS are relatively untested; 
	• Improvement and validation of predictive tools; 
	• Potential adverse impacts of NbS; and 
	• An improved understanding of the comparative performance of non-structural (i.e., planning-based), 
conventional, and nature-based (including hybrid) flood and erosion risk management solutions in achieving 
multiple benefits.   
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
8
csagroup.org
1 Introduction
Flooding is Canada’s costliest natural disaster and 
source of property damage [1]–[4], with significant 
contributions from (1) fluvial (riverine) flooding, typically 
driven by snowmelt, precipitation, or ice jams; and 
(2) coastal flooding resulting from high tides, storm 
surges, or wave effects [5]. Canada’s population and 
infrastructure are highly concentrated near rivers, 
lakes, and marine coasts, and are therefore vulnerable 
to hazards arising from the natural processes of 
flooding and erosion [5]–[7]. The risks associated 
with flood hazards are projected to increase over the 
coming decades due to continued development and 
population growth in river basins and coastal areas, 
and the effects of climate change [8]. This escalating 
flood risk profile will necessitate more holistic, 
forward-looking approaches to risk management and 
climate adaptation that leverage a broader portfolio of 
techniques, including nature-based solutions. 
Flood risk only exists where there is both hazard and 
exposure (e.g., people, property, or valued assets 
in the way of the flood) [6]. Indeed, flooding and 
erosion are fundamental processes that contribute 
to natural river and shore function, underpin the 
maintenance of habitats, and support balanced river 
and coastal ecosystems. Alteration or disturbance 
of these natural processes can result in instability, 
unintended consequences, or narrow the future range 
options for adapting to changes in the system [9-11]. 
Understanding and working with natural processes, 
for example, through Nature-based Solutions (NbS), is 
therefore crucial in supporting sustainable river basin 
and coastal zone management.
NbS are gaining increasing international traction and 
research attention [12]–[14], given their potential to 
tackle both climate mitigation and adaptation challenges 
while delivering multiple additional co-benefits for 
society and the environment. Recently, there has been 
a growing national interest in the role of NbS for climate 
adaptation, owing in part to Canada’s co-leadership of 
the Nature-based Solutions Action Track of the Global 
Commission on Adaptation [13], which aims to catalyze, 
scale up, and realize the full potential of NbS through 
initiatives that address key barriers. NbS have potential 
to play an important role in helping Canada to achieve 
its commitments and targets under global initiatives 
such as the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals [15], the Paris Agreement on Climate Change [16], 
and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
[17]. Most recently, the Government of Canada has 
identified embracing the power of nature, including NbS 
for flood risk reduction, as one of five pillars of its new 
climate plan [18]. 
1.1 Nature-Based Solutions – Overview 
and Definition
Nature-based solutions (NbS) are broadly defined 
as “actions to protect, sustainably manage and 
restore natural and modified ecosystems in ways 
that address societal challenges effectively and 
adaptively, to provide both human well-being and 
biodiversity benefits” [19]. The term nature-based 
"Canada’s population and infrastructure are 
highly concentrated near rivers, lakes and 
marine coasts, and are therefore vulnerable 
to hazards arising from the natural processes 
of flooding and erosion."
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
9
csagroup.org
solutions was coined in the early 2000s to describe 
new approaches to climate change mitigation and 
adaptation that simultaneously promote biodiversity 
and ancillary societal benefits [20]. NbS is an umbrella 
term for a range of ecosystem-based approaches to 
tackling societal challenges [21]. As such, NbS do not 
exclusively refer to flood or erosion risk management 
solutions or practices but can encompass a variety of 
activities where nature is depended on or harnessed to 
sustainably address challenges such as food security, 
water security, human health, climate change, and 
socio-economic development [12], [19]. NbS build 
on and share similarities with other approaches 
and frameworks, which has led to vague and varied 
terminology and definitions in use. On the one hand, 
this lack of precision and consistency in defining 
NbS speaks to the underlying holistic principles and 
has enabled broad acceptance; on the other, it has 
led to some confusion and concern that NbS may 
be misinterpreted, misapplied, or simply viewed 
as another buzz word [14], [19], [20], [22], [23]. The 
new International Union for Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN) Global Standard for NbS [19] aims to address 
this imprecision, and reinforces the idea that NbS go 
beyond environment conservation and preservation 
principles to focus on humans and societal challenges, 
such as flood and erosion risk management.  
Specifically, in the context of riverine and coastal 
flooding and erosion, NbS encompass a variety of 
strategies and measures that rely on, or mimic, natural 
system processes to manage or reduce risk. They 
build on well-established principles and practices that 
involve developing an understanding of the natural 
system as the basis for informing risk management 
strategies and solutions [22], [24]. The evolution of 
the term nature-based solutions reflects a growing 
awareness of the value of natural assets in delivering 
societal benefits, including flood risk reduction, and 
recognition of the ecosystem services1 and climate 
change mitigation co-benefits (see Section 3.5). For the 
purpose of this report and specifically for application 
to coastal and riverine flood risk management, the 
following definition of NbS is adopted:
1	
Ecosystem services are taken to mean “direct and indirect contributions of ecosystems to human well-being” [20].
Nature-based solutions (NbS) for coastal and 
riverine flood and erosion risk management 
are strategies or measures that depend on, or 
mimic, natural system processes to provide flood 
and erosion risk management function, while 
delivering environmental and other societal 
co-benefits.
There are a variety of ways in which natural system 
processes can be leveraged or restored to deliver flood 
and erosion risk management benefits, for example:	
• In coastal regions – beaches/dunes and wetlands
provide buffers against wave action, storm surges,
and erosion;	
• In river watersheds – wetlands, reconnected
floodplain areas, and restored river channels
enhance groundwater infiltration, reduce or delay
runoff, and attenuate peak flood flows and water
levels; and	
• In estuaries – marsh and wetland systems can
be preserved, expanded, or restored to provide
additional hydraulic storage and attenuate waves.
Further examples and details of different mechanisms 
and nature-based solutions that support flood and 
erosion risk management objectives are described in 
Section 3.
There are many terms that are either synonymous 
with, or resemble, the meaning of NbS for flood and 
erosion risk management, that is, green (or grey-
green) infrastructure, natural infrastructure, natural 
asset management, soft engineering, living shorelines, 
ecosystem services, ecosystem-based approaches, 
bio-engineering, natural flood management, working 
with natural processes, engineering with nature, 
building with nature, room for the river, ecological 
engineering, integrated coastal zone management, and 
integrated water resources management [20]–[22]. 
Each of these terms and their definitions have their 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
10
csagroup.org
own nuances and emphasis, largely determined by 
where they sit on the continuum of focus on addressing 
purely societal versus purely environmental objectives 
[25]. Eggermont et al. [20] and Gómez Martín [23] 
identify different types of NbS that span a continuum 
of human intervention; from conserving or protecting 
existing natural systems to hybrid or grey-green 
solutions that integrate hard engineering or structural 
measures with more natural features, applying whole 
system principles (see Section 3.2). 
While the benefits of NbS are receiving increasing 
attention, these solutions remain comparatively 
underutilized in Canada [26] and around the world. 
Globally, barriers to broader uptake of NbS include 
the following [11]–[14]: 
1.	
Challenges in predicting performance and cost-
effectiveness compared to alternatives; 
2.	 Challenges in valuation of benefits and economic 
appraisal of NbS;
3.	 Inflexible governance structures;
4.	 Lack of institutional, financial and regulatory 
capacity to strategize, implement and monitor NbS;
5.	 Lack of awareness of the role NbS can play in 
supporting social and economic resilience;
6.	 Lack of access to funds for investment in NbS;
7.	
Limited opportunities for multi-disciplinary and 
multi-sectoral communication/collaboration 
(e.g., between ecologists, economists, engineers, 
landscape architects and planners).
8.	 Piecemeal approaches to climate change 
adaptation that undervalue NbS; and 
9.	 Public or stakeholder perceptions that NbS are less 
effective than traditional solutions. 
1.2 Objectives
By synthesizing published literature and stakeholder 
perspectives, the broad objectives of this report are to:
	• Assess how NbS can be used for mitigating 
flood and erosion risks in coastal and riverine 
environments, and what types of NbS are most 
effective and most appropriate in the Canadian 
climate; and
	• Determine what standards requirements and 
recommendations are needed to inform the 
appropriate selection and application of NbS to 
ensure that they are effective in mitigating flooding 
and erosion risks.
More specifically, the report:
	• Identifies the types of NbS that can be used in 
coastal and riverine regions, and discusses current 
best practices for the successful implementation 
of each type of system including key design, 
construction, maintenance and monitoring 
considerations, favourable site characteristics and 
climatic regions, and known vulnerabilities (such as 
damage caused by extreme weather);
	• Discusses prominent case examples of natural and 
NbS reflecting on things that have gone well and 
things that have resulted in problems/challenges;
	• Provides insights into the processes that should 
be used for monitoring functional performance in 
order to adaptively manage and maintain the level of 
performance and benefits delivered; and
	• Identifies current knowledge gaps and provides 
recommendations for future research and standards 
development.
2 Methods
The review of NbS for coastal and riverine flood risk 
management described in this report is based on a 
search and synthesis of existing, publicly available 
information and published literature, as well as 
interviews with various experts, stakeholders, and 
interested parties across Canada. The stakeholder 
outreach activity aimed to provide a reasonable 
balance in terms of geographic coverage, discipline, 
expertise, and sector. Written background 
information on the purpose of the study, the interview 
questionnaire, and intended use of the interview 
responses were provided to invited participants 
(Appendix A). In total, 21 teleconference interviews 
were conducted, and two written responses to the 
questionnaire were received, with representation from 
academia, non-government organizations, private 
industry, and all levels of government. Interview 
responses were provided by representatives from 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
11
csagroup.org
British Columbia, Yukon, Alberta, Manitoba, Nunavut, 
Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and 
Newfoundland and Labrador. All responses were 
anonymized during the synthesis, and efforts were 
made to distill common or recurring themes and points 
deemed to be particularly insightful.
3 Nature-Based Solutions – 
Principles, Concepts, and 
Benefits
3.1 Guiding Principles
In striving to establish a consistent framework for 
NbS, IUCN [19] has defined eight criteria that allow 
users to assess how a solution meets the Global 
Standard for NbS:
	• Criterion 1 – NbS effectively address societal 
challenges;
	• Criterion 2 – NbS design is informed by scale;
	• Criterion 3 – NbS result in a net gain to biodiversity 
and ecosystem integrity;
	• Criterion 4 – NbS are economically viable;
	• Criterion 5 – NbS are based on inclusive, 
transparent, and empowering governance processes;
	• Criterion 6 – NbS equitably balance trade-offs 
between achievement of their primary goal(s) and 
the continued provision of multiple benefits;
	• Criterion 7 – NbS are managed adaptively, based on 
evidence; and
	• Criterion 8 – NbS are sustainable and mainstreamed 
within an appropriate jurisdictional context.
Although these criteria are not limited or specific to 
flood and erosion risk management applications, they 
are suitable guiding principles for NbS intended to 
address flood risk as a societal challenge.
3.2 Adopting a System-Based Approach
Rooted in the concept of NbS, and indeed flood and 
erosion risk management more generally, is the idea 
of “system-based” or “whole system” approaches [10], 
[19], [27]. Such approaches consider a broad range of 
physical, biological, and social processes, and their 
interactions, in evaluating flood and erosion risk and 
solutions. System-based approaches also consider a 
range of temporal scales (hours to decades) and spatial 
scales (local to global) to arrive at solutions that are 
sustainable. They recognize that the cumulative effects 
of multiple, small interventions can have significant 
impacts on the system as a whole and are therefore 
often most effective when applied at broad scales 
[13]. An example is the use of leaky dams in upper 
watersheds to attenuate flood peaks in lower river 
reaches, or application of the principles of redundancy 
in multiple-line-of-defence coastal protection schemes 
– see the Living Breakwaters Project in Case Study A.
Developing a whole system understanding is crucial 
to successful implementation of NbS, because it 
provides a broad perspective on interplay of ecology, 
geomorphology, hydrology, and hydrodynamics, 
as well as interfaces with the social system. Such 
approaches promote long-term thinking, which is 
fundamental to enable anticipation of change (e.g., 
climate, urbanization, human behaviour) and adaptive 
management. Natural systems, and therefore NbS, 
are inherently dynamic, which is partly why they are 
often more adaptable to climate change. However, 
to be sustainable, NbS must be capable of bouncing 
back following a natural or anthropogenic system 
disturbance, that is, they must be resilient and 
predominantly self-sustaining. This is often a significant 
source of anxiety for new adopters of NbS, who may 
be more familiar or comfortable with the apparent 
surety of conventional, hard engineering solutions, or 
skeptical that NbS can be cost-effective [28]. On the 
contrary, evidence shows that well-executed NbS are 
often the least regret options for flood and erosion risk 
management because they provide a buffer against 
development in areas of high hazard, and typically 
incur lower capital investment and operating costs [29], 
[30], owing to their ability to adapt. 
Developing resilient NbS requires developing an 
understanding of the interconnectedness in systems. 
For instance, stabilization of eroding cliffs may deprive 
downdrift beaches of sediment needed to sustain them, 
and marsh vegetation plantings may be vulnerable to 
grazing bird populations or damage by storms or debris 
during the initial period. Leveraging the advantages 
of system interconnectivity, such as harnessing 
ecosystem services to deliver flood and erosion risk 
management benefits, is a fundamental principle 
underlying NbS.   
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
12
csagroup.org
Case Study A: The Living 
Breakwaters Project, New York – 
a Multiple-Line-of-Defence NbS
Following the devastating impacts of Hurricane 
Sandy in 2012, the State of New York looked for 
opportunities to proactively plan for long-term 
resilience and climate change adaptation. The 
Living Breakwaters project is an innovative, 
one-mile long system of proposed offshore 
breakwaters with various ecosystem-enhancing 
features that will attenuate storm waves and 
reduce coastal erosion [135]. The breakwaters 
will act in concert with a beach nourishment 
overlying rock revetment (i.e., buried revetment) 
on the south shore of Staten Island, providing 
a multiple-line-of-defence shore protection 
system. The breakwaters are designed with a 
variety of habitat features, including “reef streets” 
and “reef ridges” (Figure 1). Together, the ridges 
and streets expand the intertidal and subtidal 
zones of the breakwaters, increasing habitat 
area. Two types of special bio-enhancing armor 
units are to be incorporated into the breakwater, 
ECOncrete® Armor Units and Tide Pools. The 
armor units have surface recesses and striations 
to encourage the growth of marine organisms and 
enhance biodiversity [135]. The Tide Pool units are 
designed to mimic natural tidal pools commonly 
found on rocky coasts. Co-benefits will include 
the planned restoration of active oyster reef 
habitat on and adjacent to the new breakwaters, 
and opportunities for waterfront stewardship and 
recreation. Physical model investigations of the 
hydraulic performance of the breakwaters were 
conducted in several wave basins at the National 
Research Council Canada's research facilities in 
Ottawa, to support the breakwater system design. 
As of October 2021 construction of the project 
was contracted out (https://stormrecovery.ny.gov/
learn-more-about-living-breakwaters-project). 
The Living Breakwaters Project is an example of 
an innovative, hybrid NbS that demonstrates how 
degraded coastlines can be renaturalized and 
enhanced to provide improved flood and erosion 
resilience, and a range of co-benefits.
Figure 1: Reef ridges and streets on a rubblemound breakwater. Reproduced with permission from SCAPE.
NAVIGATION AID
REEF RIDGE ROTATION AXIS
ARMOR STONE
CORE STONE
PRE-CAST 
ECOLOGICAL 
CONCRETE  
ARMOR UNIT
PRE-CAST ECOLOGICAL 
CONCRETE TIDE POOL
REEF RIDGES
REEF STREETS
GEOTEXTILE
REEF RIDGE EXTERIOR STONE
REEF RIDGE CORE STONE
TOE ARMOR STONE
MARINE MATTRESS
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
13
csagroup.org
3.3 Broad Perspectives and Collaborative 
Approaches
As discussed, NbS for flood and erosion risk 
management build on and integrate aspects of system-
based approaches, integrated flood risk management, 
river and coastal engineering, ecological engineering, 
restoration ecology, archeology, economics, and other 
fields of practice. NbS are therefore inherently multi-
disciplinary and collaborative endeavours [31] (see the 
Percé Waterfront Rehabilitation project in Case Study 
B). Consequently, development and implementation 
of NbS is more likely to involve and embrace novelty, 
innovation, and new or previously ignored ways of 
thinking. This exploratory ethos may require a greater 
emphasis, by comparison to conventional flood and 
erosion risk management approaches, on anticipating 
and adaptively managing change.
Criteria 5 and 8 of the IUCN Global Standard speak to 
the need for, and value of, inclusion and empowerment 
of Indigenous peoples in NbS, recognizing that NbS 
can contribute to human well-being, climate change, 
biodiversity, and human rights, including the United 
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples. There is an obligation to obtain free, prior, 
and informed consent from Indigenous peoples on 
issues that might affect their interest. Indigenous 
perspectives, traditional knowledge, including 
traditional ecological knowledge, and world views 
can promote and enhance the success of NbS, and 
there are a number of examples where Indigenous 
communities are leading proponents of NbS in Canada 
(e.g., [32]–[34]).
Case Study B: Percé Waterfront 
Rehabilitation, Québec – a 
Collaborative NbS
The town of Percé on the Gaspé Peninsula is 
known for its natural features, including Percé 
Rock (Figure 2) and Bonaventure Island, which 
help to attract more than 400,000 visitors every 
year. The town’s waterfront was experiencing 
ongoing coastal erosion and flooding, 
exacerbated over time by rising sea levels, and 
decreases in winter sea ice cover and ice season 
duration [136]. In particular, two major storms 
in 2010 and 2016 caused significant damage to 
coastal infrastructure, including Percé Wharf 
and the concrete seawall protecting the town’s 
scenic boardwalk (Figure 2). In 2016, a team of 
researchers from Ouranos and the Université 
du Québec à Rimouski investigated a solution 
to enhance flood resilience in the Anse-du-
Sud area, which has important heritage and 
economic value for the town. The study included 
cost-benefit analysis, and environmental and 
social impact assessment for five different 
adaptation options: (1) construction of a new 
seawall, (2) rock-filling the shoreline, (3) riprap 
installation, and beach nourishment (4) with or 
(5) without groynes. The team determined that 
a pebble beach nourishment would be the most 
economically beneficial solution. The project 
was completed in the summer of 2018, and 
received a National Urban Design Award from 
the Royal Architectural Institute of Canada for its 
innovative and sustainable approach [137].
Figure 2: Percé's restored shoreline. Reproduced with 
permission from Enda Murphy.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
14
csagroup.org
3.4 Grey to Green – the NbS Spectrum
NbS span a continuum of approaches lying between 
purely natural (green) and conventional (grey/hard 
structural) solutions. This recognizes that ecosystem 
restoration or biodiversity enhancement are not 
necessarily the primary or only goals of NbS, which 
are fundamentally aimed at addressing broad societal 
challenges [20], such as flood and erosion risk 
management. NbS leverage synergies and system-
based approaches to better integrate conventional 
infrastructure and natural ecosystems in hybrid or 
grey-green solutions [35]. Hybrid solutions generally 
mimic, or are inspired by, nature, such that the term 
biomimicry is often synonymous with NbS [36]. 
Examples of hybrid solutions specific to coastal and 
riverine flood and erosion risk management include 
restored beach-dune systems that incorporate hard, 
stabilizing control structures (e.g., groynes), buried 
revetments (Figure 3) [37], and off-stream flood storage 
areas in river watersheds that feature engineered 
hydraulic structures at the inlets/outlets, such as 
the Living Breakwaters in Case Study A and the 
Springbank Off-Stream Reservoir in Case Study C. In 
some cases, greening or retrofitting conventional flood 
risk management infrastructure to provide enhanced 
habitat value, such as tidewater retaining niches in 
breakwaters or seawalls, may be considered a viable 
form of NbS [22], [38]. However, this can only be true if 
the principles guiding NbS are adhered to (e.g., whole 
system considerations, equitable balance of trade-
offs, delivery of multiple benefits), or such approaches 
run the risk of merely constituting greenwashing, with 
associated negative connotations [39].
3.5 Benefits of NbS
The benefits to people or the environment arising from 
NbS (or natural systems), whether directly or indirectly, 
are sometimes called ecosystem services [20], [40]. If 
flood and erosion risk management is considered the 
primary benefit, ancillary benefits are often referred 
to as co-benefits. NbS deliver flood and erosion risk 
management benefits through various processes and 
mechanisms, for example, attenuation of waves in 
coastal regions, trapping and retention of sediment, 
increasing groundwater infiltration, reducing runoff, 
and creating flood storage in river watersheds. The 
extent and value of such benefits are beginning to be 
quantified and fully recognized internationally and in 
Canada. For example, in a rigorous analysis, Storlazzi 
et al. [41] determined that the annual value of flood risk 
reduction provided by coral reefs in the U.S. is more 
than 18,000 lives and US$1.8 billion (2010 dollars). 
Narayan et al. [42] estimated that coastal wetlands 
averted more than US$625 million in flood damages 
from Hurricane Sandy across the northeastern U.S. 
Arkema et al. [43] calculated that the number of 
vulnerable people and value of residential property in 
the U.S. that are most exposed to hazards (including 
storm wind/wave exposure and inundation) could 
be reduced by 50% if existing coastal habitats are 
preserved. Moudrak and Feltmate [1], Moudrak et al. 
[26], Circé et al. [44], Horizon Advisors [45], Sherren et 
al. [46], and the Municipal Natural Assets Initiative [47], 
[48] present numerous examples of economic analyses 
that quantitatively illustrate the benefits of NbS and 
natural assets in Canada: 
Figure 3: Schematic of buried revetment cross-section at Dominion Beach, Nova Scotia. Reproduced with permission from 
Vincent Leys, CBCL.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
15
csagroup.org
Case Study C: Springbank Off-
Stream Reservoir Project, Alberta
The Elbow and Bow River floods of June 2013 
resulted in the largest flood event in Calgary since 
1932, causing an estimated $6 billion in damage 
throughout the province of Alberta and five deaths 
[138]. The City of Calgary and the Government of 
Alberta are investigating several flood mitigation 
solutions. One of the preferred solutions is to 
construct an offstream diversion (Figure 4) about 
15 km west of Calgary to re-route Elbow River 
floodwaters into an adjacent wetland, gradually 
releasing it back into the system after the peak 
of the flood hydrograph has passed. The project 
will increase the total storage capacity within the 
system to 87 million m3, which exceeds the volume 
needed to pass the 2013 flood. A benefit/cost ratio 
of 1.68 was estimated for the project [139]. 
Figure 4: 1/16 Scale physical model of the Springbank 
Off-Stream Reservoir Project at the National Research Council 
Canada, Ottawa. Source: National Research Council Canada. 
	• The Town of Gibsons, British Columbia, found that 
the natural ponds in White Tower Park provided 
water and stormwater management services, which 
would have cost about $3.5–4.0 million to achieve 
using engineered infrastructure [26]. 
	• Hydraulic modelling for two Southern Ontario 
pilot sites, in rural and urban settings, showed that 
flood damages could be reduced by 29% and 38%, 
respectively, if wetlands were maintained in their 
natural state (versus conversion to agricultural 
use) [45].
	• An engineered wetland retention system at Pelly’s 
Lake in Manitoba delivered economic benefits in 
terms of avoided flood damages, water quality, 
carbon sequestration, and biomass production to the 
tune of $25,507 per hectare per year (2017 dollars) 
[45], [49] (see Pelly’s Lake Wetland Restoration in 
Case Study D). 
	• A naturalized channel at Oakville, Ontario, delivered 
stormwater conveyance and flood attenuation 
benefits, which would cost $725,000 to provide 
using grey infrastructure (pipes) with equivalent 
conveyance capacity [26].
	• 1.4 hectares of wetlands in the Mill Creek watershed, 
New Brunswick, deliver $1.4 million in flood 
attenuation benefits for a 1-in-100 year return period 
flood event [48].
	• Based on a direct cost comparison, coastal dyke 
realignment and tidal marsh restoration would save 
more than $520,000 (2018 dollars) compared to 
maintaining dyke infrastructure at North Onslow, 
Nova Scotia. This analysis excluded monetary 
analysis of additional co-benefits, including carbon 
sequestration and flood mitigation [46].
A key feature and advantage of NbS, demonstrated 
by Criterion 1 of the IUCN Global Standard [19], is 
that they deliver multiple benefits simultaneously [12], 
[50]. For example, reforestation of river watersheds 
can simultaneously deliver benefits in terms of flood 
risk reduction (see Ganaraska River Headwaters 
Reforestation in Case Study E), carbon sequestration, 
biodiversity, and human health. Standardization, 
classification, and assessment of ecosystem services 
are ongoing efforts [21]. However, ecosystem services 
or co-benefits are sometimes grouped into four broad 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
16
csagroup.org
categories: provisioning, regulation, supporting, and 
cultural. Examples of ecosystem services provided 
by NbS for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk 
management are listed in Figure 5.
Although there are numerous examples of NbS that 
demonstrate these concepts, there are open questions 
on how to appropriately evaluate or weigh co-benefits 
when appraising flood and erosion risk management 
options [12], [50], particularly when relying only on 
conventional cost-benefit analysis techniques. Indeed, 
valuation of co-benefits is one of the most prominent 
subjects of research related to NbS [52]. Due to the 
challenges in quantifying or monetizing ancillary 
benefits, NbS are often undervalued by traditional cost-
benefit analyses [53], and may score higher in more 
holistic triple- or quadruple-bottom line multi-criteria 
analyses. Multi-criteria analysis [54] is a particularly 
useful decision-making tool for projects with multiple 
objectives, inherent to the definition of NbS, and costs 
or benefits that are difficult to monetize (e.g., indirect 
or intangible). A comprehensive assessment of the 
financial, environmental, and social costs is required to 
illuminate the otherwise uncaptured benefits of NbS 
and enable economically sound decision-making [26]. 
While the benefits of NbS are increasingly being 
recognized and quantified, they must be deployed 
with consideration for systems and local contexts, and 
for future change, and are not universally appropriate 
or successful. Indeed, there is potential for negative 
consequences if NbS are misapplied or not well 
conceived. An example of potential unintended 
consequences in river watersheds is that afforestation 
Figure 5: Examples of ecosystem services provided by NbS for flood and erosion risk management. Adapted from IUCN [51]
Supporting
Cultural
Provisioning
Regulation
 • Biodiversity
 • Habitat
 • Soil formation
 • Pollination
 • Primary 
production
 • Clean water
 • Clean air
 • Renewable energy 
(e.g., biomass)
 • Fish
 • Native food
 • Green growth  
and job creation
 • Recreation
 • Tourism
 • Education
 • Preservation  
of heritage and 
cultural assets
 • Preservation of 
traditional hunting 
and fishing areas
 • Stewardship
 • Carbon 
sequestration  
and storage
 • Flood and erosion 
risk management
 • Climate resilience
 • Human health 
(including mental 
health and 
wellness)
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
17
csagroup.org
for the purpose of attenuating floods has potential 
to generate or exacerbate woody debris hazards. 
In coastal or estuarine environments, managed 
realignment of dykes has the potential to alter tidal 
prisms and regional circulation patterns [55], with 
potential negative consequences for ecosystems or 
communities (e.g., increased flood risk). Placement 
of sediment on beaches or dune systems as part of a 
nourishment scheme, a common coastal nature-based 
solution, has potential to disturb natural ecosystems 
and habitats, usually temporarily. An important 
consideration in design of such solutions is therefore 
to understand the resilience of the system, capacity/
timescales for recovery, and the balance between 
short-term impacts and longer-term benefits. 
3.6 Nature-Based Solutions through 
Strategic Planning
Broadly speaking, NbS for flood and erosion risk 
management can be deployed in two ways: (1) through 
sustainable planning and regulatory frameworks that 
recognize the value of natural assets and infrastructure 
in supporting risk management objectives, discussed 
in this section, and (2) through the targeted and/
or cumulative deployment of nature-based features 
to provide specific functions, which is discussed in 
Section 3.7.
Sustainable planning includes the following [21]:
	• Integrated water resources management (including 
integrated river basin management)
	• Integrated coastal zone management
	• Strategic flood risk management
	• Land use regulation
	• Restoration
	• Natural asset management
Each of these planning aspects can make use of 
NbS. They are covered in more detail in the following 
subsections.
3.6.1 Integrated Water Resources 
Management
Integrated water resources management (IWRM) 
is a concept dating back to the early 20th century 
whereby water, land, and related resources would be 
managed in a holistic and broad participatory manner 
to maximize economic and social benefits without 
compromising the sustainability of the environment. 
Though sometimes criticized for the vagueness of 
the concept and associated challenges for broad 
Case Study D: Pelly’s Lake Wetland Restoration, Manitoba – the Value of NbS
In 2015, a managed wetland water retention 
system was built on Pelly’s Lake to support 
flood risk management within the Boyne River 
watershed and improve water quality in Lake 
Winnipeg. The system captures surface water 
runoff during the spring, reducing peak flood 
discharges downstream, and retaining nutrients 
and pollutants upstream of Lake Winnipeg. 
The site is drained in the summer, providing 
ideal conditions for growing cattails and other 
emergent wetland vegetation, which contribute 
to nutrient uptake and provide habitat for birds 
and wildlife. Under drier conditions in the fall, 
cattails are harvested and sold for bio-energy 
generation. Over 200 hectares of wetlands 
were restored, resulting in significant increases 
in the number and diversity of waterfowl and 
marsh birds. Economic assessments of Pelly’s 
Lake water retention system estimated annual 
contaminant removal and flood damage 
reduction benefits of more than $17,000 per 
hectare (2017 dollars) of the 121 ha retention 
basin, and net benefit-cost ratios in the range 
of 2.8 to 3.64 [140]. The Pelly’s Lake Wetland 
Restoration demonstrates the value of wetlands 
in providing flood risk management benefits and 
a variety of co-benefits in river systems.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
18
csagroup.org
Case Study E: Ganaraska River Headwaters Reforestation, Ontario
Agriculture expansion in the 19th century, 
accompanied by deforestation of the Ganaraska 
River basin headwaters, contributed to water 
and wind-driven erosion and flooding in the 
town of Port Hope, where the river discharges 
into Lake Ontario. Reforestation operations were 
conducted in this region over an extensive period 
(1945 to 2007) to address these challenges. Buttle 
[95] investigated the response of streamflows to 
reforestation in a 267 km2 headwater basin of the 
Ganaraska River. From 
an analysis of several streamflow metrics in 
basins and sub-basins with similar characteristics 
but different headwater reforestation extents, 
reforestation activities were found to enhance 
groundwater recharge by prolonging snowmelt 
and reducing the potential for high river flows 
during rain-on-snow events. This is a useful 
Canadian example of how reforestation and tree 
planting can represent, or contribute to, NbS for 
flood risk management in river basins.
implementation, IWRM was rediscovered and has 
been widely promoted since the 1990s, partly in 
recognition of the need to consider multiple criteria 
and perspectives to guide the management of water 
[56]. IWRM recognizes the interconnectedness of 
water systems through the hydrological cycle, the 
impacts of land management on water resources 
(and vice versa), and the need for collaborative, multi-
disciplinary approaches. These aspects make IWRM 
wholly compatible with NbS, considering the principles 
outlined in Section 3.1.
The concept of integrated river basin management 
(IRBM) is closely linked to, and derived from, IWRM 
[57]. Perhaps best exemplified by the Room for 
the River Programme in the Netherlands, IRBM 
is described by Rijke et al. [57] as having three 
distinguishing characteristics: (1) alignment and 
balancing of multiple objectives; (2) utilization of 
systems approaches that consider all relevant spatial 
scales; and (3) requiring consideration of short- and 
long-term costs and benefits, and anticipation of future 
changes. Again, these features of IRBM are strongly 
aligned with the principles of NbS.
3.6.2 Integrated Coastal Zone Management
Integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) is a multi-
disciplinary approach to planning and governance that 
seeks to integrate and balance development and the 
use of resources in coastal areas with environmental 
and social goals [58]. Two of the key objectives of 
ICZM are to preserve/protect the productivity and 
biodiversity of coastal ecosystems and to promote 
rational development and sustainable utilization of 
resources [58]. ICZM shares many principles with 
NbS (Section 3.1), including [58]:
	• Multi-sectoral considerations, i.e., the need to 
balance different technical, environmental, and 
societal goals and objectives, and multiple uses of 
coastal space;
	• Multi-disciplinary, “whole system” perspectives;
	• The need to consider long-term planning horizons 
in the delivery of environmentally sound responses 
to reduce the vulnerability of low-lying coastal 
communities to coastal storms and relative sea-level 
rise; and 
	• A dynamic, evolutionary (i.e., adaptively managed) 
process.
As evident from the latter two bullets above, ICZM often 
involves adaptation planning, that is, preparing coastal 
communities for future change [59]. The “protect/
accommodate/retreat/avoid” (PARA) framework for 
coastal adaptation is well established internationally 
and has previously been adopted in Canada [60], [61]. 
It includes four strategies for adapting to changing 
flood and erosion hazard risk [6], [60], [61]:
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
19
csagroup.org
	• Protect – involving deployment of structural or 
nature-based solutions in the way of the hazard to 
protect people and infrastructure (e.g., seawalls or 
beach nourishment to protect a community from 
coastal storms);
	• Accommodate – an adaptive approach whereby 
areas exposed to flood hazard continue to be used 
by people and infrastructure, while behaviours 
and infrastructure are changed to reduce the 
consequences of flooding and erosion;
	• Retreat (or planned retreat or managed retreat or 
managed realignment) – withdrawal, relocation, or 
abandonment of areas prone to flood and erosion 
hazards;
	• Avoid – proactive prevention of development or 
settlement in areas prone to flood and erosion 
hazards, which is usually the preferred, and most 
effective, strategy for flood risk management.
Although most commonly applied in the context 
of coastal community adaptation to sea-level rise 
[60], [61], the PARA strategies are also relevant in the 
broader context of coastal flood risk management.  
Indeed, they resemble the generic coastal defence 
strategy options allowed under shoreline management 
planning guidance in the U.K. [62] (see the Shoreline 
Management Plans in Case Study F) and they can 
definitely support and enable NbS. For example, 
managed realignment involves breaching or removing 
existing flood defences (usually constructed sea dykes) 
to restore or create more natural intertidal system 
functions. This may or may not also involve relocation or 
planned retreat [63] of communities and infrastructure.
Practical guidelines for developing and implementing 
ICZM programs and plans are provided by Post and 
Lundin [58]. As highlighted by the United Nations 
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) [64], 
combining ICZM and IWRM can be a powerful ridge-
to-reef or mountain-to-sea approach to managing 
water resources and coastal zones.
Case Study F: Shoreline Management Plans, United Kingdom (England 
and Wales)
Shoreline management planning, defined by 
Cooper et al. [62] as “large-scale and longer-
term strategic planning in order to reduce 
risks to people and the developed and natural 
environments from coastal flooding and erosion,” 
arguably fits within the nexus of ICZM. One of 
the first examples of this approach was initiated 
in the U.K. in the 1990s. The first generation of 
shoreline management plans (SMPs), prepared 
by co-operative groups that included local 
authorities and the Environment Agency, was 
intended to promote sustainable coastal defence 
policies within physically self-contained units 
(Shoreline Management Units) over a time 
period of 50 years. The SMPs were expected to 
provide broad-level assistance to local planning 
authorities and integration with coastal habitat 
management plans, biodiversity action plans, 
coastal zone management plans, estuary 
management plans, and catchment management 
plans [62]. They also provided the basis for more 
detailed flood and coastal defence strategy plans 
at the local level. A critical review of the program 
in 1999–2000 identified numerous beneficial 
effects on coastal defence policy in England 
and Wales, as well as areas for improvement, 
including the need to better consider the 
potential role of NbS [62]. A second generation 
of plans (SMP2s) commenced development 
in 2006, following revised guidance [69]. The 
new guidance emphasizes the importance of 
existing natural defences (such as sand dunes, 
saltmarshes, and shingle ridges) in contributing 
to coastal flood and erosion risk management, 
and encourages consideration of measures to 
restore or recreate natural defences [69].
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
20
csagroup.org
3.6.3 Strategic Flood Risk Management	
Strategic flood risk management (SFRM) is a practice 
that is often encompassed by IWRM and/or ICZM, 
which have a broader focus. SFRM involves utilizing 
limited resources to reduce, control, accept, or 
redistribute flood hazard risk, while supporting and 
balancing other objectives (e.g., environmental, social, 
and economic) [27], [65]. It emphasizes longer term, 
whole system perspectives and identifies promoting 
ecosystem services as a key objective [27]. In one 
of ten golden rules for SFRM, Sayers et al. [65] 
describe the importance of allowing some flooding 
to occur as a natural process: “Making room for the 
river and the sea, utilizing the natural ability of this 
space to accommodate flood waters and dissipate 
energy, maintains vital ecosystems and reduces the 
chance of flooding elsewhere.” Thus, NbS are deeply 
embedded in SFRM. Like NbS, SFRM encourages 
the use of a portfolio of solutions to deliver multiple 
benefits, adaptive management approaches, and 
consideration of multiple temporal and spatial scales 
[27]. A distinctive feature of SFRM is that it relies 
on knowledge of flood risk (encompassing hazard 
likelihood, severity, and consequences) and uncertainty 
to inform decision-making and prioritization of 
solutions and strategies, and is therefore well aligned 
with disaster risk reduction efforts such as the United 
Nations Sendai Framework [17]. 
3.6.4 Land Use Regulation
Since the establishment of the National Flood Damage 
Reduction Program (FDRP) in 1975, regulation of land 
use to discourage development in flood-prone areas has 
been the primary mechanism for flood and erosion risk 
management in Canada. The program supported flood 
hazard mapping to establish designated flood risk areas, 
where provinces, territories, and municipalities could 
regulate or prohibit development, and where disaster 
assistance could be refused to new developments [2]. 
In theory, this approach should be conducive to NbS, 
in so far as it would restrict disturbance to natural flood 
plains and coastal systems and maximize the flood 
and erosion risk management benefits they provide. In 
practice, however, demand for waterfront development 
and the associated tax revenues has created significant 
pressures on authorities responsible for regulation [2]. 
A lack of consistency in defining regulations across 
Canada has also resulted in various degrees of success 
in terms of managing flood risk. Furthermore, since land 
use is generally regulated at the municipal government 
level, this tool often does not facilitate the whole system 
approaches needed to facilitate NbS, particularly where 
the system in question, such as the river catchment or 
coastal littoral cell, spans municipal boundaries. To be 
effective in reducing flood and erosion risk, regulatory 
tools need to be underpinned by strategic geospatial 
planning that includes consideration for system 
boundaries and future changes in hazards, such as the 
idea of preserving a freedom space for rivers proposed 
in Quebec [66].
Designation of protected areas (e.g., national or 
provincial parks, migratory bird sanctuaries, and 
marine protected areas) is one form of land or water 
use regulation that can support implementation of 
"Since the establishment of the National 
Flood Damage Reduction Program (FDRP) 
in 1975, regulation of land use to discourage 
development in flood prone areas has been 
the primary mechanism for flood and erosion 
risk management in Canada."
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
21
csagroup.org
NbS [64]. Though primarily focused on conservation 
and preservation of existing natural system functions, 
habitats, and biodiversity, protecting areas from 
development allows the flood and erosion risk 
management benefits of natural systems to be 
preserved and harnessed. This type of tool may not be 
appropriate in locations where the natural system has 
been significantly altered by human activity in the past, 
or where development has occurred in high flood and/
or erosion hazard areas. 
3.6.5 Restoration
Restoration of degraded natural systems, such as 
afforestation or revegetation of river watersheds 
and coastal land and managed dyke realignment or 
breaching to restore tidal saltmarshes, can unlock 
many benefits in terms of managing flood and 
erosion risks [21]. Two case studies exemplifying 
the benefits and co-benefits of shoreline restoration 
for different types of environments are presented 
here:  coastal/estuarine marshes in the Bay of Fundy 
Dyke Realignment project in Case Study G, and  
the Jim Tovey Lakeshore Conservation Area on the 
shores of Lake Ontario in Case Study H. Similar to 
the designation of protected areas, the philosophy 
underlying restoration is different to strategic flood 
risk management in that it prioritizes environmental 
objectives as opposed to minimizing risk to people, 
infrastructure, and the environment. However, 
restoration and strategic flood risk management, or 
Case Study G: Bay of Fundy Dyke 
Realignment, New Brunswick and 
Nova Scotia
Salt water marshes and coastal/estuarine 
wetlands provide natural buffers against storm 
surges, waves, erosion, streamflow-driven 
flooding, and sea-level rise. Since the 17th century, 
approximately 85% of the salt marsh area in 
the upper Bay of Fundy was transformed to 
agricultural land by dykes, roads, and causeways 
[141], altering the natural system dynamics. In 2010, 
the provincial government purposely breached 
1.5 km of an old dyke at Aulac in New Brunswick, 
and constructed a new dyke about 100 m landward. 
This realignment enabled restoration of previously 
degraded salt marsh habitat. Virgin et al. [141] 
investigated the response of the Aulac system to 
dyke realignment and observed 34–67 cm thick 
sediment layers had deposited in the seven-to-
eight-year period following restoration (Figure 6). 
The Cornwallis River and Converse Marsh (www.
transcoastaladaptations.com) are other examples 
of managed dyke realignment projects in the Bay 
of Fundy that have restored tidal wetland habitat, 
reduced dyke management costs, contributed 
to carbon storage, and provided flood risk 
management benefits.  
Figure 6: Aulac salt marsh, in 2011, approximately one year 
after breaching (a) (Reproduced with permission from Nic 
McLellan), and in 2020 (b) (Reproduced with permission 
from Myriam A. Barbeau).
2011
2020
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
22
csagroup.org
Case Study H: Jim Tovey Lakeview 
Conservation Area, Ontario
The project involves creating a 26 ha 
conservation area on a 1.5 km reach of the Lake 
Ontario shoreline, near an existing wastewater 
treatment plant (Figure 7) [142]. Construction 
commenced in 2016 and is expected to be 
completed in 2024–2026. The objective is to 
restore and enhance fish and bird habitat, 
provide green space for recreation, and protect 
1.5 km of degraded shoreline. The project 
involves constructing new wetlands and 
rocky islands, cobble beaches, and a channel 
connecting Serson Creek to Lake Ontario [143]. 
The islands will protect the shore from wave 
action and provide shelter to fish. Applewood 
Creek and Serson Creek will discharge into the 
constructed wetlands, trapping nutrient loads 
and contributing to improved water quality in 
Lake Ontario. 
Figure 7: Lakeview waterfront restoration (a), Source: The 
Region of Peel, Credit Valley Conservation and Toronto Region 
Conservation Authority; Physical model of Lakeview waterfront 
at National Research Council Canada’s research facilities, 
Ottawa (b), Source: National Research Council Canada.
other strategic planning approaches like natural asset 
management, are not mutually exclusive. In fact, they 
can be complementary in unlocking multiple benefits.
3.6.6 Natural Asset Management
Natural assets are defined as “the stock of natural 
resources and ecosystems that yield a flow of benefits 
to people” [67]. With support from the Municipal 
Natural Assets Initiative, the Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities, and other organizations, Canadian 
municipalities are increasingly using natural asset 
management approaches to protect, manage, and 
ensure continued delivery of ecosystem services 
to communities, as shown in the Courtenay River 
Natural Asset Management project outlined in Case 
Study I. This approach typically involves identification, 
monitoring, maintenance, and rehabilitation of natural 
assets as part of an overall asset management strategy, 
and it has been shown to save capital and operating 
costs and reduce risk [67]. 
3.6.7 General Considerations
Many of the frameworks and concepts described 
above are precursors to and/or are closely aligned 
with the ideas underlying NbS for flood and erosion 
risk management and, when successfully implemented, 
can all enable NbS. The differences between some 
of these concepts are somewhat nuanced, and they 
typically relate to the primary focus and philosophy. For 
example, Strategic Flood Risk Management proponents 
might view NbS as a means to achieve reductions in 
flood risk, with ancillary environmental benefits. At the 
other end of the spectrum, proponents of protected 
areas or restoration might consider the preservation 
and health of ecosystems to be the priority, with the 
role of natural assets in alleviating flooding seen as a 
potential co-benefit. By design, IWRM and ICZM aim 
to balance multiple considerations and objectives and 
are therefore arguably the more balanced philosophical 
approaches.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
23
csagroup.org
Case Study I: Courtenay River Natural Asset Management, British Columbia
The Courtenay River flows from the confluence 
of the Tsolum and Puntledge Rivers through the 
City of Courtenay to Comox Harbour on the east 
coast of Vancouver Island. The city is mostly 
developed in low-lying areas of the estuary, and 
has been historically subjected to coastal and 
riverine flooding. Climate change effects have 
increased the frequency and intensity of flooding 
in the Courtenay River system over time. The 
City of Courtenay assessed the role of natural 
assets located in the Courtenay River corridor 
in mitigating flood risk in the downtown core. 
The project was conducted with support from 
the Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI), 
convened in 2016 to assist local governments 
in identifying and understanding the value of 
natural assets in addressing environmental 
and hydrological challenges [48]. Four flood 
mitigation options involving natural asset 
improvements were investigated: (1) increasing 
the conveyance capacity of the system by 
widening the Courtenay river, (2) naturalizing 
the foreshore area of a former sawmill site, (3) 
restoring historical natural streams within the 
Courtenay river system, and (4) removing at-
risk buildings from the floodplain (setback). It 
was concluded that although improvement of 
natural assets could contribute to reducing flood 
damages, and provide co-benefits, including 
recreational space and water quality, additional 
measures would be needed to manage flood 
risk. Hybrid solutions, combining natural and 
engineered infrastructure, were therefore 
recommended.
4 Nature-Based Features 
Descriptions of typical nature-based features, which 
may be deployed at local and regional scales to 
support flood and erosion risk management objectives, 
are provided in Section 4.1 for coastal environments 
and Section 4.2 for riverine environments. On the 
coast, nature-based features primarily function by 
providing buffers against waves, storm surges, and 
erosion. In riverine environments, features are generally 
deployed to increase water storage capacity within 
the floodplain, regulate flows and runoff, control or 
mitigate erosion, or enhance surface water infiltration. 
A special case occurs in estuarine areas, where flood 
hazards can arise from various combinations of high 
river flows, coastal water levels (associated with tides, 
storm surges, seiches, tsunamis, and relative sea-
level rise) and wave effects. Nature-based features in 
estuarine regions may therefore combine elements and 
principles of coastal and riverine features, depending 
on the specific nature of flood hazards and ecosystems. 
Although the principles of how nature-based features 
provide flood and erosion risk management function 
in estuaries are likely to be similar to coastal and/or 
river settings, estuaries are distinct ecosystems that 
may require special considerations for hydrodynamics, 
biogeomorphology, ecology, and water quality when 
implementing NbS. 
4.1 Coastal Environments
More than 15 million people live within 20 km of 
Canada’s marine and Great Lakes coasts [6]. Many 
of these communities are vulnerable to coastal flood 
and erosion hazards [5] resulting from extreme water 
levels, waves, tsunamis, and other contributing factors. 
In most regions, the risks associated with coastal flood 
and erosions hazards are escalating over time, due to 
pressures including development and population growth 
in coastal zones, and climate-driven effects, such as 
global sea-level rise, thawing permafrost, and declining 
sea ice. In particular, relative sea-level rise is expected to 
lead to more frequent and severe flooding on Canada’s 
Atlantic, Pacific, and Beaufort Sea coasts [5], [68].
There are a variety of natural or nature-based features 
that can provide flood and erosion risk management 
benefits (and ancillary co-benefits) in coastal 
environments. A summary of some features relevant to 
Canadian coastal environments is provided in Table 1, 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
24
csagroup.org
which has been adapted from an example in Bridges 
et al. [31]. Examples of the mechanisms/processes by 
which each feature typically delivers flood and erosion 
risk management benefits are indicated, along with 
relevant factors affecting performance.
NbS for coastal flood and erosion risk management 
can be thought of as leveraging natural systems to 
provide strategic coastal defence functions, expressed 
in the parlance of U.K. Shoreline Management Planning 
guidance [69] as holding the defence line or advancing 
the line. The natural or nature-based feature (Table 
1) may form the defence line or be located on either 
side of it. Managed realignment strategies can also 
unlock or restore flood and erosion risk management 
benefits that have been lost or degraded due to prior 
development on the coast or in estuaries. 
Table 1: Examples of NbS for coastal flood and erosion risk management (adapted from Bridges et al. [31]).
Features
Dunes and 
Beaches
Vegetated Features 
(Marshes, Submerged 
Aquatic Vegetation, 
Wetlands)
Reefs
Barrier Islands
Maritime Forests 
and Upland Shrub 
Communities
Flood and Erosion Risk 
Management Benefits/Processes
Buffer against 
erosion and wave 
action
Attenuation of 
wave energy
Barrier/resistance 
to inundation and 
overland flow 
Attenuation and 
dissipation of wave 
energy
Hydraulic storage
Promotes retention of 
stabilizing sediment
Increased infiltration
Induces offshore 
wave breaking
Attenuation of 
wave energy
Slow inland water 
transfer
Provides 
redundancy as part 
of multiple line-of-
defence system
Buffer against 
erosion and wave 
action
Attenuation of 
wave energy
Provides 
redundancy as part 
of multiple line-of-
defence system
Wave attenuation 
and/or dissipation
Soil and sediment 
retention and 
stabilization
Increased infiltration
Decreased or delayed 
run-off
Attenuation of 
overland flow peaks
Factors Affecting Performance
Wave climate and 
exposure
Sediment supply, 
sediment budgets 
and sediment 
transport 
processes
Stability in 
response to 
extreme events
Berm/dune 
height and width
Beach slope 
Frequency 
and severity of 
disturbance, and 
rate of recovery
Hydrodynamic 
regime (frequency 
of inundation, wave 
exposure, salt 
tolerance)
Sediment supply, 
sediment budgets and 
sediment transport 
processes
Vegetation 
characteristics (type, 
height, density, rigidity, 
morphology, salt 
tolerance)
Spatial extent 
(elevation, storage 
volume, width)
Frequency and severity 
of disturbance, and rate 
of recovery
Reef width, 
elevation and 
roughness
Tidal range
Wave climate and 
exposure
Frequency 
and severity of 
disturbance, and 
rate of recovery
Island elevation, 
length, and width
Sediment supply, 
sediment budgets 
and sediment 
transport 
processes
Breach 
susceptibility
Proximity to 
mainland 
Capacity to 
recover/rebuild 
following storm 
events
Frequency 
and severity of 
disturbance, and 
rate of recovery
Vegetation 
characteristics (type, 
height, density, 
rigidity, morphology, 
root systems, salt 
tolerance)
Spatial extent 
(elevation, storage 
volume, width)
Ground 
characteristics (soil 
types, stratigraphy, 
permeability, water 
retention, organic 
content)
Elevation, slopes and 
drainage
Frequency and 
severity of disturbance, 
and rate of recovery
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
25
csagroup.org
Beach nourishment, stabilization, or restoration is 
perhaps the most familiar form of coastal NbS, with 
the relevant physical processes (hydrodynamics 
and sediment transport) and coastal engineering 
principles having been extensively studied and applied 
for decades [70]. Conventionally, beach nourishment 
has emphasized the use of sediment that closely 
matches the characteristics of native beach materials 
(e.g., gradation). Dynamic revetments also referred 
to as cobble/shingle/pebble berms or beaches are 
a form of beach nourishment that utilizes coarser 
material (cobble and gravel), while still allowing for 
reshaping and adaptation to changing hydrodynamic 
conditions [71], [72]. Such solutions may be appropriate 
for holding or advancing the line in areas with 
coarse native sediments (e.g., many parts of British 
Columbia), in regions with finer sediments where 
natural sources and supply are limited (e.g., Percé 
Waterfront Rehabilitation project in Case Study B), 
or where there are constraints on the footprint of a 
nourishment (e.g., prohibitions on placing fill below 
the water line). Recently, a greater understanding of 
the potential advantages of “mega-nourishments” has 
been realized, based on research on the Sand Motor 
in the Netherlands as presented in Case Study J. 
Advantages of larger nourishments include the ability 
to extend intervals between re-nourishments, which 
are beneficial because placement of sediment has 
negative impacts on beach ecosystems, and reliance 
on natural system processes to redistribute sediment. 
NbS in coastal environments are often hybrid solutions, 
combining some of the elements of Table 1 with 
conventional or grey infrastructure. For example, 
buried revetment concepts (Figure 3) utilize natural 
beach and/or dune features to provide flood and 
erosion risk management function, with the added 
backstop of a hard structure, which provides the last 
line of defence in the event of a particularly damaging 
storm. Beach/dune nourishment schemes often 
rely on fencing, breakwaters, or groyne structures 
to retain sediment and delay intervals between re-
nourishments (see Souris Beach Shoreline Erosion and 
Highway Projection in Case Study K), depending on 
the available sediment supply (natural or artificial) and 
optimal timeframes for system recovery.
Given the legacy of hard structures such as seawalls, 
groynes, revetments, and breakwaters on coasts 
around the world, significant effort has recently been 
dedicated to researching methods of “greening” or 
enhancing existing coastal infrastructure. Examples 
include the use of roughened textures or features 
(e.g., water retaining tide pools) on hard structures to 
promote marine biological growth or provide habitat 
for marine organisms as shown in Living Breakwaters 
in Case Study A. For new coastal infrastructure, often 
still appropriate in circumstances where more natural 
solutions are not viable or sustainable, such features 
can support ecosystem health or at least mitigate 
adverse environmental impacts of hard infrastructure.
4.2 Riverine Environments
Fluvial flooding in Canada is predominantly driven 
by elevated river discharges associated with spring 
snowmelt (freshet) and/or prolonged or intense rainfall 
[4]. Rainfall coinciding with snow cover increases 
the likelihood of flooding, considering the reduced 
capacity for infiltration.  As ice is present in nearly 
every Canadian river [73], ice-jamming during spring 
break-up represents a major driver of flood events [4], 
and often results in the most damaging and severe 
flood hazards. Backwater effects associated with 
coastal/estuarine high-water levels resulting from high 
tides, storm surges, and relative sea-level rise can also 
contribute to flooding in river watersheds.
NbS for riverine flood and erosion risk management 
typically involve applying the long-standing principles 
of integrated water resources management (IWRM) 
[21]. Broadly speaking, there are three main ways in 
which NbS can reduce flood and erosion risk in river 
systems [10]:
1.	
Regulating, either slowing or accelerating, the flow/
conveyance of river flows and surface water runoff 
at strategic locations to manage the timing and 
magnitude of peak flows within the system; 
2.	 Increasing water storage capacity within the 
floodplain, such as through offline storage/
retention features, or by increasing connectivity 
between the river channel and floodplain; and 
3.	 Enhancing surface water infiltration and below-
ground storage, and/or evaporation.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
26
csagroup.org
Case Study J: The Sand Motor, 
Netherlands – Mega-Nourishment 
as a Coastal NbS
More than 9 million residents live near the 
coast in the Netherlands, many of them below 
mean sea level.  A shortage of natural sediment 
supply and sea-level rise contribute to erosion 
at many locations along the coast.  In 2011, 
Rijkswaterstaat and the Provincial Authority 
of South Holland decided to pilot a “mega-
nourishment” scheme to mitigate coastal 
erosion, called the Sand Motor. The mega-
nourishment involved depositing a single, large 
quantity of sand near the shore to feed and 
sustain a 5 km stretch of coastline for a number 
of years. The initial nourishment consisted 
of 21.5 million m3 of sand, extracted from a 
borrow location 10 km offshore, and deposited 
in the form of a hook shaped peninsula (Figure 
8). The peninsula was 2 km wide, extended 
1 km offshore, and reached up to 5 m above 
mean sea level in some locations [144]. The 
pilot project aimed to understand if natural 
processes (waves, currents, and wind) could 
work and redistribute the sand along the coast. 
By concentrating a single mega-nourishment 
at one location, the goal was to minimize long-
term ecosystem damage resulting from the sand 
placement, compared to (conventional) smaller, 
more frequent nourishments distributed along 
the coast that impact a larger area and inhibit 
ecosystem recovery. The large nourishment 
creates new habitat for flora and fauna, 
particularly in the sheltered and shallow lagoon 
that developed behind the spit (Figure 8).  
The Sand Motor has been monitored to assess 
its effectiveness in nourishing the adjacent 
coasts, contributing to dune growth, creating 
new habitat, and providing recreation space 
[145]. The data have indicated that, in the first 
four years following its construction, the Sand 
Motor provided almost 1 million m3 of sand to the 
south coastline and 1.5 million m3 to the north 
coastline. Based on these initial observations, 
the Sand Motor is expected to exceed its initial 
design life of 20 years [144]. Approximately 
1 ha of new dunes have formed behind the 
Sand Motor. The dune development has been 
slower than initially anticipated, which has been 
attributed to the fact that dune formation was 
entirely left to natural processes (i.e., there was 
no artificial dune construction or planting of 
stabilizing marram grass).  The monitoring has 
also shown that there is increasing biomass 
of benthic fauna immediately offshore of the 
sand dune and in the four years of monitoring 
between 2011 and 2015, almost 40 species of 
birds were regularly observed on the Sand 
Motor [144], [146]. It appears that the Sand 
Motor is performing as designed and “mega-
nourishment” is a valid alternative to regular 
beach nourishment. 
Figure 8: Sand Motor peninsula. Reproduced with permission 
from www.dezandmotor.nl.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
27
csagroup.org
Case Study K: Souris Beach 
Shoreline Erosion and Highway 
Protection, Prince Edward Island – 
A Hybrid Solution
Shoreline erosion and relative sea-level rise 
were contributing to increasing flood risk along 
a relatively exposed section of the Trans-Canada 
Highway near Souris Beach, Prince Edward 
Island (PEI). In 2016, storms eroded much of the 
small dune system along the beach, bringing 
flood waters to the edge of the highway. PEI 
Transportation Infrastructure and Energy (PEI-
TIE) worked with Coldwater Consulting Ltd. to 
implement a demonstration shore protection 
scheme involving a combination of dune 
restoration works and intertidal reef structures, 
which were designed to dissipate wave energy, 
and encourage sediment deposition on the 
beach in front of the highway. The reef structures 
consisted of sandstone boulders, designed to 
mimic the rocky outcrops present along the 
coast of PEI and provide a natural substrate 
for growth of marine organisms. The dune 
restoration involved sand fencing and vegetation 
planting, following guidance developed for the 
east coast of the U.S. [147], [148]. Construction 
was completed in March 2018 (Figure 9), and 
post-construction surveying using RTK-GPS 
and drones has indicated that the solution 
performed as anticipated with a small tombolo 
beach formation growing in the lee of the two 
reef structures. The resulting increase in the 
upper beach area has, in turn, led to growth and 
vegetation of the landward dunes. No repeat 
of the large shoreline recession that occurred 
in 2016 has been observed, despite significant 
storm events in November 2018 and September 
2019 (post-tropical storm Dorian).  
Figure 9: NbS for coastal erosion at Souris. Reproduced with 
permission from M. Davies, Coldwater Consulting Ltd.
Thus, NbS in rivers are centred on enhancing or 
restoring natural system function to store, slow, 
or disperse floodwater in areas that minimize the 
exposure of people and property to flood hazards. 
Different measures and interventions can be applied 
to achieve these objectives. The Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) in the U.S. [74], [75] and 
the ICF in Canada [50] describe common nature-based 
approaches for riverine flood risk reduction, which are 
broadly categorized in Table 2 and summarized in the 
sections that follow. 
4.2.1 Floodplain and River System 
Preservation and Restoration
Flooding is a natural process. Preserving and allowing 
room or freedom space for natural river and floodplain 
system functions can therefore reduce the degree to 
which people and infrastructure are exposed to flood 
hazards, and maintain or provide additional storage 
within the floodplain [76], [77]. In essence, this solution 
amounts to “avoidance”, which is broadly accepted to be 
the most effective strategy for flood risk management  
[6], [78], [79]. This strategy can involve restoration 
of previously developed areas of the floodplain, for 
example, through managed realignment or planned 
retreat [63], [77], [80] (see Cache la Poudre River 
Restoration in Case Study L), or establishing regulations 
to prohibit/limit developments within areas of high 
flood hazard, which has been the primary strategy 
for flood risk management in Canada [2]. Natural 
or nature-based water-retaining features within the 
floodplain such as ponds and depressions [81] can help 
to store and slow the flow of water to river channels and 
enhance ground infiltration. Ancillary benefits include 
enhanced sediment and water quality control, achieved 
by trapping sediments, pesticides, and nutrients [82].
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
28
csagroup.org
Table 2: Examples of NbS for riverine flood risk management.
Features and 
Approaches
Floodplain and 
river system 
preservation 
and restoration
Wetland 
restoration
Two-stage 
channel
Relief channel
In-stream 
features
Vegetation
Flood and Erosion Risk Management 
Benefits/Processes
Attenuation of 
peak flood flows 
and water levels
Increased 
storage capacity 
within floodplain
Promotes 
retention of 
sediment and 
floodplain 
accretion
Provides room 
for natural river 
processes (e.g., 
meandering, 
channel 
avulsion, 
flooding)
Attenuation of 
peak flood flows 
and water levels
Enhances 
infiltration
Increased 
storage capacity 
within floodplain
Promotes 
retention of 
sediment and 
floodplain 
accretion
Mimics natural 
channel/ 
floodplain 
processes
Increases 
conveyance 
capacity 
Provides room 
for main channel 
migration
Promotes 
retention of 
sediment and 
floodplain 
accretion 
Benches 
dissipate flood 
energy
Mimics natural 
channel/ 
floodplain 
processes
Increases 
conveyance 
capacity during 
flood conditions
Attenuates 
and regulates 
streamflow and 
velocities
Alters hydraulic 
gradient
Reduces bank 
erosion
Attenuates and 
regulates flow 
in channels and 
floodplains
Enhances 
infiltration
Promotes 
retention of 
sediment, 
stabilization of 
soil, and reduces 
erosion
Factors Affecting Performance
Sediment 
budgets and 
transport 
processes 
Spatial extent 
(elevation, 
storage volume, 
width)
Hydrologic, 
hydraulic, and 
geomorphic 
regimes 
Native 
ecosystems, 
habitat, and 
vegetation types
Hydrologic, 
hydraulic, and 
geomorphic 
regimes 
Sediment 
budgets and 
transport 
processes 
Spatial extent 
Native 
ecosystems, 
habitat, and 
vegetation types
Hydrologic, 
hydraulic, and 
geomorphic 
regimes 
Bank stability 
in response to 
extreme events
Hydrologic, 
hydraulic, and 
geomorphic 
regimes 
Channel bed 
elevation relative 
to the main 
channel
Conveyance 
capacity 
Frequency/  
duration of flow 
in relief channel
Connectivity of 
relief channel to 
natural systems
Hydrologic, 
hydraulic, and 
geomorphic 
regimes 
Potential for 
trapping of 
debris
Bank stability 
in response to 
extreme events
Scour potential
Vegetation 
characteristics 
(type, height, 
density, rigidity, 
root systems, 
native types)
Ground 
characteristics 
Hydrologic, 
hydraulic, and 
geomorphic 
regimes 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
29
csagroup.org
Case Study L: Cache la Poudre River Restoration, Colorado, U.S.A.
The Cache la Poudre River is a source of drinking 
water, and provides stormwater conveyance 
and tourism benefits to Fort Collins, Colorado 
[149]. Levees/dykes were constructed along the 
river banks during gravel-mining operations to 
prevent flooding. This disconnected the river 
from its floodplain and altered natural system 
processes, concentrating high flows in the 
main channel, increasing river bank erosion 
rates and eliminating bankside vegetation and 
habitat [150]. Two river restoration projects, 
the Sterling Pond Restoration Project and the 
McMurry Restoration Project, were implemented 
to reconnect the Cache la Poudre River to its 
floodplains. The Sterling Pond project spanned 
a 600 m reach with an abandoned dam at the 
downstream end of the project stretch. The goals 
of the restoration work were to lower the river 
bank elevations to reconnect with the floodplain, 
create additional shallow wetland habitat in the 
newly connected floodplain, and remove the 
abandoned dam. Removing the abandoned dam 
helped to restore natural river flow and enabled 
fish passage [150]. Once the dam was removed, 
approximately 150 m of river was modified to 
include natural river features such as riffles and 
pools and to improve the river gradation. The 
McMurry Restoration Project covered an 800 m 
stretch of river and involved similar techniques, 
including lowering the river banks and creating 
new wetlands. The McMurry Restoration Project 
also included significant removal of concrete, 
debris, and old cars from the river bank that were 
historically placed there to mitigate bank erosion 
resulting from high flows in the main channel. 
Combined, the two projects restored nearly two 
kilometres of river, created over five hectares of 
floodplain and several hectares of wetlands [150]. 
The City of Fort Collins is continuing to look to 
implement restoration projects that connect the 
Cache la Poudre River to its floodplain.
4.2.2 Wetland Preservation and Restoration
Canada is home to approximately 24% of the world’s 
natural wetlands, which have been shown to reduce 
climate-related flooding costs by as much as 38% 
[26]. Wetland areas typically represent a significant 
proportion of natural river floodplains but have been 
severely reduced by changes in land use for agriculture 
and development [83], [84]. Wetlands can reduce or 
delay floods by trapping and storing surface runoff 
or floodwaters and enhancing infiltration to soil and 
groundwater. Vegetation creates resistance to flow, 
slowing the movement of water within the floodplain 
and attenuating runoff. Although most studies indicate 
that wetlands can provide an important role in flood 
attenuation, Bullock and Acreman [85] caution against 
generalization, and show that the diverse hydrological 
role and function of wetlands within broader systems 
should be considered. In particular, wetland restoration 
through managed dyke realignment in estuarine areas 
alters the tidal prism, which may have unintended 
consequences, including increased flood risk in 
adjacent areas [55]. Wetlands are highly biodiverse 
and productive ecosystems, providing co-benefits 
such as water filtration, carbon sequestration, wildlife 
habitat improvement, nutrient retention, ground water 
recharge, sediment transport control, moderation/
prevention of droughts, and recreation and educational 
opportunities [86]–[90].
4.2.3 Two-Stage Channels
Two-stage channels (Figure 10) are modified versions 
of conventional trapezoidal channels, which are more 
aligned with NbS. The main channel that conveys the 
river flow during normal conditions, and a floodplain 
bench that conveys water only when the capacity of 
the main channel is exceeded (e.g., during flood or 
high discharge conditions), mimic natural channel and 
floodplain function. They provide flood and erosion risk 
management benefits by facilitating higher discharges 
than channelized reaches with equivalent width to the 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
30
csagroup.org
main channel, dissipating hydrodynamic energy on 
the benches, improving channel stability, or providing 
room to facilitate meandering of the main channel, 
controlling downstream sediment transport by allowing 
for deposition on benches, improving water quality, and 
increasing habitat diversity [91], [92]. 
Figure 10: Two-stage channel concept. 
4.2.4 Relief Channels
Restoration and reconnection of relict channel networks 
or the construction of new, naturalized channel systems 
can reduce flood risk by diverting floodwaters around 
developed areas or vulnerable communities, or by 
temporarily storing water during periods of high flow. 
However, the context for, and implementation of this 
type of solution determines the extent to which it may 
be considered a NbS. Straight, hardened relief channels 
can lead to channelization, interruption of natural 
processes, and elevated discharges, with associated 
high velocities and potential for scour. However, 
restoring relict or disconnected channels can improve 
or restore habitats and ecosystem function. 
4.2.5 Instream Features 
Instream features include woody debris (Figure 11 
and Figure 12), boulders and other materials, which 
are strategically placed in river channels and streams 
to control flood and erosion hazards, typically by 
increasing flow resistance thus slowing the flow and 
trapping debris and sediment [81]. These features also 
encourage overbank flow, diverting water to areas of 
natural floodplain in headwaters upstream of urban 
centres. Instream features can support enhanced river 
bank stability, where desired, by diverting flows away 
from eroding banks. Leaky dams, woody deflectors, 
boulder terraces, wood dams, beaver dams, engineered 
log jams, and engineered riffles are some examples 
of natural or nature-based instream structures. A 
comprehensive list of instream structures and guidance 
for their design and construction is provided by JMT 
Consultants Inc. [93]. Many of these features are 
relatively low cost and provide a range of co-benefits, 
including fish spawning habitat, sediment, and debris 
retention. Woody deflectors (Figure 11) follow similar 
design and functionality principles as leaky dams but 
typically do not span the entire channel cross section 
[94]. Care must be taken when designing instream 
features to avoid unintended negative consequences 
on stream hydraulics and associated hazards [94]. For 
example, their addition to the areas in close proximity 
to bridges, culverts, urban development, or protected 
assets can result in backwater effects and flood 
hazards, or debris loads on hydraulic structures. 
Figure 11: Photograph of a woody deflector in a channel. Source: 
City of Surrey, BC (a).  Schematic of a woody deflector in a 
channel (b). 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
31
csagroup.org
Figure 12: Instream structures constructed with woody debris. 
Source: City of Surrey, BC.
4.2.6 Vegetation
Planting or restoring woodlands and vegetation (e.g., 
shrubs, trees, grass) in riparian areas and other areas 
of a river watershed can provide flood and erosion 
risk management benefits as shown in the Ganaraska 
River Headwaters Reforestation project in Case 
Study E. Riparian vegetation provides a buffer against 
erosion by attenuating water velocities and stabilizing 
sediment. Vegetation root systems also increase 
infiltration rates, improve the quality and stability of the 
soil, and increase habitat and aesthetic quality (Figure 
13). Reforestation of headwater regions can reduce 
flood risk in the lower reaches [95].
Figure 13: Effect of soil structure on the infiltration process.  
Adapted from Forbes et al. [81].
5 Technical Guidance and 
Best Practice
In recent years, there has been an explosion of interest 
in research and development of NbS, which has 
contributed to a proliferation of technical literature 
and guidance. Published guidance ranges from high-
level, overarching framework documents aimed at 
broad audiences (including the general public and 
policymakers), to more detailed technical guides to aid 
design and implementation of NbS. A non-exhaustive 
overview of technical guidance pertaining to NbS for 
coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management 
is provided in Section 5.1, highlighting key relevant 
documents (including standards, where identified) 
developed in Canada and internationally. More 
expansive summaries of these and other documents are 
provided in Appendix B. A synthesis of best practices, 
distilled from common themes and ideas presented 
within the existing guidance, is presented in Section 5.2.
5.1 Summary of Technical Guidance
5.1.1 International Guidance
Several international guidance documents have 
been developed to provide overarching frameworks, 
principles, considerations, and high-level information 
for NbS. The IUCN Global Standard for Nature-
based Solutions [19] was developed to promote 
consistent approaches to design and verification of 
NbS worldwide, and provides a useful framework 
for NbS implementation. It sets out fundamental 
steps for establishing the credibility of NbS when 
engaging with investors, and is a potentially useful 
communication tool for broader engagement prior to 
design and implementation. The UNDRR’s Nature-
Based Solutions for Disaster Risk Reduction document 
[64] was developed to support the delivery of the 
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals and 
the Sendai Framework, while providing practical 
guidance on developing and implementing NbS for 
disaster risk reduction. It identifies knowledge gaps, 
enablers, and barriers to uptake of NbS, and provides 
suggestions for how public and private sector entities 
can be involved in incentivizing and delivery of NbS. 
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and 
the World Bank (WB) have published documents 
[96], [97] providing guidance, high-level principles, 
Loose soil promotes 
infiltration 
Packed soil 
inhibits infiltration and 
increases surface 
runoff
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
32
csagroup.org
and frameworks for NbS implementation. These 
international guides provide excellent resources and 
background information, and useful foundational 
frameworks for NbS. However, the information provided 
is relatively high-level and generic, and, therefore, it 
is a precursor to more detailed technical guidance 
(including standards) for design and implementation 
of NbS for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk 
management. 
More detailed technical guidance specific to coastal 
and riverine applications has been developed by a 
variety of international organizations [10], [11], [31], 
[81], [98]–[101]. Natural and Nature-Based Flood 
Management: A Green Guide [99] was developed by 
the World Wildlife Fund to support the use of natural 
and nature-based methods for flood risk management, 
based on integrated flood management (IFM) 
approaches (i.e., combining elements of the IWRM 
and strategic FRM concepts discussed in Section 
3.6). Since 2017, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 
through its Engineering with Nature® Program, 
has led an international working group to develop 
International Guidelines on Natural and Nature-based 
Features for Flood Risk Management [101]. The working 
group has received contributions from more than 
180 practitioners, researchers, and academics from 
more than 70 organizations, including the National 
Research Council of Canada. The 1000-page guideline 
is intended to equip users with information needed to 
assess the feasibility of, plan, design, and implement 
NbS for coastal and riverine flood risk management. 
The Engineering with Nature® website (https://ewn.
el.erdc.dren.mil/about.html) also provides a wealth 
of information and resources for practitioners. In 
the U.K., the Environment Agency’s Working with 
Natural Processes and Natural Flood Management 
[10] provides a wealth of information on the current 
state of knowledge surrounding the effectiveness of 
different measures from a flood risk and ecosystem 
services perspective. This evidence directory builds 
on the earlier Greater Working with Natural Processes 
in Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management report 
[100], which explained the basis of working with natural 
2	
Natural flood management is defined by SEPA as involving “techniques that aim to work with natural hydrological and morphological processes, features and 
characteristics to manage the sources and pathways of flood waters”, and is therefore roughly synonymous with NbS.
processes to manage flood and coastal erosion risk, 
and provided recommendations for U.K. governments 
and practitioners to improve this practice. The Scottish 
Environment Protection Agency’s (SEPA) Natural 
Flood Management Handbook [81] – aimed primarily 
at local authorities, as natural flood management2 
project proponents – provides practical guidance to 
support the delivery of NbS. EcoShape, an organization 
based in the Netherlands that provides engineering 
services through the delivery and/or utilization of 
ecosystem services, has developed a comprehensive 
website (https://www.ecoshape.org/en/) documenting 
examples of NbS while providing a framework for 
implementation and identifying key criteria to ensure 
for successful implementation and functioning of NbS. 
The U.S. Federal Highway Administration’s Nature-
Based Solutions for Coastal Highway Resilience: An 
Implementation Guide [98] is a comprehensive and 
useful guide intended primarily for transportation 
professionals interested in applying NbS, but it is likely 
to be of interest to a wider audience. 
The international guidance described above (and 
in further detail in Appendix B) provides important 
information that is likely to be of use to Canadian 
communities, governments, project proponents, and 
practitioners engaged in NbS for coastal and riverine 
flood and erosion risk management. With added 
region- and site-specific context and considerations, 
many of these documents could provide a strong 
fundamental basis for the development of future 
standards supporting NbS in Canada. A consistent 
message across all of the existing guidance is 
the importance of an enabling framework, which 
encapsulates the necessary steps for project 
proponents to plan, design, initiate, and implement 
NbS. Each of the frameworks described is a slight 
variation on the others. However, many of the 
frameworks touch on the following key elements: 
	• Identifying the need/aspiration 
	• Multi-stakeholder engagement and approaches 
	• Capacity building 
	• Preliminary assessment 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
33
csagroup.org
	• Benefits and costs assessment 
	• Vulnerability and risk assessment 
	• Project evaluation 
	• Development of performance objectives and metrics 
	• Options appraisal 
	• Classification of NbS type 
	• Monitoring and adaptive management strategies 
	• Site assessment 
	• Permitting 
	• Design and implementation 
	• Operations and maintenance 
	• Addressing key policy, governance, and regulatory 
issues     
5.1.2 Canadian Guidance
The growth in interest surrounding NbS in Canada 
has led to the development of a number of enabling 
documents and programs, many of which provide a 
regional context for the planning and implementation 
of NbS in Canadian environments. On behalf of the 
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment, 
ICF prepared a report entitled Best Practices and 
Resources on Climate Resilient Natural Infrastructure 
[50], which summarized the state of practice for 
natural infrastructure solutions to enhance community 
resilience to hazards, including riverine flooding, and 
coastal storms and flooding. This is arguably the most 
comprehensive report to date discussing NbS across 
the Canadian landscape, and identifies best practices 
and NbS commonly applied to support coastal and 
riverine flood and erosion risk management. The 
ICF report explains the business case for natural 
infrastructure with emphasis on socio-economic 
benefits, including how these solutions can encourage 
a sense of identify and stewardship in communities, 
nurture human health and well-being, facilitate outdoor 
recreation, and increase property values.  
A three-part series of guidance documents titled 
Adapting to Climate Change in Coastal Communities 
of the Atlantic Provinces, Canada: Land Use Planning 
and Engineering and Natural Approaches [37], 
[102], [103] was developed as part of a suite of tools 
developed by the Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions 
Association (ACASA) to support community adaptation 
in Atlantic Canada. Though not exclusively focused 
on NbS, the series illustrate that natural solutions can 
be integrated within broader adaptation strategies 
(procedural, avoid, retreat, accommodate, protect). An 
accompanying online decision tool provides guidance 
on a range of engineering (grey to green) and land 
use options depending on user inputs. Similarly, the 
Nova Scotia Department of Agriculture is currently 
developing a tool that will aid in the assessment of 
dyke and tidal barrier upgrades using NbS (along with 
traditional engineering solutions) such as tidal wetland 
restoration and managed dyke realignment. The intent 
is to determine the feasibility of managed realignment 
using holistic approaches by considering elements of 
existing land use, hydrology, ecology, geomorphology, 
soils, and sediments. The tool is in development and 
not yet publicly available.  However, ACASA’s series 
provide a potentially useful framework for design 
and implementation of NbS across Canada’s coastal 
regions. By covering aspects of land use planning, 
engineering, and broader considerations for selecting 
adaptation options, they demonstrate how NbS can be 
integrated within broader coastal zone management 
and flood/erosion risk management strategies.
The Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI) 
provides technical and policy support to guide local 
governments in managing their natural assets. 
Guidance on scoping, defining, and managing natural 
assets [104], [105] and documented case studies [47], 
[48] provide useful Canadian examples and lessons 
learned for how natural assets can be sustainably 
managed to support flood risk management. 
The Green Shores© program, run by the Stewardship 
Centre for British Columbia, encourages the 
preservation, management, and restoration of 
shorelines for public and private properties, with 
ecosystem sustainability at the forefront [106], [107]. 
The program is based on voluntary credits and ratings 
system, modelled after the widely adopted LEED™ 
program for green buildings. The guides developed for 
the Green Shores© program provide useful resources, 
information, and highlight issues relevant to design and 
implementation of NbS in coastal (including freshwater 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
34
csagroup.org
lakeshore) environments [106], [107]. Based on an earlier 
version of the Green Shores© rating system, Lamont et 
al. [29] developed a potentially useful framework and 
initial basis for development of Canadian guidance on 
evaluation of costs and benefits of coastal NbS. The 
authors explored “soft” shore protection approaches 
to flood protection and sea-level rise adaptation as 
alternatives to hard shoreline armouring where soft 
solutions provided a significant cost savings over hard 
solutions with similar degrees of flood protection and 
probable service life.
Useful technical guidance on riverine NbS is provided 
by Ontario’s Ministry of Natural Resources [108] 
and Newbury and Gaboury [109], even though both 
documents were developed before NbS emerged as an 
established concept. Ontario’s Adaptive Management 
of Stream Corridors in Ontario [108] provides a basis 
for, and comprehensive guidance to proponents of, 
stream naturalization through management, design, 
and implementation within an adaptive management 
framework. Significantly, it advocates for multi-
disciplinary teams, recognizing the complexity involved 
in achieving functional systems, and multiple objective 
planning and design approaches. Newbury and 
Gaboury’s Stream Analysis and Fish Habitat Design: 
A Field Manual [109] presents a ten-step procedure 
for analysis, design, implementation, and monitoring 
of stream habitat works. In addition to technical 
guidance, the manual provides lessons learned from 
stream restoration projects in varied geological and 
hydrological environments in Manitoba.  
Properly assessing and understanding the value of 
ecosystem services provided by NbS is a crucial 
prerequisite for developing business cases and 
appraisal of alternatives. Moudrak et al. [26] developed 
a framework (“Value for Money”) to guide the 
development of business cases and investment in 
NbS for flood risk management in Canada, which 
emphasizes valuation methods, funding models and 
mechanisms, financial instruments, and forums for 
convening stakeholders. The report provides a useful 
resource for decision-makers and investors considering 
funding or investment in natural infrastructure, as 
well as techno-economic appraisal of flood risk 
management strategy options that include NbS. 
Moudrak and Feltmate [1] propose practical measures 
that stakeholders in Canada can take to alleviate the 
risk of future floods, including NbS, for which several 
successful case studies are highlighted. 
In 2020, a multi-year research project, Nature-
Based Infrastructure for Coastal Resilience and Risk 
Reduction, led by the National Research Council of 
Canada, was established through the Canadian Safety 
and Security program managed by Defence Research 
and Development Canada’s Centre for Security 
Science. The project is bringing together engineers, 
scientists, and practitioners from federal, municipal, 
and First Nations government and academia to 
address key factors and data gaps limiting the uptake 
of nature-based infrastructure for coastal flood and 
erosion risk reduction in Canada. It aims to break new 
ground by developing an improved understanding of 
the performance of nature-based shore protection 
systems in typical Canadian coastal environments 
by conducting coordinated research activities 
(field monitoring, digital twinning, and laboratory 
experiments). The project will draw on observations 
from pilot sites in diverse coastal environments, to 
inform the development of a new design guide for 
Canadian communities and practitioners considering 
nature-based solutions.
The emergence of guidance, programs, case studies, 
and other resources for NbS in Canadian coastal zones 
and river basins is encouraging. Existing guidance 
documents and available information, including those 
summarized above (and in more detail in Appendix 
B) provide a useful starting basis for the future 
development of national guidance (including standards) 
for application of NbS to coastal and riverine flood 
and erosion risk management.  However, more work 
is needed to enable future technical guidance and 
standards. Much of the existing national guidance (e.g., 
[26], [50], [104], [105]) provides a useful overview of key 
issues and resources for policymakers, decision-makers, 
asset managers, investors, and project proponents but 
lacks the technical detail needed by practitioners to 
enable design and implementation of NbS for coastal 
and riverine flood and erosion risk management. The 
majority of the more detailed technical guidance has 
been developed with a regional focus (e.g., [37], [102], 
[103], [108], [109]), and is in some cases several decades 
old [108], [109], omitting some of the learnings and 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
35
csagroup.org
perspectives that have emerged since the recent rise in 
popularity of NbS. Ongoing, multi-disciplinary research 
and lessons learned from pilot projects across Canada 
offer potential to enhance the body of knowledge that 
will support future technical guidance and standards in 
this space. 	
5.2 Synthesis of Current Best Practice
The following best practice summary, synthesized 
from the existing guidance identified in Section 5.1, is 
structured according to four key phases involved in 
implementing NbS and discussed below: 
	• Engagement and consensus-building 
	• Project planning and design 
	• Construction 
	• Maintenance, monitoring, and adaptive management 
The synthesis may be useful to inform the future 
development of technical guidance or standards for 
NbS to address coastal and riverine flood and erosion 
risks in Canada.
5.2.1 Engagement and Consensus-Building
The system-based principles underlying NbS inherently 
require broad engagement and consultation with a 
variety of stakeholders, rights holders, regulators, and 
interested or affected parties [11], [19], [21]. Indeed, 
early, comprehensive, and continuing engagement and 
consensus-building is key to ensuring project success 
[96]–[98]. The engagement process may benefit from 
an early mapping exercise to identify various actors. 
Defining a clear process for engagement, participation, 
and decision-making will help to clarify expectations 
and ensure buy-in. This process should define and 
communicate when and how decisions are to be 
made, and who participates at each step. Consensus 
and active participation is usually achieved through 
effective communication, outreach, and feedback from 
multi-party involvement in planning, implementing, 
monitoring, and evaluation [26], [98], [110]. It is 
good practice for engagement activities, decisions, 
and agreements to be tracked, documented, and 
disseminated throughout the project implementation 
[96] to ensure a transparent process and a clear 
understanding amongst participants. Perspectives, 
knowledge, values, world views, priorities, and risk 
tolerances can vary significantly across regions, 
communities, and actors, and are rarely static. Local 
and regional contexts, knowledge, and lessons 
learned should therefore inform the engagement 
and consensus-building process. This variability and 
potential for changes over time should be considered 
before and during outreach and engagement [108].
5.2.2 Project Planning and Design
NbS require understanding the historical and present 
system states as well as anticipating potential future 
changes in the system [96], [111]. A phased approach 
to project planning and implementation is therefore 
useful, as lessons learned from earlier stages can be 
"Much of the existing national guidance  
provides a useful overview of key issues 
and resources for policy-makers, decision-
makers, asset managers, investors and project 
proponents but lacks the technical detail 
needed by practitioners to enable design 
and implementation of NbS for coastal and 
riverine flood and erosion risk management."
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
36
csagroup.org
applied later in the process [110]. Many of the guidance 
documents discussed in Section 5.1 (and summarized 
in more detail in Appendix B) provide reasonable 
frameworks for effective planning and design, each 
with a slight difference in emphasis or regional 
applicability. Key relevant points of broad applicability 
to project planning and design are summarized below. 
5.2.2.1 Scoping
A clear understanding and definition of the problem, 
goals, objectives, and constraints is crucial to enable 
effective NbS design and implementation  [96], [110]. 
Some level of system understanding is typically 
required at an early stage in the project to support 
objective-setting, even before detailed analyses. 
Understanding the drivers for flood and erosion risk 
through the lenses of bio-physical processes and 
socio-economic pressures is an important starting 
point. Deliberation with stakeholders, interested or 
affected parties, and regulators can help to refine 
and constrain the problem definition [96]. Questions 
such as “What is the determination of success?” and 
“What is the time required to achieve that success?” 
are worthy of consideration. Advance knowledge of 
relevant governance, jurisdictional, and regulatory 
considerations may help to identify or exclude 
possibilities and opportunities for collaboration. NbS 
typically have multiple objectives, and metrics should 
be developed to enable evaluation of success against 
desired objectives.
A scoping study will help to identify priority objectives 
and the potential need for NbS, by characterizing the 
river catchment or coastal system of interest, assessing 
flooding, and erosion issues at a high level, identifying 
potential wider benefits of different measures, 
prioritizing stakeholder and community values, and 
determining potential impacts and constraints [19], 
[81]. Scoping and identification of needs for NbS may 
occur as part of broader strategic geospatial planning 
or flood and erosion risk assessments. Relevant 
system scales (in space and time) and boundaries 
should be evaluated by considering the variety of 
drivers and interactions between environmental and 
social systems, such as hydrology, climate, physics, 
biogeomorphology, ecosystems, and anthropogenic 
influences  [96], [97]. This should include an early 
assessment of potential impacts, including possible 
encroachment on sensitive ecosystems, livelihoods, 
traditional ways of life, archaeological sites, cultural 
heritage, and industry (including fisheries and 
aquaculture). The results of the scoping study will 
provide the project team with a better understanding 
of flood and erosion risk, whether the potential 
solutions are feasible, identification of benefits and 
disadvantages, and, most importantly, whether NbS 
should be further considered as part of the flood and 
erosion risk management strategy [81]. 
5.2.2.2 Assembling the Project Team
Design of NbS requires innovation, multi-disciplinary 
project teams, broad participation, and open minds 
[112]. NbS are most effective when developed with 
direct input from stakeholders and actors from a variety 
of backgrounds and sectors [19]. Input from engineers, 
biologists, geomorphologists, geophysicists, ecologists, 
archaeologists, planners, environmental/ecological 
economists, social scientists, Indigenous and local 
community members, and others will benefit the 
decision-making process. Local knowledge, including 
the traditional knowledge of Indigenous peoples, can 
bring significant value and richness to NbS projects 
and a greater collective understanding of contexts and 
system processes.  Early assembly of a core project 
team, and clear definition of roles and expectations, 
ensures the necessary expertise and knowledge can be 
applied to develop appropriate NbS [96], [98]. 
5.2.2.3 System Analysis and Options Appraisal
The first priority in managing or reducing disaster risk 
is developing a thorough understanding of risk [17]. 
Risk assessments provide a means to identify the 
full range of risks associated with flood and erosion 
hazards in a system, establish risk tolerances and 
priorities, and generate alternative risk reduction 
strategies [6], [96]–[98]. The assessment should 
consider present-day risk and risk dynamics, including 
changes related to natural system variability, climate 
change, policy, governance, human activities, and 
economics  [6], [96]. A rigorous risk assessment will 
allow for options appraisal (a comparative evaluation of 
risk management strategy alternatives), many or all of 
which may include NbS. Generation and comparative 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
37
csagroup.org
analysis of appropriate risk management alternatives 
will require a comprehensive understanding of 
system-wide and local conditions and processes. The 
options appraisal should review and prioritize the list 
of potential strategies, and identify their advantages 
and disadvantages in terms of meeting defined 
objectives [81]. This may involve applying a variety of 
techniques for qualitatively or, preferably, quantitatively 
evaluating each alternative. Total economic value 
appraisal techniques can be used to monetize and 
evaluate a range of costs and benefits associated with 
each alternative [26]. Engineering and geomorphic 
modelling and analysis may be required to evaluate the 
performance of alternative strategies in managing flood 
and erosion risk, as well as the stability and response 
of nature-based features to storms, human activities 
(e.g., land use, dredging), or non-stationarity in hydro-
climatic variables. Sources of uncertainty associated 
with future natural, technical, and social system states 
[11] should be factored into the options appraisal, while 
recognizing that adaptive management is an inherent 
feature of NbS.
5.2.2.4 Permitting
Permitting can represent a significant challenge 
for NbS project proponents in Canada and can 
dramatically affect timelines for project implementation. 
A thorough understanding of jurisdiction and 
regulations is an important prerequisite for 
navigating the complex regulatory environment and 
understanding which NbS are likely to be viable. Given 
the complexities and distinct regulatory contexts in 
different parts of Canada, expert professional advice 
is often needed to guide NbS proponents through the 
process. The potential for permitting requirements to 
change over the project life cyle should be considered.  
5.2.2.5 Design
Not all NbS require a design phase. For example, 
delivery of NbS through land use planning and 
regulatory tools such as creating protected areas 
may not require design activities. For NbS where 
some element of design is required, approaches can 
involve similar steps to those employed for design of 
traditional coastal or river infrastructure. The level of 
effort required during the design phase may depend 
on the nature and complexity of the intervention [81] 
(e.g., restoration versus enhancement or alteration 
of the system), and on the approach to adaptive 
management. 
Large or complex NbS will likely require hydrological, 
hydrodynamic, sediment transport modelling, and 
analysis to refine the design to achieve the desired 
flood and erosion risk management objectives (e.g., 
protection of a community against flood hazards for a 
defined event over a defined time horizon) [98]. This 
may involve expert analysis using a variety of empirical, 
statistical, or numerical modelling tools, and validation 
against field data. Under certain circumstances, 
physical modelling can provide valuable input to 
guide or optimize NbS design in river and coastal 
settings (see Living Breakwaters in Case Study A and 
Springbank Off-Stream Storage Reservoir in Case 
Study C). 
Analysis of the system ecology and biology is a key 
component of NbS design development, to support 
decisions surrounding suitable feature types [102], 
materials (soils, plants), and elevations. Diversification 
principles [11], [24] should be applied where possible, 
to facilitate a multiple line of defence flood/erosion 
risk management strategy and to ensure resilient, 
adaptable NbS. The design should include an analysis 
of the potential impacts of interventions on the existing 
natural systems, including potential cumulative impacts 
of multiple NbS, to ensure unintended negative 
consequences are anticipated and avoided [12].
Typical steps in the design process might include 
development of preferred concept(s), followed by the 
development of a preliminary design and cost estimate, 
and detailed design with technical specifications, 
necessary tasks, timelines, a detailed budget, and 
phased or life-cycle costing [30], [96]. U.S. Federal 
Highway Administration guidance [98] suggests that 
the design team and process may be guided by the 
following questions: 
	• Is it technically feasible?
	• Is it reasonable?
	• Is it justifiable?
	• Is it constructible? 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
38
csagroup.org
5.2.3 Construction / Implementation
Contractors experienced in bioengineering, marine 
engineering, and NbS and who understand the fragility 
of sensitive natural systems are crucial to successful 
implementation [108]. Furthermore, open and clear 
communication and collaboration between designers 
and contractors are needed to ensure success [108]. 
Given the inherent requirement for innovation with NbS, 
performance-based or turnkey (design-build-operate) 
procurement may be appropriate strategies to consider, 
where the focus is on eventual outcomes rather than 
how they will be achieved [98]. This is particularly worth 
considering where NbS may take some time to establish 
or reach dynamic equilibrium, which may require re-
deployment of construction workers and equipment a 
year or more following construction to repair any initial 
damage sustained during flood or storm season and 
adaptively manage the NbS.
Construction can be split into three phases: pre-
construction, construction, and post-construction [98]. 
During the pre-construction phase, thought should 
be given to the construction process, techniques, and 
materials, including transportation to and from the site, 
staging, sequencing, scheduling, and environmental 
protection measures (e.g., erosion and sediment 
control). Pre-construction surveys may be carried out, 
potentially at intervals beginning a year or more in 
advance, to support site characterization and system 
understanding. Federal, provincial, or local guidance 
and regulations pertaining to working in or near water 
should be consulted. Seasonal conditions, weather, and 
windows of time for construction should be considered, 
including any regulations or restrictions related to 
migratory birds, fish, marine mammals, fishing, and 
harvesting. High-flow velocities or changing water 
levels can affect construction operations, while 
heavy machinery can damage surfaces and disturb 
sediments, potentially causing irreversible damage 
to watercourses and fish habitat [81], [108]. During 
the construction phase, there should be clear and 
continuous communication between the project 
manager, contractor, design team, and other parties 
interested in, or affected by, the project such as local 
residents. The post-construction phase will typically 
include an as-built survey to assess compliance with 
or deviation from the original design, and to provide 
a baseline for monitoring, followed by full or partial 
demobilization from the site. 
5.2.4 Maintenance, Monitoring, and Adaptive 
Management
Successful operation and maintenance of NbS requires 
developing a monitoring, maintenance, and adaptive 
management plan with clearly defined goals and 
measurable objectives [50], [96]. The plan should 
typically be drafted at the planning and design phase, 
and updated throughout the project life-cycle [26], 
[108]. The plan should provide information to enable 
an assessment of the performance of the NbS over the 
design life, or other timeframes relevant to the system 
evolution [102], and outline roles and responsibilities, 
the required frequency and duration of monitoring 
activities, funding, compliance with relevant policies 
and standards, staff and expertise, training, remedial/
contingency measures (if required), and adaptive 
management triggers [96]. 
Long-term post-construction/implementation 
monitoring enables objective assessment of the 
performance of NbS, and identification of triggers 
for routine maintenance, extraordinary maintenance 
(remedial measures), or adaptive management. More 
broadly, monitoring of the life-cycle performance of 
NbS will provide crucial evidence to inform future 
solutions [81], [113]. 
Yepsen et al. [114] provide a useful framework guiding 
the development of monitoring plans for living 
shorelines and wetland restoration in New Jersey, 
which has potential for application to a variety of NbS 
project types in other regions. The framework provides 
users with suggested metrics relevant to project goals 
and restoration type, common methods for collecting 
data, monitoring plan templates, suggestions for 
selecting metrics and methods, and guidance on 
indicators or triggers for adaptive management. The 
framework encourages standardization of metrics and 
broad dissemination of data to share lessons learned. 
A non-exhaustive list of parameters to consider 
for monitoring riverine and coastal NbS projects is 
provided as follows [81]:
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
39
csagroup.org
	• Meteorology, hydrology, and hydraulic conditions 
(such as precipitation, wind speed, air temperature, 
water levels, flow speeds, sea states, ice);
	• Geomorphology and sediment transport (topography, 
bathymetry, erosion rates, sediment grain size 
distribution);
	• Sediment and water quality (turbidity, contaminants, 
salinity, dissolved oxygen, pH, organic matter, redox 
potential); 
	• Ecology (number, density, morphology, health and 
changes in local aquatic and terrestrial flora and 
fauna);
	• Performance (number of damaging flood events, flood 
depths and velocities, flood damages incurred). 
When developing a monitoring plan, the timescale 
of the monitoring plan is an important consideration 
as it will define the frequency of monitoring and the 
amount of funding required. Long-term monitoring 
may be necessary for inherently dynamic coastal 
sites, or riverine sites that may be heavily impacted 
by large flood events [81]. However, timeframes for 
implementation and evolution of the NbS, and needs to 
inform adaptive management, will inevitably determine 
the time frames for monitoring [102]. 
Like traditional hard engineering solutions, regular 
operation and maintenance of NbS ensures that they 
will function as intended  [26], [98], [115] and is critical 
for long-term resiliency [116]. When maintenance is 
considered in planning and design phases, it can 
help to “maximize environmental benefits and reduce 
the project costs over its life span” [115]. Regular 
maintenance and monitoring can also help to minimize 
the damage resulting from extreme weather or 
hydrometeorological disturbances [116]. 
Adaptive management is embedded in the principles 
underlying NbS. Adaptive management plans are 
therefore integral to the long-term success of NbS 
and reduce risks associated with uncertainty in 
future systems [11], even for traditional engineered 
infrastructure. Adaptive management should 
occur throughout the NbS service life, facilitating 
adjustments when new information is discovered 
through monitoring [96] or when thresholds triggering 
intervention are reached. 
6 Challenges and Opportunities 
for Nature-Based Systems in 
Canada
6.1 Overview
Challenges and opportunities for NbS to address 
coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk in Canada 
were identified based on the literature review (Section 
5) and feedback from interviewees. Table 3 summarizes 
some of the key points from this analysis. A more 
thorough discussion with relevant examples is provided 
in Sections 6.2–6.9.  
Table 3: Overview of challenges and opportunities for nature-based systems in Canada
Distinct and Varied Environmental Conditions  (Section 6.2)
Challenges
•	NbS are site-specific, requiring a comprehensive understanding of regional and local systems [31], [116], 
and solutions are not always directly transferable.  
•	Ice and permafrost in coastal regions and watersheds creates distinct challenges for NbS in Canada.     
Opportunities
•	Ongoing, multi-disciplinary, collaborative research and monitoring of NbS at pilot sites across Canada 
provide ideal opportunities to learn about the viability and performance of different solutions in a variety 
of environments and to inform future solutions, technical guidance, and standards as appropriate.
•	Canada’s diverse environments present opportunities for innovation. 
Planning and Land Use Strategy (Section 6.3)
Challenges
•	Although avoidance is proven to be the most effective strategy for flood and erosion risk management, 
many Canadian communities and infrastructures are already situated in areas of high flood or erosion 
hazards. 
Opportunities
•	Land use planning and development strategies that embrace “whole system” approaches and the 
dynamic nature of flood and erosion risk are needed to enable NbS. 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
40
csagroup.org
Regulation and Governance (Section 6.4)
Challenges
•	The complex and changing regulatory environment is a significant barrier to NbS in Canada [31]. A lack 
of streamlined processes and synergies between different levels of government can impede or even 
prevent adoption of NbS. 
•	NbS are most commonly implemented on a small scale and at local levels in Canada, which is not
always conducive to whole system approaches, which typically span multiple jurisdictions or regulatory 
boundaries.
Opportunities
•	The whole system thinking underlying NbS has the potential to create a paradigm shift in flood and 
erosion risk management practice and governance in Canada. 
•	Ontario’s Conservation Authorities provide a Canadian example of whole system approaches to water 
management, whereby jurisdictions are aligned with system (i.e., watershed) boundaries. Insight gained 
and lessons learned from these experiences may help to guide new approaches to governance enabling 
NbS across Canada.
Funding and Financing (Section 6.5)
Challenges
•	Project funding models that emphasize capital spending de-incentivize projects that involve 
maintenance and adaptive management, including NbS. Buy-in from investors or funding agencies may 
be difficult to obtain.
•	NbS require innovation, multi-disciplinary and specialized knowledge, and broad stakeholder 
engagement; all of which can represent significant up-front investments for NbS project proponents. 
These costs can be prohibitive for small communities.
Opportunities
•	Organizations like the MNAI are working with local governments to embed natural assets within asset 
management programs and financial planning, promoting broader implementation of NbS in Canada.
•	NbS are increasingly recognized in funding programs for adaptation infrastructure and gaining interest 
from capital markets.
•	Innovative insurance products are emerging to address some of the inherent or perceived risks and 
uncertainties associated with NbS implementation. 
Monitoring Performance (Section 6.6)
Challenges
•	Data demonstrating and contrasting the technical performance and track record of NbS across Canada 
are severely lacking.  
Opportunities
•	Monitoring and evaluating the performance of NbS demonstrates the benefits and effectiveness of 
NbS. Broadly accessible monitoring results promote uptake and more successful implementation of 
NbS by informing designers, proponents, decision-makers, and the public of the benefits and lessons 
learned [118].
•	Standards or guidance for NbS performance assessment and monitoring, would help potential 
proponents to better understand the factors affecting performance, to secure funding for assessment 
and monitoring, to establish standardized metrics and criteria, and, ultimately, increase investor 
confidence in NbS projects.
Perceptions (Section 6.7)
Challenges
•	NbS are perceived as uncertain. NbS are inherently dynamic and may depend on living components that 
adapt to changing externalities, which may create anxiety for proponents. 
Opportunities
•	The adaptive capacity of NbS is an inherent advantage in dealing with a highly uncertain future. Well-
implemented and publicized pilot projects that demonstrate performance objectively, by monitoring 
against clear and consistent performance metrics, can help to change perceptions surrounding 
uncertainty associated with NbS.
•	Technical guidance provided by future standards and guidelines can facilitate increased confidence 
in NbS. Standards that provide guidance on high-level frameworks and considerations for design and 
implementation of NbS would be beneficial in mainstreaming important principles, such as whole 
system thinking, multi-disciplinary teams, and adaptive management. 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
41
csagroup.org
Technical Expertise (Section 6.8)
Challenges
•	Cross-disciplinary collaboration on NbS for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management has 
been lacking in Canada. NbS are inherently multi-disciplinary endeavours, and their success depends on 
engaging a broad range of perspectives and expertise.
•	There is a shortage of highly skilled NbS practitioners in Canada [50]. 
Opportunities
•	Education and outreach on NbS is on the rise, and this can be effective in gaining increased public 
support [120]. Future technical guidance and standards can play an important role in educating 
practitioners and project proponents.
Post-Flood Recovery (Section 6.9)
Challenges
•	Canada’s flood and erosion risk management infrastructure is aging and under increasing pressure (e.g., 
due to climate change effects such as sea-level rise and more extreme weather patterns).
Opportunities
•	Future post-flood recovery activities present unique opportunities to “build back better” and consider 
NbS as part of flood and erosion risk management strategies. Frameworks and enablers, including 
guidance and standards, are needed to position planners, designers, communities, and governments 
to maximize the potential of NbS for coastal flood and erosion risk management.
6.2 Distinct and Varied Environmental 
Conditions 
Canada is a country of diverse shorelines and 
watersheds, where ecology, hydrology, and climate 
differ vastly depending on location. There are 
significant regional contrasts in the predominant 
drivers of floods [4]. Almost every interview 
respondent highlighted the site-specific or “place-
based” nature of NbS, consistent with findings by ICF 
[50].  NbS therefore typically require a rigorous and 
comprehensive understanding of local environmental 
conditions to ensure successful implementation, 
where options may be constrained by local drivers and 
processes [102]. For example, NbS implemented on the 
sandy coasts or muddy intertidal marshes on Canada’s 
East Coast are not necessarily transferable to the 
steep, rocky, or mixed-sediment shorelines of the West 
Coast. Similarly, NbS designed for steep, mountainous 
watersheds may not perform well in permafrost regions 
or the flat terrain of the Prairies. Hydrologic, hydraulic, 
and ice regimes vary substantially across Canada’s 
river watersheds (and seasons) and play a crucial role 
in determining which NbS are viable. For example, 
the significant spatio-temporal variability in the soil-
water interface creates challenges in determining how 
vegetation can be incorporated in riverine NbS. Aquatic 
vegetation is not suited to prolonged periods of low 
flow, whereas terrestrial vegetation may not survive 
exposure to high flows, and special planting techniques 
may be required to improve survival rates of newly 
seeded riparian vegetation. 
The ubiquity of ice in Canadian rivers and northern 
coastal regions creates additional challenges for NbS, 
because of the rapid local and system-wide changes 
that can be driven by ice dynamics. Freeze-thaw 
cycles can lead to “plucking” of sediment (or rock) 
and vegetation by ice. Ice can scour shorelines and 
river banks or accumulate on shorelines (i.e., ride-
up) and channel constrictions (i.e., jams), causing 
backwater floods, scour, and damage to river banks 
and vegetation. Ice jams and related backwater 
effects are a significant cause or contributor to flood 
hazards in rivers across Canada [123]. NbS may involve 
“making room for ice”, such as strategically promoting 
retention of ice in areas where the consequences of 
accumulation are not severe, or the use of topographic 
or bathymetric features to promote ice break-up during 
changes in hydraulic regimes.  
NbS for flood and erosion risk management sometimes 
apply a principle of enhancing groundwater infiltration 
to reduce runoff to watercourses and developed areas. 
In permeable (e.g., sand/gravel) soils, this approach 
can be effective at alleviating flooding. However, in 
regions with non-permeable soils (e.g., clay) and 
limited capacity to convey groundwater, solutions 
based on maximizing shallow surface infiltration do 
not always work. For example, in the City of Winnipeg 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
42
csagroup.org
where the soil is highly impermeable, it may be 
preferable to quickly convey local runoff through the 
system during and leading up to the spring freshet 
season, to ensure conveyance capacity is maximized 
when peak flows arrive.
One interviewee identified a potential opportunity to 
avail of existing ecological land classification data to 
guide NbS design and implementation [124]. This type 
of information could help to avoid the introduction 
of invasive plant species and ensure NbS are place-
based and suited to the regional system context. 
Similarly, more comprehensive classification systems 
and geospatial data characterizing the coastal zones 
and river watersheds of Canada (e.g., ecology, wave 
exposure, tidal range, sediment) are needed to support 
these objectives.
6.3 Planning and Land Use Strategy
Many Canadian communities include existing public 
and private infrastructure in areas of high coastal 
and/or riverine flood hazard. Development in close 
proximity to water bodies, without adequate foresight 
for short- or long-term risks, encroaches on natural 
(dynamic) flooding and geomorphological processes 
with negative consequences. Interventions aimed 
at protecting people and assets already situated in 
areas prone to flood and erosion hazards (e.g., raising 
dykes) can divert floodwaters or disturb natural 
sediment transport processes, with potentially negative 
consequences, and/or limit future adaptation options. 
In coastal regions, hardening of defences can deprive 
downdrift shorelines of sediment leading to erosion 
and contribute to “coastal squeeze” [9], with associated 
negative impacts on intertidal ecosystems and the 
vulnerability of coastal communities and infrastructure 
to sea-level rise. This points to a need for land use 
planning and development strategies that embrace 
whole system approaches and the dynamic nature of 
flood risk. Where development has already occurred, 
a number of interview respondents suggested that 
renaturalization of shorelines and floodplains would be 
beneficial and lower risks associated with flooding and 
erosion. One respondent articulated that large-scale 
land use and long-term planning uncovers nuances 
overlooked by small-scale short-term projects, but the 
appetite for large-scale projects that capture the full life 
cycle of a solution (or long-term thinking) is lacking in 
Canada, in part due to short election cycles and multi-
jurisdictional governance.
The pace and extent of development in areas of high 
flood hazard can affect the extent to which NbS 
are viable or acceptable to communities [50]. For 
example, the City of Winnipeg developed rapidly in 
the Red River floodplain, leaving little room for natural 
system features and placing constraints on the extent 
to which NbS could be implemented. By contrast, 
Saskatoon (in the South Saskatchewan River valley) 
developed at a slower pace, allowing more room for 
the river and, arguably, more opportunities for NbS. 
Studies in Ontario [50] have shown that wetlands in 
rural settings are more effective in terms of reducing 
flood damages than their counterparts in developed 
urban areas. Concepts such as Making Room for 
Wetlands, Making Room for Movement (https://www.
transcoastaladaptations.com/), and freedom space 
[66], are encouraging communities and various actors 
to think about flooding, erosion, spatial planning, and 
NbS over longer timescales.  
 Without careful planning, marginalized communities 
can be negatively affected by NbS, and low-income 
residents may even be driven out of the places they 
helped create. NbS promote and preserve green space, 
which improve the aesthetic appeal of communities. 
This can drive rent and housing prices up, in a process 
referred to as eco-gentrification, driving the low-
income base out  [50], [125].
6.4 Regulation and Governance
The complex and changing regulatory environment 
is a significant barrier to NbS in Canada [50]. 
This conclusion was corroborated by interviews 
conducted for this study, with a number of interview 
respondents identifying challenges in keeping up with 
continuously changing regulations and government 
policy applicable to NbS, with some even referring 
to a “regulatory nightmare”. While planning for a 
potential future NbS installation, one respondent 
found that the process for obtaining permits changed 
substantially mid-project, significantly affecting the 
project schedule. In another case, a respondent found 
that previously existing synergies between different 
levels of government and regulatory agencies had 
ceased. These types of changes can significantly alter 
the plans and implementation of NbS, increasing cost 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
43
csagroup.org
and lengthening timeframes for delivery. Silos within 
different governing and regulatory agencies can also 
create confusion amongst stakeholders and the public 
with multiple or conflicting projects sometimes taking 
place without effective cooperation.
In general, interviewed stakeholders believed that 
there is a lack of familiarity with NbS amongst 
regulators and decision-makers, which is a hindrance 
to permitting and approvals. Existing regulatory 
frameworks are more suited to traditional engineered 
infrastructure. Where regulations or guidelines 
support or accommodate NbS, they are sometimes 
misinterpreted. Some interviewees mentioned that 
traditional engineering approaches are sometimes 
adopted to streamline regulatory and permitting 
processes, despite preferences for NbS among 
proponents. In the United States, the U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers is revising policies, guidance, and 
regulations to enable implementation of NbS through 
the Engineering With Nature™ program [35], which 
could be a model for change in Canada. However, the 
complex, multi-jurisdictional regulatory framework in 
Canada will require leadership and buy-in from multiple 
government departments to achieve progress. 
To be effective and sustainable, flood and erosion 
risk management strategies (including NbS) require 
whole system thinking and approaches [11], [19], [21] 
and institutional innovation [112]. Almost inevitably, 
natural systems span multiple jurisdictions or 
regulatory boundaries, particularly in Canada where 
flood risk management responsibilities are shared 
by federal, provincial/territorial, municipal, and 
Indigenous governments [2]. Municipal governments, 
which typically implement and enforce flood risk 
management strategy and infrastructure in Canada [2], 
and project proponents face challenges in navigating 
the jurisdictional overlap and a large number of 
stakeholders. For example, the City of Winnipeg 
is located at the outlet of the Red River and the 
Assiniboine River watersheds, where all of the flows are 
discharged into Lake Winnipeg. The City of Winnipeg’s 
floods are driven by upstream flows, yet the city has 
no authority beyond its jurisdictional limits leaving it 
vulnerable to upstream conditions. If an integrated 
flood risk management approach was taken, the city 
might benefit from improved management practices 
at the watershed scale (e.g., reintroduction of prairie 
pothole topography to enhance flood storage). Some 
respondents suggested that a complete paradigm shift 
is required if whole systems thinking is to become the 
norm in Canada. In Ontario, Conservation Authorities 
(CAs) have been created to enable watershed-scale 
governance [126]. Their strength lies in organizing 
multiple levels of government to effectively 
manage issues such as flood control. There may be 
opportunities to extrapolate lessons learned and 
institutional experience from Ontario’s Conservation 
Authority approach to other regions of Canada, and 
enable IWRM or ICZM approaches that support NbS. 
For example, along Lake Ontario, some neighbouring 
CAs have demonstrated the ability to collaborate 
effectively across jurisdictional boundaries to support 
sustainable shoreline management planning [118]. In 
New Brunswick, the Nashwaak Watershed Association 
has brought together key actors within the Nashwaak 
"To be effective and sustainable, flood 
and erosion risk management strategies 
(including NbS) require whole system 
thinking and approaches and institutional 
innovation."
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
44
csagroup.org
River basin, to address challenges such as water 
quality at the watershed scale and to share experiences 
with other groups/communities interested in improving 
the resilience of their watersheds.
6.5 Funding and Financing
A growing body of evidence is illustrating that natural 
infrastructure assets are beneficial to climate resilience 
of Canadian communities [1], [26], [47], [48]. However, 
existing government funding and financial planning 
models, and terminologies, typically do not adequately 
support NbS. One interview respondent noted an 
experience whereby NbS have to be embedded within 
a larger project in order to receive funding. Project 
funding models that emphasize capital spending 
disincentivize projects that require maintenance 
and adaptive management approaches, which are 
inherent to NbS. Traditionally, natural infrastructure 
assets have not been categorized as capital assets 
(unlike hard infrastructure), which makes funding and 
financing for investment in NbS difficult to obtain [1]. 
However, building on fundamental changes in asset 
management practice in the Town of Gibsons, British 
Columbia [47] – a first for North America – MNAI is 
now working with local governments to embed natural 
assets in their asset management programs and 
financial planning. The shift in mindsets and practices 
resulting from the many successful MNAI case studies 
has the potential to promote broader implementation 
of NbS in Canada, particularly if espoused by multiple 
levels of government. 
NbS are increasingly being recognized in funding 
programs for adaptation infrastructure. For example, 
the City of Surrey received funding through the Federal 
Disaster Mitigation Adaptation Fund to implement 
a coastal flood adaptation strategy [127], including 
design, piloting, and evaluation of NbS to mitigate 
the impacts of sea-level rise on marsh habitat and to 
attenuate floods. 
NbS are gaining interest from capital markets. In recent 
years, financial mechanisms promoting environmentally 
sustainable investments, such as green bonds, have 
begun to facilitate NbS. For example, in 2019 the City 
of Toronto used proceeds from a green bond issuance 
to support the Port Lands Flood Projection Project – 
one of the largest infrastructure projects in Toronto’s 
history. The project will protect Toronto’s southeastern 
downtown area from extreme flooding by creating a 
naturalized river mouth that reconnects the Don River to 
Lake Ontario [128]. 
Innovative insurance products are being developed to 
address some of the inherent or perceived risks and 
uncertainties associated with NbS implementation 
[129]. The ability to insure against construction risks 
and failed project outcomes will help to alleviate some 
of the concerns that governments face with financing 
such projects. 
NbS require innovation, multi-disciplinary and 
specialized knowledge, and broad stakeholder 
engagement, all of which can represent significant up-
front investments for NbS project proponents. These 
costs can be prohibitive for small communities. 
Volunteer NbS initiatives and technical communities of 
practice – such as the Cold Regions Living Shorelines 
Community of Practice convened by the Coastal Zone 
Canada Association and the Natural and Nature-Based 
Climate Change Adaptation Community of Practice 
convened by the New Brunswick Environmental 
Network – are generally underfunded or funded only for 
short periods. Long-term funding is needed to support 
these types of initiatives, so that dedicated staff can be 
assigned to keep networks thriving and relevant. 
6.6 Monitoring Performance
Monitoring and evaluating the performance of NbS 
is crucial to demonstrate benefits and effectiveness 
to the public and potential future project proponents, 
and to enable adaptive management. Broadly 
accessible monitoring data can promote uptake 
and more successful implementation of NbS by 
informing designers, proponents, decision-makers 
and the public of the benefits and lessons learned 
[130]. A number of the documents summarized in 
Appendix B provide general guidance on developing 
monitoring, maintenance, and adaptive management 
plans. However, comprehensive data demonstrating 
and contrasting the technical performance and track 
record of NbS in watersheds and coastal zones 
across Canada is severely lacking. This adds to the 
challenge of attracting public support and investment 
interest to secure broad-scale implementation of NbS 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
45
csagroup.org
projects in Canada – in contrast to well-established 
grey infrastructure projects. Reasons may include 
a lack of funding for monitoring, the absence of 
standardized and consistent performance metrics or 
criteria, or a limited understanding of requirements for 
an effective monitoring program. Some interviewees 
observed that, even when monitoring is conducted, 
durations tend to be too short. For example, a two-
year monitoring plan following implementation is often 
too short to comprehensively assess performance of 
an implemented NbS (e.g., vegetation may not have 
fully grown), to observe the response of the NbS to 
more extreme events, or for the NbS to reach a state of 
dynamic equilibrium. In general, respondents observed 
that monitoring activities typically consist of no more 
than a single inspection (e.g., a year after installment). 
By contrast, compensation projects undertaken to 
offset the impacts of development on fish and fish 
habitat, which may involve wetland restoration or other 
forms of NbS, are typically authorized by regulators 
with conditions for monitoring over periods of one 
year in advance (baseline) and five years post-
construction [113]. Similar conditions could be attached 
to funding for natural infrastructure projects to promote 
monitoring, which is needed to establish an evidence 
base for NbS performance.
Standards or guidance for NbS performance 
assessment and monitoring would help potential 
proponents to better understand the factors affecting 
performance, to secure funding for assessment and 
monitoring, to establish standardized metrics and 
criteria, and, ultimately, to increase investor confidence 
in NbS projects.
Some interview respondents suggested that a national 
clearing house for relevant data collections would be a 
useful tool to encourage monitoring (as well as future 
implementation) of NbS. All levels of government, 
local authorities, community groups, consulting firms, 
and special interest groups collect useful data that 
are often shelved after project completion, which is 
counterproductive to the end- goals of monitoring. 
Citizen science programs (i.e., citizen crowdsourcing or 
volunteer monitoring) – such as Ontario Nature Citizen 
Science Program (https://ontarionature.org/programs/
citizen-science/) where wildlife observations by the 
public feed into spatial and temporal monitoring and 
tracking of local species – may also help to address 
data needs, as well as provide an enhanced sense of 
community ownership [131] and connection to NbS.    
6.7 Perceptions
Some interview respondents observed there are broad 
perceptions that traditional (i.e., hard engineering) 
approaches to flood and erosion risk management 
have a proven track record, whereas NbS are seen 
to be in their infancy and inherently more uncertain. 
Traditional approaches are seen to be supported by 
existing standards, and with performance assurances 
(e.g., warranties and service life expectancies), giving 
confidence to stakeholders and decision-makers. By 
contrast, NbS are inherently dynamic and may depend 
on living components (e.g., vegetation that requires 
time to establish and mature) that adapt to changing 
externalities, which may create anxiety for potential 
proponents [110]. However, as several interview 
respondents articulated, acknowledging the potentially 
negative consequences of hard infrastructure should 
also be a design consideration. For example, hard 
structures may inhibit natural system processes locally 
or at other locations within the system. Education is an 
important part of addressing these (often ill-informed) 
perceptions and changing mindsets. For example, 
Cado van der Lely et al. [11] explain that the adaptive 
capacity of NbS is in fact an inherent advantage in 
dealing with a highly uncertain future, and describe 
how uncertainties in design and implementation of 
NbS can be effectively managed. Well-implemented 
and publicized pilot projects that demonstrate 
performance (objectively, by monitoring against clear 
and consistent performance metrics) are also needed 
to change perceptions surrounding uncertainty 
associated with NbS. Based on feedback from focus 
groups in Nova Scotia, Sutton [132] recommended 
a future-framed approach for broaching adaptation 
planning, to maximize community support. 
Some interviewees felt that new standards for NbS 
would facilitate increased comfort and confidence in 
these types of solutions amongst funding agencies, 
thereby supporting broader uptake. Standards provide 
clarity to the concepts and principles underlying 
NbS and the steps required to implement them, raise 
awareness and educate about NbS best practices and 
lessons learned, and provide assurances to stakeholders 
and decision-makers [19]. Although there are many 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
46
csagroup.org
proponents and leading adopters of NbS within 
engineering disciplines, Morris et al. [110] suggest that 
design manuals may be a necessity for the broader 
engineering community to fully embrace NbS.
Canada’s abundance of wilderness and scenic beauty 
can lead to public complacency and perceptions that 
local interruption of natural system processes by hard 
infrastructure solutions are justified or proportionate. 
This creates challenges for public acceptance of NbS, 
particularly amongst those who mistakenly believe that 
hard infrastructure solutions are always more reliable 
or permanent.
6.8 Technical Expertise
NbS are inherently multi-disciplinary endeavours. 
However, there is a relative paucity of cross-
disciplinary collaborations on NbS for coastal and 
riverine flood and erosion risk management in Canada. 
For example, one interviewee observed that NbS 
are often framed as purely environmental restoration 
projects (i.e., without consideration for flood and 
erosion risk management benefits), and therefore 
engage professional expertise from the environmental 
sciences only. This approach has potential to omit 
consideration of important perspectives from other 
fields of expertise (e.g., hydrology, engineering, 
landscape architecture, archaeology) that may be 
crucial to the success of NbS. Knowledge and attitudes 
towards NbS can vary, even amongst individuals within 
the same institution, depending on expertise and 
academic backgrounds [120]. 
The multi-disciplinary expertise needed to ensure 
successful NbS implementation may be considered 
cost-prohibitive for small projects with limited 
funding, and can result in misguided or high-risk 
project delivery, with negative consequences for 
the broader perception of NbS. An example is the 
widespread integration of logs (woody debris) for shore 
protection on British Columbia beaches because of 
their perceived co-benefits to ecosystems, despite 
a paucity of peer-reviewed evidence or design 
guidance supporting their effectiveness in mitigating 
erosion or wave run-up to date [25]. In fact, excessive 
quantities of woody debris can cause damage to 
sensitive shoreline habitats and features, contributing 
to hazards. However, woody debris is known to trap 
and promote retention of sediment on beaches 
under certain conditions [133], [134]. These examples 
underscore the need for multi-disciplinary project 
teams, local knowledge, research, and design guidance 
to support the development of NbS based on science 
and evidence. 
Some interviewees expressed concerns that Canada’s 
academia is not developing enough highly qualified 
professionals with the breadth of expertise needed 
to enable design and implementation of reliable NbS. 
While there is active academic research on topics 
relevant to NbS at Canadian educational institutions, 
not many have the extremely broad range of expertise, 
disciplines, and experience needed to educate future 
NbS practitioners. Employers in the public and private 
sectors often struggle to recruit suitably qualified and 
experienced practitioners, and experience with NbS 
is largely obtained through experiential learning on 
projects (e.g., in professional practice), which can be 
opportunistic and sporadic. 
Several interview respondents voiced concerns about 
a lack of trained and experienced contractors (and 
training opportunities) capable of delivering NbS 
projects. Construction of NbS may require more care, 
creativity, and expertise than traditional engineering 
works. Some respondents observed that some 
construction companies engaged to construct NbS 
lack understanding of the fragility of ecosystems. 
Misconceptions that the NbS feature always has the 
capacity to self-repair has in some instances led to 
careless construction, unlike for traditional engineered 
structures where there is a clearer understanding and 
expectations of precautions and outcomes. As with 
traditional engineering works, adaptive management 
should be built into the construction phase of NbS.
Some respondents expressed concerns about 
waning support for government science, leaving 
the responsibility of technical spearheading of NbS 
projects to the private or non-profit sectors and 
academia, and the associated fragmentation of NbS-
related experience and knowledge in Canada.
Broad outreach, engagement, and education on 
NbS can be effective in supporting uptake and 
acceptance. Stakeholders and a public that are better 
informed with respect to NbS are better equipped to 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
47
csagroup.org
participate in decision-making processes, ensuring 
more active engagement and effective solutions. 
The BC Stewardship Centre provides training on 
the Green Shores® program [106], [107]. In 2018, 
Nature New Brunswick and NBEN organized a one-
day Natural Infrastructure Learning Day in Dieppe, 
where participants (from technical professionals 
to academics) learned about challenges and 
opportunities involved with NbS for inland flooding 
and erosion, while visiting relevant sites. Education 
and outreach activities like these undoubtedly help to 
broaden awareness and interest in NbS, and increase 
public support for NbS projects [120]. 
6.9 Post-Flood Recovery
Canada’s flood and erosion risk management 
infrastructure is aging and under increasing pressure 
(e.g., due to climate change effects such as sea-level 
rise and more extreme weather patterns). Future 
post-flood recovery activities will present unique 
opportunities to “build back better” and consider NbS 
as part of the flood and erosion risk management 
strategy. Frameworks and enablers, including guidance 
and standards, are needed to position planners, 
designers, communities, and governments to maximize 
the potential of NbS for coastal flood and erosion risk 
management.
7 Knowledge Gaps and 
Research Needs
The Government of Canada’s Climate Science 2050 
national synthesis underscores the urgency in working 
to address science gaps related to identifying and 
deploying NbS in Canada, such as research in to 
potential negative effects, socio-economic and cultural 
valuations and trade-offs, and the impact of extreme 
events on NbS [121]. ICF provides a comprehensive 
review of knowledge gaps and implementation 
challenges, which includes limited institutional 
capacity, a lack of highly qualified personnel, limited 
awareness, a sparsity of data, policy and regulatory 
barriers that favour conventional (grey) infrastructure, 
gentrification of neighbourhoods where NbS are 
implemented, a lack of maintenance capacity, and 
limited cross-disciplinary communication [50] (see 
Appendix B for more information on this review). 
Additional gaps and research needs are identified as 
follows, based on the literature review and interviews 
conducted for this study.
7.1 Monitoring
Broader uptake and implementation of NbS for coastal 
and river flood and erosion risk management in Canada 
is inhibited by a scarcity of accessible, consistent, 
long-term, quality-assured monitoring data. Monitoring 
data is needed to inform performance assessment, 
adaptive management, and future solutions, and 
to give confidence to NbS project proponents and 
investors. The literature search conducted for this 
study identified many NbS project examples and case 
studies across Canada but very little quantitative data 
to assess performance over time. Long-term multi-
year monitoring programs are needed to demonstrate 
performance over time frames of relevance to system 
recovery and establishment. Periodic appraisals 
and observation of NbS project performance over 
even longer (i.e., multi-decadal) time scales would 
help to facilitate comparisons to traditional hard 
infrastructure solutions with design lifetimes typically 
in the range of 25 to 100 years. A centralized project 
database and national standards for monitoring NbS 
performance would represent concrete steps towards 
supporting these aspirations. However, research is 
needed to determine parameters, metrics, indicators, 
instrumentation, and techniques appropriate to 
different types of NbS in different regions. Funding and 
mechanisms for incentivizing long-term monitoring is 
also needed. Options to consider could include making 
project funding contingent on proponents developing 
and implementing monitoring plans.
7.2 Predicting Performance
Canada’s coastal and riverine environments, flood-
driving processes and regional climates are extremely 
diverse. Research and evidence is needed to determine 
how various NbS perform in diverse river and coastal 
settings, to support the development and validation 
of predictive tools and design guidance that are 
applicable across Canada. This will require engaging 
local and regional expertise, expansion of existing pilot 
project programs, and collaborative, multi-disciplinary 
research to develop the evidence base for tools and 
guidance. In regions and environments where NbS are 
relatively untested to date, such as northern Canada, 
innovation will be required to adapt NbS concepts 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
48
csagroup.org
or develop new variants to take into account unique 
issues relative to ice, permafrost, relative sea-level fall, 
native ecosystems, and materials.
7.3 Planning/Decision-Making 
Frameworks
Despite the accelerating interest in NbS for managing 
coastal and riverine flood and erosion risks, and the 
need to address underutilization in Canada, they 
are not universally applicable. A well-designed hard 
infrastructure solution that makes allowance for natural 
systems processes may outperform a poorly designed 
and implemented NbS, which could even have 
unintended negative environmental consequences. 
Research is needed to better understand the 
performance of non-structural (i.e., planning-based), 
conventional, and nature-based (including hybrid) 
solutions for managing coastal and riverine flood and 
erosion risk in Canada, to support effective decision-
making. Moreover, there is a need for improved geo-
spatial planning and decision-making frameworks that 
incorporate NbS as tools in the portfolio of possible 
strategies for flood and erosion risk management. 
Although there are a number of international 
examples (e.g., IWRM and ICZM) that could provide 
a basis for such frameworks, research is needed to 
determine which are appropriate within the Canadian 
context, considering the complex regulatory, policy, 
and governance contexts. With buy-in from parties 
engaged in or affected by flood risk management 
practice, standards can play an important role in 
promoting consistent decision-making approaches 
across Canada.
7.4 Technical Guidance
Authoritative technical guidance is needed to 
enable design and implementation of effective and 
sustainable NbS in Canadian coastal zones and 
river basins. While the emergence of some guidance 
and resources is encouraging, much of the existing 
national guidance targets non-technical audiences and 
lacks the technical detail needed by practitioners to 
enable design and implementation. The more detailed 
Canadian technical guidance that exists has been 
developed with specific regional focuses and is, in 
some cases, outdated. Together with existing Canadian 
guidance, the International Guidelines on Natural and 
Nature-based Features for Flood Risk Management 
[101],  may provide a useful initial basis for the 
development of Canadian design guides and standards 
in this space. Pilot projects and research are needed 
to identify appropriate NbS across Canada’s diverse 
environments, to ensure future guidance is robust and 
supports successful project implementation, without 
stymieing innovation. 
7.5 Inclusivity and Collaboration
A key strength of NbS is in their integrative, systemic 
approach [122], which draws on a broad range of 
perspectives to achieve multiple objectives. Inclusivity 
and collaboration are therefore integral to NbS. 
Work is needed to determine how best to facilitate 
collaborative approaches and broaden participation 
in NbS in Canada. Forums and networks like ACASA 
and the Cold Regions Living Shorelines Community of 
Practice can help to foster multi-disciplinary and multi-
sectoral collaboration and knowledge-sharing. There 
is significant potential for NbS to benefit from wide-
ranging Indigenous knowledge, through collaborative 
approaches. More collaboration and sharing of lessons 
learned would help to better elucidate how Indigenous 
knowledge systems and “Western” science can be co-
applied to achieve more effective and sustainable NbS.
8. Conclusion
Opportunities to deploy NbS to enhance coastal and 
riverine flood and erosion risk management practice 
in Canada are many and significant. However, there 
are technical, cultural, and institutional barriers to be 
overcome to support broader uptake and integration 
of NbS in the portfolio of tools to respond to escalating 
coastal and riverine flood and erosion risks. Technical 
guidance and standards have an important role to 
play in mainstreaming, promoting confidence in, and 
supporting decision-making surrounding NbS. Multi-
disciplinary research is needed to address knowledge 
gaps and support technical guidance and standards 
that are robust and evidence-based, so that they 
contribute to sustainable design and implementation of 
NbS in Canada’s diverse river watersheds and coastal 
settings. 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
49
csagroup.org
References
[1] 	
N. Moudrak and B. Feltmate, Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risk in Canada, 
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo, and Standards Council of Canada, Nov. 2020. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.scc.ca/en/system/files/publications/UoW-ICCA-Under_One_Umbrella_
English_FINAL.pdf
[2] 	 M. Golnaraghi et al., "Flood Risk Managment in Canada: Building Flood Resilience in a Changing Climate," 
The Geneva Association, Dec. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.genevaassociation.org/sites/default/
files/research-topics-document-type/pdf_public/frm_canada_web.pdf
[3] 	 D. Sandink et al., "Making Flood Insurable for Canadian Homeowners: A Discussion Paper," Institute for 
Catastrophic Loss Reduction, 2010. [Online]. Available: https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/PDFS/
making-flood-insurable-for-canadian-homeowners.pdf
[4] 	
J. Buttle et al., "Flood Processes in Canada: Regional and Special Aspects," Can. Water Resour. Journal, vol. 41, 
no. 1-2, pp. 7–30, 2016. 
[5] 	 D. Lemmen et al., Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate, Government of Canada, 2016. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/files/pdf/NRCAN_
fullBook%20%20accessible.pdf
[6] 	
E. Murphy et al., Coastal Flood Risk Assessment Guidelines for Building & Infrastructure Design, National 
Research Council Canada, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://nrc-publications.canada.ca/eng/view/
ft/?id=b4e8e5cd-ace2-4777-866f-1bb18bff77f0
[7] 	 M. N. Khaliq et al., "Assessment of Canadian Floodplain Mapping and Supporting Datasets for Codes and 
Standard," National Research Council Canada, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://csce.ca/elf/apps/
CONFERENCEVIEWER/conferences/2018/pdfs/Paper_GC158_0607032112.pdf
[8] 	 E. Bush and D. Lemmen, Eds., Canada’s Changing Climate Report, Government of Canada, 2019. [Online]. 
Available: https://changingclimate.ca/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2020/06/CCCR_FULLREPORT-EN-FINAL.pdf
[9] 	 N. Pontee, "Defining Coastal Squeeze: A Discussion," Ocean Coast. Manag., vol. 84, pp. 204–207, 2013. 
[10] 	 L. Burgess-Gamble et al., Working with Natural Processes – Evidence Directory, Bristol, UK: Environment 
Agency, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/6036c5468fa8f5480a5386e9/
Working_with_natural_processes_evidence_directory.pdf
[11] 	 A. Cado van der Lely et al., Building with Nature: A Future Proof Strategy for Coping with a Changing and 
Uncertain World, Dordrecht: Ecoshape, 2021. 
[12] 	 N. Seddon et al., "Understanding the Value and Limits of Nature-Based Solutions to Climate Change and 
other Global Challenges," Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., B., Biol. Sci., vol. 375, p. 20190120, 2020. 
[13] 	 Global Commission on Adaptation, Adapt Now: A Global Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience, Global 
Center on Adaptation and World Resources Institute, Sept. 13, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://gca.org/
wp-content/uploads/2019/09/GlobalCommission_Report_FINAL.pdf
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
50
csagroup.org
[14] 	 S. Han and C. Kuhlicke, "Reducing Hydro-Meteorological Risk by Nature-Based Solutions: What Do We Know 
about People’s Perceptions?" Water, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 2599, 2019. 
[15] 	 United Nations General Assembly, United Nations Sustainable Development Summit 2015, Sept. 25–27, 2015. 
[Online]. Available: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/summit
[16] 	 United Nations, Paris Agreement, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/english_
paris_agreement.pdf
[17] 	 United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015–2030, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.preventionweb.net/files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf
[18] 	 Environment and Climate Change Canada, A Healthy Environment and a Healthy Economy: Canada's 
Strengthened Climate Plan to Create Jobs and Support People, Communities and the Planet, Government of 
Canada, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/documents/pdf/climate-
change/climate-plan/healthy_environment_healthy_economy_plan.pdf
[19] 	 International Union for Conservation of Nature, The IUCN Global Standard for Nature-based Solutions: A 
User-Friendly Framework for the Verification, Design and Scaling Up of NbS, Gland, Switzerland: IUCN, 2020. 
[20] 	 H. Eggermont et al., "Nature-based Solutions: New Influence for Environmental Management and Research in 
Europe," Gaia: Okologische Perspektiven in Natur-, Geistes-und Wirtschaftswissenschaften, vol. 24, no. 
10.14512/gaia.24.4.9, pp. 243–248, 2015.  
[21] 	 N. Doswald et al., Words into Action Guideline Series: Nature-Based Solutions for Disaster Risk Reduction, 
UNDRR, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.preventionweb.net/files/74082_
naturebasedsolutionsfordrr20210624c.pdf
[22] 	 N. Pontee et al., "Nature-based Solutions: Lessons from Around the World," Marit. Eng., vol. 169, no. 1, 
pp. 29–36, 2016. 
[23] 	 E. Gómez Martín, M. Costa, and K. Máñez, "An Operationalized Classification of Nature Based Solutions for 
Water-Related Hazards: From Theory to Practice," Ecol. Econ., vol. 167, p. 106460, 2020. 
[24] 	 K. Arkema et al., "Linking Social, Ecological, and Physical Science to Advance Natural and Nature-Based 
Protection for Coastal Communities," Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 1399, no. 1, pp. 5-26, 
Jul. 2017.
[25] 	 J. Wilson, "Efficacy and Design of Large Woody Debris as Shoreline Protection in the Coastal Environment," 
M.Sc. thesis, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, CAN, 2020. 
[26] 	 N. Moudrak et al., "Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural Infrastructure Is an Underutilized Option," 
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, 2018.
[27] 	 P. Sayers et al., Flood Risk Management: A Strategic Approach. Paris, France: UNESCO, 2013.
[28] 	 L. Gunderson and C. Holling, Panarchy: Understanding Transformations in Human and Natural Systems. 
Washington, DC: Island Press, 2002.
[29] 	 G. Lamont et al., "Greening Shorelines to Enhance Resilience: An Evaluation of Approaches for Adaptation to 
Sea Level Rise," Stewardship Centre for British Columbia, Jun. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.
stewardshipcentrebc.ca/PDF_docs/greenshores/Resources/Greening_Shorelines_to_Enhance_Resilience.pdf
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
51
csagroup.org
[30] 	 J. Silver et al., "Advancing Coastal Risk Reduction Science and Implementation by Accounting for Climate, 
Ecosystems, and People," Front. Mar. Sci., vol. 6, no. 566, pp. 1–19, 2019. 
[31] 	 T. S. Bridges et al., Use of Natural and Nature-Based Features (NNBF) for Coastal Resilience, U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers, Engineer Research and Development Center, Jan. 2015. [Online]. Available: https://usace.
contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p266001coll1/id/3442/
[32] 	 Tsleil-Waututh, "Understanding Our Community's Climate Change Vulnerabilities, Community Climate 
Change Resilience Planning: Phase 1 Summary," Tsleil-Waututh Nation Treaty, Lands and Resources 
Department, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://twnation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/TWN_CCRP_
Phase_1_SUMMARY_report.pdf
[33] 	 W̱ SÁNEĆ Nation, "The Clam Garden Restoration Project Has Reclaimed W̱ SÁNEĆ Knowledge, Improved 
Ecosystems and Provided the W̱ SÁNEĆ Nation with Additional Funding," W̱ SÁNEĆ Leadership Council 
[Online]. Available: https://wsanec.com/the-clam-garden-restoration-project/# (accessed Mar. 17, 2021).
[34] 	 Mi'kmaw Conservation Group, "Mi’kmaw Conservation Group at Work in Communities." [Online]. Available: 
https://mikmawconservation.ca/programs-and-services/current-projects/ (accessed Mar. 17, 2021).
[35] 	 A. Sutton-Grier et al., "Investing in Natural and Nature-Based Infrastructure: Building Better Along Our 
Coasts," Sustainability, vol. 2, no. 10, p. 523, 2018.  
[36] 	 S. O'Hogain and L. McCarton, A Technology Portfolio of Nature Based Solutions: Innovatioins in Water 
Management. Cham, Switzerland, Springer International Publishing, 2018. 
[37] 	 V. Leys and D. Bryce, Adapting to Climate Change in Coastal Communities of the Atlantic Provinces, Canada: 
Land Use Planning and Engineering and Natural Approaches, Part 3: Engineering Tools Adaptation Options, 
Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://atlanticadaptation.ca/en/
islandora/object/acasa%3A789
[38] 	 M. Chapman and A. Underwood, "Evaluation of Ecological Engineering of 'Aarmoured' Shorelines to Improve 
Their Value as Habitat," J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol., vol. 400, no. 1-2, pp. 302–313, 2011. 
[39] 	 N. Seddon et al., "Getting the Message Right on Nature‐Based Solutions to Climate Change," Glob. Chang. 
Biol., vol. 27, no. 8 pp. 1518–1546, Apr. 2021, https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.15513. 
[40] 	 United Nations Environment Programme, "Ecosystem Management Programme: A New Approach to 
Sustainability," 2009. [Online]. Available: https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/32453/
EMP.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
[41] 	 C. D. Storlazzi et al., "Rigorously Valuing the Role of U.S. Coral Reefs in Coastal Hazard Risk Reduction," U.S. 
Department of the Interior and U.S. Geological Survey, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://pubs.usgs.gov/
of/2019/1027/ofr20191027.pdf
[42] 	 S. Narayan et al., "The Value of Coastal Wetlands for Flood Damage Reduction in the Northeastern," Sci. Rep., 
vol. 7, no. 1, p. 9463, 2017. 
[43] 	 K. Arkema et al., "Coastal Habitats Shield People and Property from Sea-Level Rise and Storms," Nat. Clim. 
Change, vol. 3, no. 10, pp. 913–918, 2013. 
[44] 	 M. Circé et al., "Cost-Benefit Analysis for Adaptation Option in Quebec’s Coastal Areas – Synthesis Report," 
Ouranos, Mar.  2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.ouranos.ca/wp-content/uploads/Synthesis-report-
ACA-Quebec-final.pdf
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
52
csagroup.org
[45] 	 Horizon Advisors, "Benefits of Adopting Natural Infrastructure: A Comparison of Natural and Grey 
Infrastructure Solutions," Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://awc-
wpac.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Adopting-Natural_Infrastructure.pdf
[46] 	 K. Sherren et al., "Coastal Infrastructure Realignment and Salt Marsh Restoration in Nova Scotia, Canada," 
in Responding to Rising Seas: Comparing OECD Countries' Approach to Coastal Adaptation, Paris, France: 
Organization for Economic Collaboration and Development, 2019, pp. 75–108.
[47] 	 S. O'Neill, "Municipal National Assets Initiative: Results from the First National Cohort," MNAI, Jul. 2018. 
[Online]. Available: https://institut.intelliprosperite.ca/sites/default/files/spmnaijuly25-summaryweb.pdf
[48] 	 S. Cairns, "Cohort 2 National Project Overview," MNAI, Feb. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://mnai.ca/
media/2020/02/MNAI-CohortSummary.pdf
[49] 	 P. Berry et al., "An Economic Assessment of Local Farm Multi-purpose Surface Water Retention Systems 
under Future Climate Uncertainty," Sustainability, vol. 9, no. 3, p. 456, 2017. 
[50] 	 ICF, Best Practices and Resources on Climate Resilient Natural Infrastructure, Canadian Council of 
Ministers of the Environment, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.preventionweb.net/files/64196_
naturalinfrastructurereporten1.pdf
[51] 	 J. Karimi, "A Step to Sustainability; MAES Mapping and Assessment of Ecosystem Services in European Cities 
and Italy," International Union for Conservation of Nature, Feb. 9, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.iucn.
org/news/commission-environmental-economic-and-social-policy/201702/step-sustainability-maes-
mapping-and-assessment-ecosystem-services-european-cities-and-italy
[52] 	 H. Sungju and C. Kuhlicke, "Reducing Hydro-Meteorological Risk by Nature-Based Solutions: What Do We 
Know about People’s Perceptions?" Water, vol. 11, no. 12, 2019. 
[53] 	 F. Ackerman and L. Heinzerling, "Pricing the Priceless: Cost-Benefit Analysis of Environmental Protection," 
Univ. PA Law Rev., vol. 150, pp. 1553–1584, 2002. 
[54] 	 L. Ruangpan et al., "Incorporating Stakeholders’ Preferences into a Multi-criteria Framework for Planning 
Large-Scale Nature-Based Solutions," Ambio, vol. 50, pp. 1514–1531, 2021. 
[55] 	 N. Pontee, "Impact of managed realignment design on estuarine water levels," in Inst. Civ. Eng. Proc. Marit. 
Eng., vol. 61, no. 2, pp, 48–61, Jun. 2015. 
[56] 	 R. Lenton and M. Muller, Integrated Water Resources Management in Practice: Better Water Management for 
Development. New York, NY: Taylor and Francis, 2012. 
[57] 	 J. Rijke et al., "Room for the River: Delivering Integrated River Basin Management in the Netherlands," Int. J. 
River Basin Manag., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 369–382, 2012. 
[58] 	 J. Post and C. Lundin, Guidelines for Integrated Coastal Zone Management,  International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development / World Bank, 1996. [Online]. Available: https://www.reefresilience.org/pdf/
Post_Lundin_1996.pdf
[59] 	 N. Pontee and A. Parsons, "Adaptation as Part of Sustainable Shoreline Management in England and Wales," 
Inst. Civil Eng. Proc. Marit. Eng., vol. 165, no. 3, pp. 113–129, 2012. 
[60] 	 B. Doberstein, J. Fitzgibbons, and C. Mitchell, "Protect, Accommodate, Retreat or Avoid (PARA): Canadian 
Community Options for Flood Disaster Risk Reduction and Flood Resilience," Nat. Hazards, vol. 98, no. 1, 
pp. 31–50, 2019. 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
53
csagroup.org
[61] 	 BC Ministry of Environment, "Sea Level Rise Adaptation Primer: A Toolkit to Build Adaptive Capacity on 
Canada's South Coasts," 2013. [Online]. Available: https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/environment/climate-
change/adaptation/resources/slr-primer.pdf
[62] 	 N. Cooper et al., "Shoreline Management Plans: A National Review and Engineering Perspective," Proc. Inst. 
Civ. Eng.-Wat. Marit. Eng., vol. 154, no. 3, pp. 221–228, 2002. 
[63] 	 P. Saunders-Hastings, M. Bernard, and B. Doberstein, "Planned Retreat Approaches to Support Resilience to 
Climate Change in Canada," Natural Resources Canada, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://gevityinc.com/
sites/default/files/documents/gid_328323.pdf
[64] 	 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, Nature-based solutions for disaster risk reduction, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.undrr.org/publication/words-action-nature-based-
solutions-disaster-risk-reduction.
[65] 	 P. Sayers et al., "Strategic Flood Management: Ten ‘Golden Rules’ to Guide a Sound Approach," Int. J. River 
Basin Manag., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 137–151, 2015. 
[66] 	 P. Biron et al., "Freedom Space for Rivers: A Sustainable Management Approach to Enhance River 
Resilience.," Environ. Manage., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1056–1073, 2014. 
[67] 	 Municipal Natural Aassets Initiative, "Primer on Natural Asset Managment," 2018. [Online]. Available: https://
mnai.ca/media/2018/01/FCMPrimer_Jan1_2018.pdf
[68] 	 B. Greenan et al., "Chapter 7: Changes in Oceans Surrounding Canada," in Canada's Changing Climate 
Report,  Government of Canada, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://changingclimate.ca/site/assets/uploads/
sites/2/2018/12/CCCR_Chapter7-oceans.pdf
[69] 	 Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Shoreline Management Plan Guidance Volume 1: Aims 
and Requirements, Mar. 2006. [Online]. Available: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/69206/pb11726-smpg-vol1-060308.pdf 
[70] 	 J. Rogers et al., Beach Management Manual, 2nd ed. London, UK: CIRIA, 2010. 
[71] 	 M. Van Gent, "Dynamic Cobble Beaches as Sea Defence," in Proceedings on the Third International 
Conference on the Application of Physical Modelling to Port and Coastal Protection, Barcelona, 2010. [Online]. 
Available: http://publications.deltares.nl/EP2019.pdf
[72] 	 P. Bayle et al., "Performance of a Dynamic Cobble Berm Revetment for Coastal Protection, under Increasing 
Water Level," Coast. Eng., vol. 159, p. 103712, Aug. 2020. 
[73] 	 S. Beltaos and T. D. Prowse, "Climate Impacts on Extreme Ice-Jam Events in Canadian Rivers," Hydrol. Sci. J., 
vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 157–181, 2001. 
[74] 	 Federal Emergency Management Association, "Fact Sheet: Climate Resilient Mitigation Activities – Floodplain 
and Stream Restoration," Federal Insurance and Mitigation Adminstration. [Online]. Available: https://www.
epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-04/documents/fema_floodplain_stream_restoration_fact_sheet-sept_2015.
pdf (accessed Jul. 19, 2021)
[75] 	  Federal Emergency Management Association, Building Community Resilience with Nature-based Solutions: A 
Guide for Local Communities, Jun. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/fema_riskmap-nature-based-solutions-guide_2021.pdf
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
54
csagroup.org
[76] 	 Federal Emergency Management Agency, Reducing Flood Losses: Coordinating Building Codes and 
Floodplain Management Regulations, 5th ed., International Code Council and FEMA, Oct. 2019. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-07/fema_reducing_flood_losses_rfl_5th-ed.pdf
[77] 	 T. Dahl, C. Theiling, and W. Echevarria, "Overview of Levee Setback Projects and Benefits," U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers, Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://erdc-library.erdc.dren.mil/jspui/bitstream/11681/22767/1/
ERDC-CHL%20CHETN-VII-17.pdf
[78] 	 P. Bowker, M. Escarameia, and A. Tagg, Improving the Flood Performance of New Buildings: Flood Resilient 
Construction, Department for Communities and Local Government: London, May 2007. [Online]. Available: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/7730/
flood_performance.pdf 
[79] 	 D. Proverbs and J. Lamond, "Flood Resilient Construction and Adaptation of Buildings," in Oxford Research 
Encyclopedia of Natural Hazard Science, S. Cutter, Ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2017. https://doi.
org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199389407.013.111
[80] 	 D. Smith et al., "Levee Setbacks: An Innovative, Cost-Effective, and Sustainable Solution for Improved Flood 
Risk Managment," U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Engineer Research and Development Center, Jun. 2017. 
[Online] Available: https://erdc-library.erdc.dren.mil/jspui/bitstream/11681/22736/1/ERDC-EL%20SR-17-3.pdf
[81] 	 H. Forbes, K. Ball, and F. McLay, Natural Flood Management Handbook. Stirling, Scotland: Scottish 
Environment Protection Agency, 2015.
[82] 	 M. Blackwell et al., Ecoflood Guidelines: How to Use Floodplains for Flood Risk Reduction. Luxembourg: 
European Communities, 2006. 
[83] 	 A. J. Douglas and R. L. Johnson, "Drainage Investment and Wetlands Loss: An Analysis of the National 
Resources Inventory Data," J. Environ. Manage., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 341–355, 1994. 
[84] 	 D. J. Bellamy and P. Dugan, Wetlands in Danger. London, UK: Mitchell Beazley London Ltd., 1993. 
[85] 	 A. Bullock and M. Acreman, "The Role of Wetlands in the Hydrological Cycle," Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 358–389, 2003. 
[86] 	 T. A. DeLaney, "Benefits to Downstream Flood Attenuation and Water Quality as a Result of Constructed 
Wetlands in Agricultural Landscapes," J. Soil Water Conserv., vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 620–626, 1995. 
[87] 	 R. Hart, "Mussel (Bivalva: Unionidae) Habitat Suitability Criteria for the Otter Tail River, Minnesota," 
M.S. thesis, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND, USA, 1995. 
[88] 	 N. R. Council, Wetlands: Characteristics and Boundaries. Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press, 1995.
[89] 	 R. Gleason and N. Euliss, "Sedimentation of Prairie Wetlands," Gt. Plains Res., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 97–112, 1995. 
[90] 	 W. Yang et al., "Examining Water Quality Effects of Riparian Wetland Loss and Restoration Scenarios in a 
Southern Ontario Watershed," Environ. Manage., vol. 174, pp. 26–34, 2016. 
[91] 	 A. Hodaj et al., "Impact of a Two-Stage Ditch on Channel Water Quality," Agric. Water Manag., vol. 192, 
pp. 126–137, 2017. 
[92] 	 A. Ward et al., "Two-Stage Channel Design Procedures," in Self-Sustaining Solutions for Streams, Wetlands, 
and Watersheds: Proceedings of the September 2004 Conference, J. L. D'Ambrosio, Ed. St. Paul, MI: American 
Society of Agricultural Engineers, 2004. 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
55
csagroup.org
[93] 	 JMT Consultants Inc. and Haks Consulting Services, "In-Stream Structures Details and Construction 
Guidelines," Sept. 2015. [Online]. Available: http://archive.phillywatersheds.org/doc/In-Stream%20
Structures%20and%20Details_Final.pdf
[94] 	 Sussex Flow Initiative, "Natural Flood Management Guidance: Woody Dams, Deflectors and Diverters," 
Jul. 2016.[Online]. Available: https://assets.sussexwildlifetrust.org.uk/sfi-wt-using-wood-towards-natural-
flood-management-2.pdf
[95] 	 J. Buttle, "Streamflow Reponse to Headwater Reforestation in the Ganaraska River Basin, Southern Ontario, 
Canada," Hydrol. Process., vol. 25, pp. 3030–3041, 2011. 
[96] 	 S. Zuniga et al., Increasing Infrastructure Resilience with Nature-based Solutions, Inter-American 
Development Bank, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.18235/0002325
[97] 	 World Bank, Implementing Nature-based Flood Protection: Principles and Implementation Guidance, 2017. 
[Online]. Available: https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/739421509427698706/pdf/Implementing-
nature-based-flood-protection-principles-and-implementation-guidance.pdf
[98] 	 Federal Highway Administration, Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal Highway Resilience: An Implementation 
Guide, Aug. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/sustainability/resilience/
ongoing_and_current_research/green_infrastructure/implementation_guide/
[99] 	 World Wildlife Fund, Natural and Nature-based Flood Management: A Green Guide, May 24, 2017. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.worldwildlife.org/publications/natural-and-nature-based-flood-management-a-green-
guide
[100] 	Environment Agency (UK), Greater Working with Natural Processes in Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk 
Management, Jan. 2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.jbatrust.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Greater-
working-with-natural-processes-in-flood-and-coastal-erosion-risk-management-REPORT.pdf
[101] 	U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, " International Guidelines on Natural and Nature-Based Features for Flood Risk 
Management," Sept 16, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://ewn.erdc.dren.mil/?page_id=5630
[102] 	D. van Proosdij et al., Adapting to Climate Change in Coastal Communities of the Atlantic Provinces, Canada: 
Land Use Planning and Engineering and Natural Approaches, Part 1: Guidance for Selecting Adaptation 
Options, Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://
atlanticadaptation.ca/en/islandora/object/acasa%3A786
[103] 	P. Manuel, Y. Reeves, and K. Hooper, Adapting to Climate Change in Coastal Communities of the Atlantic 
Provinces, Canada: Land Use Planning and Engineering and Natural Approaches, Part 2: Land Use Planning 
Tools Adaptation Options, Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://
atlanticadaptation.ca/en/islandora/object/acasa%3A788
[104] 	S. O'Neill and S. Cairns, Defining and Scoping Municipal Natural Assets, MNAI, Sept. 2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://mnai.ca/media/2018/02/finaldesignedsept18mnai.pdf
[105] 	S. Wilson, Advancing and Integrating Municipal Natural Asset Management through Asset Management Planning 
in Ontario, MNAI, Dec. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://mnai.ca/media/2020/01/MNAI_MNAPOntario.pdf
[106] 	Coastal Geologic Services Inc., Green Shores for Shoreline Developments: Credits and Ratings Guide, Victoria, 
BC: Stewardship Centre for British Columbia, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://stewardshipcentrebc.ca/PDF_
docs/greenshores/Resources/GSSD_PilotEditionApril2020.pdf
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
56
csagroup.org
[107] 	City of Seattle, Green Shores for Homes: Credits and Ratings Guide, Dec. 2015. [Online]. Available: http://
stewardshipcentrebc.ca/PDF_docs/greenshores/Resources/GSHCreditsandRatingsGuide.pdf
[108] 	Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Watershed Science Centre, Adaptive Management of Stream 
Corridors in Ontario. Peterborough, ON: Trent University, Watershed Science Centre, 2001.
[109] 	R. Newbury and M. Gaboury, Stream Analysis and Fish Habitat Design: A Field Manual, Winnipeg, MB: 
Newbury Hydraulics Ltd. and Manitoba Habitat Heritage Corporation, 1994. 
[110] 	R. Morris et al., "Design Options, Implementation Issues and Evaluating Success of Ecologically Engineered 
Shorelines," Oceanogr. Mar. Biol., vol. 57, pp. 137–196, 2019.   
[111] 	 International Union for Conservation of Nature, Guidance for Using the IUCN Global Standard for Nature-
based Solutions. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN, 2020.
[112] 	T. Rahman, K. Sherren, and D. van Proosdij, "Institutional Innovation for Bature-based Coastal Adaptation: 
Lessons from Salt Marsh Restoration in Nova Scotia, Canada," Sustain. Sci., vol. 11, no. 23, pp. 1–26, Nov. 2019. 
[113] 	T. Bowron et al., "Salt Marsh Tidal Restoration in Canada's Maritime Provinces," in Tidal Marsh Restoration: A 
Synthesis of Science and Management, C. T. Roman and D. M. Burdick, Eds., Washington, DC: Island Press, 
2012, pp. 191–210.
[114] 	M. Yepsen et al., "A Framework for Developing Monitoring Plans for Coastal Wetland Restoration and Living 
Shoreline Projects in New Jersey," prepared by the New Jersey Measures and Monitoring Workgroup of the 
NJ Resilient Coastlines Initiative, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.conservationgateway.org/
ConservationPractices/Marine/crr/library/Documents/Framework-Coastal-Wetland-Shoreline-Projects-New-
Jersey.pdf
[115] 	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, "The Importance of Operation and Maintenance for the Long-Term 
Success of Green Infrastructure: A Review of Green Infrastructure O&M Practices in ARRA Clean Water State 
Revolving Fund Projects," 2013. [Online]. Available: https://mostcenter.umd.edu/sites/default/files/2020-04/
EPA_The_Importance_of_Operation_and_Maintenance_Green_Infrastructure.pdf
[116] 	A. Rella and J. Miller, "Forensic Analysis: Common Project Performance Factors," 2015. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.nerrssciencecollaborative.org/media/resources/Hudson-Forensic-Analysis-Methodology.pdf
[117] 	Erosion and Sedimentation Management for Northern Community Infrastructure, CSA W205:19, Canadian 
Standards Association, Toronto, ON, CAN, 2019. 
[118] 	P. Zuzek, Lake Ontario Shoreline Management Plan, Central Lake Ontario Conservation Authority, 
Nov. 5, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://03879a07-372c-443e-997e-ae65078d7559.filesusr.com/
ugd/3483ab_94e08ea33a7b45ea9eee5bd6c06b3671.pdf
[119] 	M. Pitt, "The Pitt Review: Learning Lessons from the 2007 Floods," UK Government Cabinet Office,  2008. 
[Online]. Available: https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20100702215619/http://archive.cabinetoffice.
gov.uk/pittreview/thepittreview/final_report.html
[120] 	J. Eyzaguirre et al., "Green Shores 2020: Impact, Value and Lessons Learned, Final Project Report," 
Stewardship Centre for British Columbia, Victoria, Jul. 31, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://
stewardshipcentrebc.ca/PDF_docs/greenshores/Resources/Green%20Shores%202020_%20Impact,%20
Value%20and%20Lessons%20Learned_%20Full%20Report_July2020.pdf
[121] 	Environment and Climate Change Canada, Climate Science 2050: Advancing Science and Knowledge on 
Climate Change, Government of Canada, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2020/eccc/En4-414-2020-eng.pdf
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
57
csagroup.org
[122] 	C. Nesshöver et al., "The Science, Policy and Practice of Nature-Based Solutions: An Interdisciplinary 
Perspective," Sci. Total Environ., vol. 579, pp. 1215–1227, 2017. 
[123] 	B. Turcotte, B. Burrell, and S. S. Y. Beltaos, "The Impact of Climate Change on Breakup Ice Jams in Canada: 
State of Knowledge and Research Approaches," in Proceedings of the 20th Workshop on the Hydraulics of Ice 
Covered Rivers, Ottawa, May 14–16, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://www.cripe.ca/docs/proceedings/20/
Turcotte-et-al-2019.pdf
[124] 	Statistics Canada, "Introduction to the Ecological Land Classification (ELC)," 2017. [Online]. Available: https://
www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/subjects/standard/environment/elc/2017-1
[125] 	N. Quastel, "Political Ecologies of Gentrification," Urban Geogr., vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 694–725, 2009. 
[126] 	Conservation Ontario, "History of Conservation Authorities." [Online]. Available: https://conservationontario.
ca/conservation-authorities/about-conservation-authorities/history-of-conservation-authorities (accessed  
Mar. 2, 2021).
[127] 	City of Surrey, "Coastal Flood Adaptation Strategy."  [Online]. Available: https://www.surrey.ca/services-
payments/water-drainage-sewer/flood-control/coastal-flood-adaptation-strategy (accessed Jul. 16, 2021). 
[128] 	City of Toronto, "Following 2018 Success, City of Toronto Issues Its Second Green Bond," Sept. 13, 2019. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.toronto.ca/news/following-2018-success-city-of-toronto-issues-its-second-
green-bond/
[129] 	Swiss Re, "Protecting and Enabling Nature-Based Solutions," 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.swissre.
com/dam/jcr:19ebcb33-03c6-41bb-9047-917c95116b43/nature-based-solutions-pss.pdf
[130] 	M. Kurth et al., "Evaluating Resilience Co-benefits of Engineering With Nature® Projects.," Front. Ecol. Evol., 
vol. 8, no. 149, 2020, https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2020.00149. 
[131] 	A. Capdevila et al., "Success Factors for Citizen Science Projects in Water Quality Monitoring," Sci. Total 
Environ., vol. 728, p. 137843, 2020.  
[132] 	K. Sutton, "Understanding Perceptions of Coastal Climate Change and Nature-Based Coastal Adaptation: 
Using Communicative Framing in Experimental Focus Groups in Nova Scotia, Canada," M.Sc. thesis, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, CAN, 2020.
[133] 	M. Grilliot, I. Walker, and B. Bauer, "Aeolian Sand Transport and Deposition Patterns within a Large Woody 
Debris Matrix Fronting a Foredune," Geomorphology, vol. 338, pp. 1–15, 2019. 
[134] 	E. Murphy et al., "Modelling Transport and Fate of Woody Debris in Coastal Waters," Coast. Eng. Proc., 
vol. 36, pp. 1–11, Dec. 13, 2020. 
[135] 	S. Baker et al., "Design and Physical Model Studies of Innovative Living Breakwaters," Coast. Eng. Proc., 
no. 36, 2018, paper 59. https://journals.tdl.org/icce/index.php/icce/article/view/8714/7515.
[136] 	S. Guilbault, "Percé: Evaluating the costs and benefits of adaptation options," in Cities Adapt to Extreme 
Weather: Celebrating Local Leadership, Toronto, Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, 2018, pp. 27-30. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/cities-adapt-to-extreme-weater-
update-website.pdf 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
58
csagroup.org
[137] 	Royal Architectural Institue of Canada, "Rehabilitation of the Waterfront and Boardwalk at the Anse-du-Sud 
Sector of Percé, QC," 2018. [Online]. Available: https://raic.org/awards/national-urban-design-awards-
%E2%80%94-2018-medal-recipient-3
[138] 	C. Rennie et al., "Calgary Flood Mitigation Research," presented at the 2018 Conference of the Canadian 
Society for Civil Engineers, Fredericton, NB, Jun. 13–Jun. 16, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://csce.ca/elf/apps/
CONFERENCEVIEWER/conferences/2018/pdfs/Paper_DM37_0608011949.pdf
[139] 	IBI Group, Benefit/Cost Analysis of Flood Mitigation Projects for the City of Calgary and Environs on the Elbow 
River with Emphasis on MC1 and SR1, prepared for the Government of Alberta, Calgary, Aug. 21, 2017. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.ceaa.gc.ca/050/documents/p80123/122352E.pdf
[140] 	P. Berry et al., "An Economic Assessment of Local Farm Multi-purpose Surface Water Retention Systems in a 
Canadian Prairie Setting," Appl. Water Sci., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 4461–4478, 2017. 
[141] 	S. Virgin et al., "A Managed Realignment in the Upper Bay of Fundy: Community Dynamics during Salt Marsh 
Restoration over 8 Years in a Megatidal, Ice-Influenced Environment," Ecol. Eng., vol. 149, Apr. 2020, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2020.105713. 
[142] 	Credit Valley Conservation, "New Waterfront Conservation Area Continues to Take Shape," May 30, 2018. 
[Online]. Available: https://cvc.ca/conversations/new-waterfront-conservation-area-continues-to-take-shape/
[143] 	SENES Consultants, Environmental Assessment for Lakeview Waterfront Connection, Apr. 2014. [Online]. 
Available: https://cvc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Lakeview-Waterfront-Connection-EA-FINAL-May2-
2014-web.pdf
[144] 	M. Taal et al., "Development of the Sand Motor: Concise Report Describing the First Four Years of the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Programme (MEP)," Deltares, Jul. 2016. [Online]. Available: https://climate-adapt.
eea.europa.eu/metadata/case-studies/sand-motor-2013-building-with-nature-solution-to-improve-coastal-
protection-along-delfland-coast-the-netherlands/delfland-coast_document-1.pdf
[145] 	J. Lembrechts, Z. Ambagts and E. van Eijsbergen, "The Sand Motor: Building with Nature," 2012. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.commissiemer.nl/docs/mer/diversen/views_experiences_2012_p20-25.pdf
[146] 	L. Linnartz, "The Second Year Sand Engine: Nature Development on a Dynamic Piece of the Netherlands," 
Technical Report, ARK Natuurontwikkeling, 2013.
[147] 	J. O’Connell, "Coastal Dune Protection & Restoration Using ‘Cape’ American Beachgrass & Fencing," Woods 
Hole Oceanographic Institution, Dec. 2008. [Online]. Available: https://www.capecodextension.org/project/
coastal-dune-protection-and-restoration-using-cape-american-beachgrass-and-fencing/
[148] 	S. Rogers and D. Nash, The Dune Book, North Carolina Sea Grant, Sept. 2003. [Online]. Available: https://
ncseagrant.ncsu.edu/ncseagrant_docs/products/2000s/dune_book.pdf
[149] 	J. M. Bartholow, "Constructing an Interdisciplinary Flow Regime Recommendation," JAWRA, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 
892–906, 2010. 
[150] 	E. Cohen-Shacham et al., Nature-based Solutions to Address Global Societal Challenges. Gland, Switzerland: 
IUCN, 2016.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
59
csagroup.org
Appendix A – Stakeholder Interview 
Questionnaire  
The National Research Council’s Ocean, Coastal, River Engineering Centre is working with the CSA Group to 
evaluate and better understand how nature-based systems can be used for mitigating flood risks in coastal 
and riverine environments, what types of nature-based systems are most effective and most appropriate in the 
Canadian climate and to determine what standards requirements and recommendations are needed to inform 
the appropriate selection and application of nature-based solutions to ensure that they are effective in mitigating 
flooding and erosion risks.
The intention of this work is to develop a research paper that will inform the development of CSA standards related 
to nature based solutions for erosion and flood risk management in coastal regions and along Canadian rivers.  
Additionally the paper will aim to address the following key elements:
	• identify the types of nature-based systems that can be used in coastal and riverine regions, and discuss current 
best practices for the successful implementation of each type of system, including key design, construction, 
maintenance and monitoring considerations, favourable site characteristics and climatic regions, and known 
vulnerabilities; 
	• discuss prominent case examples of natural and nature-based systems reflecting on things that have gone well 
and things that have resulted in problems/challenges; 
	• provide insights into the processes that should be used for monitoring functional performance in order to 
adaptively manage and maintain the level of performance and benefits delivered; and
	• report on current knowledge gaps and provide recommendations for additional future research to support 
standards development.
Other than drawing from existing literature and material available in the public domain, we are engaging with 
municipalities and other practitioners and researchers to document lessons learned from past or ongoing project 
experience. We are asking for your involvement to help us understand past or current practice and experiences 
with nature based solution projects. Our over the phone interview covered some or all of the following questions 
based on your experience:
1.	
Have you been directly involved in implementing nature-based solutions? 
a.	 If yes, please briefly describe the nature-based solution that you have helped implement. 
b.	 If no, please tell us about your own direct experiences with nature-based solutions?
2.	 Please reflect on how you measure performance benefits of the NbS solutions implemented, including key 
performance indicators you are monitoring.
3.	 In your experience with nature-based solutions, what are/were the successes?
4.	 What are/were the major challenges faced (technical, financial, institutional, etc.)?
5.	 In your opinion, what would have helped, or would help to overcome the challenges faced?
6.	 Please describe any lessons learned from your experience with nature-based solutions.
7.	
Please give us your thoughts on the future of NbS in your region, and/or Canada.
8.	 Please give us your perspectives on the potential role of technical standards and guidelines in supporting 
NbS implementation.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
60
csagroup.org
Appendix B – Review of Available 
Guidance Documents and Manuals 
The following sections briefly summarize existing guidance and literature developed internationally (Section B.1) 
and in Canada (Section B.2) documenting best practices relevant to NbS for coastal and riverine flood and erosion 
risk management. Considering the explosion of interest and proliferation of literature pertaining to NbS that has 
occurred over the past decade, the summary is non-exhaustive. Synopses of the publications are presented in 
reverse chronological order, and a brief commentary is provided on how each could potentially support or inform 
future design and implementation guidance for coastal and riverine NbS in Canada. 
B.1 International
UNDRR Nature-Based Solutions for Disaster Risk Reduction (2021)
This comprehensive document [64] is part of the “Words into Action” guidelines series, and aims to give practical 
guidance on developing and implementing NbS for disaster risk reduction, to support delivery on the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai Framework. The document provides a detailed description 
of NbS principles and concepts applicable to riverine and coastal flood and erosion risk management, including 
integrated coastal zone management and integrated water resources management, and references the high-level 
principles of the new IUCN [19] global standard for NbS. It presents successful international case studies (e.g., 
Room for the River in the Netherlands), summarizes the evidence base for NbS, and provides recommendations for 
strengthening governance and integrating NbS in disaster risk reduction strategies. The document also identifies 
knowledge gaps, enablers and barriers to uptake of NbS, and provides suggestions for how public and private 
sector entities can be involved in incentivizing and delivery of NbS. The guideline provides a comprehensive 
overview of NbS, numerous international references, and a repository of resources and useful information. 
However, it is not a design guide, and lacks the detailed information needed to support design and implementation 
of NbS for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management in distinct and varied Canadian settings.   
International Guidelines on NNBF for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk Management (2021)
A multi-agency effort, led by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Engineering With Nature™ group, has been 
underway since 2016 to develop international guidelines for how to implement, monitor, and evaluate natural 
and nature-based features (NNBF) for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management [101]. With 
contributions from the National Research Council of Canada, the guidelines were published in September 
2021. Other agencies that contributed to the guidelines include the Environment Agency (United Kingdom), 
Rijkswaterstaat (Netherlands), HR Wallingford (United Kingdom), Deltares (Netherlands), NOAA (United States), 
the World Bank, the World Wildlife Fund, and many academic institutions. The guidelines include a framework 
for design and implementation of NNBF in coastal and riverine environments and guidance on systems-based 
approaches, stakeholder engagement, developing performance objectives and metrics, evaluating benefits of 
NNBF, adaptive management, and specific features or systems (e.g., beaches/dunes, wetlands, submerged aquatic 
vegetation, reefs, islands, managed dyke realignment or levee setbacks in rivers, river channel naturalization, and 
river watershed management techniques). It is anticipated that the international guidelines will provide a useful 
foundation for developing future design and implementation guidance on NbS for coastal and riverine flood and 
erosion risk management in Canada. However, research and engagement with Canadian practitioners and experts 
would be needed to capture regional contexts and lessons learned.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
61
csagroup.org
IUCN Global Standard for Nature-Based Solutions (2020)
The IUCN Global Standard for Nature-based Solutions [19] is a “facilitative standard”, providing a framework for 
users to implement NbS. The primary target audience is national governments, city and local governments, 
planners, businesses, donors, and financial institutions, including development banks and non-profit organizations. 
The standard is intended to promote consistent approaches to design and verification of NbS to address broad 
societal challenges (e.g., climate change, food security, disaster risk reduction), and it provides several international 
case study references. The global standard [19] is a relatively high-level (user-friendly) document, which sets 
out fundamental steps for establishing the credibility of NbS when engaging with investors and is a potentially 
useful communication tool for broader engagement prior to design and implementation. The standard identifies 
eight overarching criteria (see Section 3.1) and 28 indicators to aid in the successful implementation of NbS. It 
is accompanied by a more in-depth user guide [111], which provides the scientific basis underlying the criteria, 
and a self-assessment tool to enable users to assess how well a solution adheres to the global standard for NbS. 
The IUCN Global Standard provides a valuable synopsis of the fundamental principles underlying and guiding 
successful NbS. However, it lacks detailed guidance needed to support design and implementation of NbS for 
coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management in Canada.
Inter-American Development Bank – Increasing Infrastructure Resilience with Nature-Based 
Solutions (2020)
The Inter-American Development Bank [96] provides project-planning guidance for NbS project developers in Latin 
America and the Caribbean. It provides a 12-step project life-cycle framework to integrate resiliency to coastal and 
inland flood infrastructure through NbS. Cross-cutting themes of stakeholder engagement and adaptive planning 
and management, which apply throughout all 12 steps, are identified and discussed. Although the framework is 
defined as a series of sequential steps, from problem definition through to monitoring and evaluation, it allows for 
flexibility (through adaptive planning and management) and revisiting of steps to enable the desired objectives 
to be met. Though developed with a focus on Latin America and the Caribbean, this guide provides useful advice 
and a relevant methodological framework for planning NbS projects for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk 
management in Canada. However, the document is relatively high-level and lacks detailed and specific technical 
guidance for design, construction, monitoring, and adaptive management of NbS in coastal and riverine settings.  
EcoShape (Netherlands) – Building with Nature (2020)
EcoShape is a Dutch organization that brings together knowledge developed through collaborative NbS pilot 
projects and subsequent monitoring to develop “guidelines for replication and scaling up” of NbS projects. 
EcoShape’s objective is “to deliver engineering services while delivering and/or utilising ecosystem services”. 
Based on learned experiences through many pilot projects, EcoShape has defined a five-step approach to help 
implement NbS in a variety of environments. The information is disseminated through a comprehensive website 
(https://www.ecoshape.org/en/) that documents examples of NbS in a variety of different landscapes and settings 
(e.g., coastal, riverine, urban, sandy, muddy) and evidence of successful NbS implementation. 
EcoShape propose six key criteria to ensure successful implementation and functioning of NbS [11]. These criteria 
are termed enablers:
	• Technology and system knowledge
	• Multi-stakeholder approach
	• Management, monitoring and maintenance,
	• Institutional embedding
	• Business case
	• Capacity building.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
62
csagroup.org
A white paper published by EcoShape in 2021 [11] provides support to NbS practitioners in tackling discussions 
and issues surrounding uncertainty. The document is particularly helpful in identifying dimensions and sources of 
uncertainty in design and implementation of NbS and principles for managing uncertainty.  
All EcoShape projects to date have been collaborative endeavours, drawing on multi-disciplinary knowledge from 
practitioners in consulting organizations, academia, NGOs, government, and the construction industry. Canadian 
proponents of NbS will find the EcoShape website a useful, user-friendly tool for information about different types of 
NbS and enabling methodologies, methods to evaluating project options, implementation, and a slew of references 
and resources for each design suggestion as well as for all of the pilot and demonstration projects presented.  
Environment Agency (UK) – Working with Natural Processes: Evidence Directory (2018)
Burgess-Gamble et al. [10] provide more than 300 pages of evidence on Working with Natural Processes and 
Natural Flood Management, terms synonymous with NbS in the United Kingdom. The purpose of the document 
is to give flood and erosion risk management practitioners access to information that explains the current state 
of knowledge on the effectiveness of a range of different measures from a flood risk and ecosystem services 
perspective [10]. The document contains a separate chapter for each of the four main categories of NbS: river and 
floodplain management, woodland management, runoff management, and coast/estuary management. Based on 
an extensive literature review, each chapter introduces the NbS, explains how they can deliver flood and erosion 
risk management benefits, documents evidence (from literature, observations, and modelling), summarizes 
co-benefits that each solution can provide, and provides links to further reading. Along with the Scottish 
Environmental Protection Agency Natural Flood Management Handbook [81] (see below), this is one of the more 
comprehensive and in-depth documents in terms of providing a practical basis for design and implementation of 
NbS for riverine and coastal flood and erosion risk management. Much of the technical guidance has relevance to 
Canadian applications, and could be adopted in part with some modification for regional and local contexts.
World Bank – Implementing Nature-based Flood Protection: Principles and Implementation 
Guidance (2017)
This World Bank document [97] provides high level principles and implementation guidance for NbS in coastal, 
riverine, and urban settings. The guidance is closely aligned with information provided by EcoShape (see above), 
reflecting contributions from practitioners in the Netherlands. The document covers the NbS project life cycle from 
problem definition to monitoring and evaluation, identifying eight key steps:
1.	
Define problem, project scope and objectives;
2.	 Develop financing strategy;
3.	 Conduct ecosystem, hazard and risk assessments;
4.	 Develop nature-based risk assessment strategy;
5.	 Estimate the costs, benefits and effectiveness;
6.	 Select and design the intervention;
7.	
Implement and construct; and
8.	 Monitor and inform future practices.
The guide provides a useful “how-to” on project planning and identified important considerations for planning and 
managing NbS projects. However, this is a relatively high-level document lacking the detailed technical information 
needed to fully enable design and implementation of NbS.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
63
csagroup.org
World Wildlife Fund – Flood Green Guide (2016)
The World Wildlife Fund (WWF), in partnership with the U.S. Agency for International Development Office of the 
U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance, developed the Natural and Nature-based Flood Management: A Green Guide [99] 
(also referred to as the Flood Green Guide) to support the use of natural and nature-based methods for flood risk 
management. The Flood Green Guide is based on integrated flood management (IFM) approaches (i.e., combining 
elements of the IWRM and Strategic FRM concepts discussed in Section 3.6). The guide is targeted at flood risk 
management practitioners, including municipal governments, communities, and non-governmental organizations. 
The document was developed by an international research and writing team, with input from an advisory group and 
in consultation with experts from around the world. Similar to other guidance developed by international bodies or 
collaborations, the Flood Green Guide provides a broad, overarching framework for NbS project implementation, 
from preliminary assessment through to project evaluation. However, reasonably detailed technical guidance 
is also provided for various steps in the process, including flood risk assessment, identification and selection 
of combinations of structural (hard and soft) and non-structural solutions applicable in various contexts, and 
development of maintenance and monitoring plans. Importantly, the document sets NbS in the context of 
overarching flood risk management strategy. As such, it represents a potentially useful resource and sound initial 
basis for development of guidance applicable to riverine and coastal flood and erosion risk management in Canada.
US Army Corps of Engineers – Use of NNBF for Coastal Resilience (2015)
Bridges et al. [31] published a report providing information and guidance on the use of natural and nature-based 
features (NNBF) to enhance coastal resilience, motivated primarily by post–Hurricane Sandy recovery efforts in 
the United States. The report was intended to address knowledge gaps to support integration of structural and 
non-structural solutions in coastal risk reduction strategies, and included a framework for classifying NNBF, 
characterizing vulnerability, developing performance metrics, incorporating regional sediment management, 
monitoring and adaptively managing solutions, and addressing key policy challenges. Although the identified 
policy actions primarily targeted U.S. institutions and stakeholders, many of the outcomes have broader relevance. 
Opportunities to address challenges for NNBF were grouped in three categories: science, engineering, and 
technology; leadership and institutional co-ordination; and communication and outreach.
Scottish Environmental Protection Agency (U.K.) – Natural Flood Management Handbook (2015) 
Forbes et al. [81] provide a practical guide to support the delivery of natural flood management (NFM), which is 
broadly synonymous with NbS in the U.K. The guidance is aimed primarily at local authorities as NFM proponents, 
but provides a wealth of information based on lessons learned from demonstration projects in Scotland. The 
guidance presents technical and cost considerations for a variety of NbS in river and coastal environments: 
	• Rivers:
	• Woodland creation/restoration/management
	• Land and soil management (including sustainable agricultural practices)
	• Wetland creation/restoration
	• Sediment control
	• River and floodplain restoration
	• Instream structures
	• Controlled diversion of floodwaters (e.g. offline storage)
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
64
csagroup.org
	• Coastal:
	• Managed realignment  
	• Saltmarsh and mudflat restoration
	• Dune restoration
	• Beach nourishment
	• Dynamic revetments (i.e. cobble/shingle beach nourishment) 
Forbes et al. [81] summarize the multiple co-benefits associated with NbS and describe/recommend tools for 
analyzing and scenario-testing the performance of solutions (e.g., hydrological models, hydrodynamic models). The 
handbook provides an eight-step framework for implementing NbS projects, from identifying the need/aspirations 
and engagement with stakeholders through to options appraisal, design, implementation, management, and 
monitoring. Approaches to funding projects and negotiation of agreements with landowners are also described. 
This handbook provides a practical guide to designing a monitoring program, including how to determine 
appropriate structure and level of detail, select monitoring parameters for coastal and riverine sites, and establish 
timeframes and frequency of monitoring.
Environment Agency (U.K.) – Greater Working with Natural Processes in Flood and Coastal Erosion 
Risk Management (2012)
This report [100] was prepared by a government-led working group in response to a recommendation of the 
Pitt Review, which was a comprehensive appraisal of flood risk management in England conducted following 
particularly damaging floods in the summer of 2007 [4]. The report presents the first national review of how natural 
processes could be applied to manage flood risk in England and Wales, and articulates that flood and erosion risk 
management solutions are more resilient and flexible if natural processes are embraced. 
The report provides evidence for the benefits of working with natural processes to reduce flood risk through 
several examples, including managed realignment, sustainable urban drainage solutions (SuDS), on-line and off-
line flood storage, floodplain restoration, soil management, and woodland creation. It identifies 11 conclusions or 
recommendations for better working with natural processes to support flood risk management objectives, grouped 
under five themes:  
	• Strategic planning framework
	• Policy and legislation
	• Science, evidence and modelling
	• Funding and incentives
	• Partner and community engagement
	• Culture, skills and training
Many of the conclusions and recommendations are relevant to the Canadian context.    
U.S. Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) – Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal Highway Resilience: 
An Implementation Guide (2019)
This U.S. FHWA guide [98] provides advice to transportation professionals on implementing NbS to enhance 
coastal highway resilience. The guide includes technical factsheets with basic information on different coastal NbS 
features (e.g., marshes, dunes, pocket beaches, beach nourishments, dune restoration), including typical design 
concepts, costing, life expectancy, ecological services, benefits, challenges, and regional considerations. A chapter 
on risk reduction benefits, ecological benefits, and costs provides a basic comparative assessment of different risk 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
65
csagroup.org
management strategies, how they stand up to erosion, wave attenuation and flooding, and their capacities to adapt 
to sea-level rise and other hazards. The guide outlines a framework and steps necessary to integrate NbS in the 
transportation planning process, including planning and funding strategies, team assembly, relationship-building, 
and stakeholder partnerships. Site assessment strategies are provided, including procedures for characterizing the 
site and determining the resilience of the system. Sections are dedicated to design considerations (engineering 
and ecological), permitting processes (with emphasis on U.S. state and federal regulations as they pertain to NbS), 
construction, monitoring, maintenance, and adaptive management.
The guide is a relatively comprehensive and useful resource for transportation professionals (but likely other 
audiences too) interested in applying NbS to support coastal resilience objectives. The technical factsheets provide 
basic overviews of potential solutions, and the chapters on site assessment and design considerations provide 
useful technical details. Although limited in scope to coastal highway infrastructure, much of the guidance is more 
broadly applicable and could provide the initial basis for, or inform, the development of a guideline or standard for 
NbS in Canadian coastal settings.
B.2 Canada
Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI) – Multiple Documents (2017, 2019, 2020)
The Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI) provides technical and policy support to guide local governments in 
managing their natural assets, which are defined as “the stock of natural resources and ecosystems that yield a flow 
of benefits to people”. MNAI was launched in 2015, building on a move by the Town of Gibsons, British Columbia, 
to integrate its natural assets in asset management and financial planning processes. From 2016 to 2018, five 
communities piloted methodology and guidance documents to implement, refine, and test the approach initiated 
by Gibsons. In 2018, a second cohort of six projects was launched to further refine the methodology and expand the 
evidence base. Through the pilot studies, an eight-step framework for project implementation was developed, from 
defining the scope of natural assets through risk assessments, options appraisal, and development of operation and 
management plans. The case studies reflect the value and benefits provided by natural assets (e.g., rivers, creeks, 
wetlands) in alleviating flood hazards. For example, it was found that natural asset improvements in the Courtenay 
River watershed in British Columbia would avert $2.4 million in flood damages from a 1- in-200 year return period 
flood event [48]. Though, most of the effort has been on the riverine side to date, the MNAI is currently testing its 
methodologies for coastal environments. The MNAI technical documentation [104], [105] and case studies [47], [48] 
provide useful Canadian examples and lessons learned for how natural assets can be sustainably managed to support 
flood risk management (primarily stormwater management and in riverine systems to date), which would support and 
inform the development of future guidance for NbS design and implementation.
Stewardship Centre for British Columbia – Green Shores® (2015, 2020)
Green Shores® is a program run by the Stewardship Centre for British Columbia (SCBC) to encourage “sustainable 
shoreline ecosystems for commercial, residential, institutional and park properties” [106], and private properties 
[107]. It is a voluntary credits and ratings system, modelled after the widely adopted LEED™ program for green 
buildings. It is based on four guiding principles [107]:
	• Preserve or restore physical processes;
	• Maintain or enhance habitat function and diversity;
	• Prevent or reduce pollutants entering the aquatic environment; and
	• Avoid or reduce cumulative impacts.
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
66
csagroup.org
The guides developed for the program apply to marine and lakeshore environments. The program requires five 
prerequisite criteria to be met before a project can be assessed using a series of credits and the points system [106]: 
1.	
Specificity in location of permanent structures;
2.	 Conservation of coastal sedimentation processes; 
3.	 Conservation of sensitive and critical natural habitats;
4.	 Protection of riparian zone; and 
5.	 Construction environmental management plan.  
Credits are given for various characteristics and features of the project, based on criteria such as shore-friendly 
access, restoration, and enhancement of shoreline sediment and tidal flow characteristics, riparian zones, aquatic 
habitats, adaptation plans for climate change, and redevelopment of contaminated sites, as well as outreach and 
public engagement. The guides provide references and resources to support project design and implementation to 
maximize credits. 
Although somewhat limited by a scarcity of successful project examples, a review of the Green Shores© program 
commissioned by SCBC presented multiple lines of evidence for the positive “impact and social, environmental 
and economic value of the initiative for communities in British Columbia” [120]. The guides developed for the Green 
Shores© program provide useful resources, information and highlight issues relevant to design and implementation 
of NbS in coastal (including freshwater lakeshore) environments. The program is currently being extended to the 
Atlantic coast.
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation / University of Waterloo – Under One Umbrella: Practical 
Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada (2020) 
In this report, Moudrak and Feltmate [1] propose practical measures that stakeholders in Canada can take to 
alleviate the risk of future floods in Canada. Chapter 5 describes “practical uses of natural infrastructure to enhance 
flood resilience”, and highlights values and benefits of NbS in Canada. It promotes the valuation of natural assets 
and references case study examples where natural assets have been applied to provide stormwater management 
and flood resilience benefits in Canada, including a number of projects supported by the Municipal Natural Assets 
Initiative. The authors make the case for conservation of wetlands and the importance of considering natural 
infrastructure at watershed scales to support flood risk management. The report suggests that, in principle, the 
most cost-effective natural infrastructure solutions involve (in order of preference):
1.	
Retaining and maintaining existing natural assets (i.e., conservation); 
2.	 Restoration of lost or degraded natural assets; and 
3.	 Construction where required.
ICF – Best Practices and Resources on Climate Resilient Natural Infrastructure (2018)
ICF prepared this report [50] for the Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME), which summarized 
the state of practice for natural infrastructure solutions to enhance community resilience to hazards associated 
with coastal storms and flooding, riverine flooding, urban and rural stormwater (overland flooding), and urban heat 
islands.  The report identifies best practices and natural infrastructure features and solutions commonly applied 
to support coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management, including examples of applications in Canada. 
The business case for natural infrastructure is explained with emphasis on socio-economic benefits, including 
how these solutions can encourage a sense of identify and stewardship in communities, nurture human health 
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
67
csagroup.org
and well-being, facilitate outdoor recreation, and increase property values. The report summarizes some available 
tools supporting cost-benefit analyses for natural infrastructure. It identifies knowledge gaps, opportunities, and 
challenges, as well as lessons learned and documented through a series of interviews with Canadian practitioners. 
Identified gaps and barriers include limited institutional capacity, a lack of highly qualified personnel, limited 
awareness, limited data, policy and regulatory barriers that favour conventional (grey) infrastructure, gentrification 
of neighbourhoods where NbS are implemented, lack of maintenance capacity, and limited cross-disciplinary 
communication. This report is one of the more comprehensive resources providing information relevant to NbS 
for coastal and riverine flood and erosion risk management in Canada but is relatively high-level, lacking some 
technical details and regional considerations needed to support design and implementation.  
Insurance Bureau of Canada – Combatting Canada’s Flood Risks: Natural Infrastructure Is an 
Underutilized Option (2018)
This document [26] presents a broad framework for natural infrastructure project implementation, from community 
engagement and risk assessment through to design, construction, and maintenance. The document emphasizes 
the importance of considering social and environmental benefits of NbS in cost-benefit analyses (i.e., total 
economic value assessment) to ensure robust decision-making and to capture the true value. The document 
provides a useful high-level introduction to NbS and references Canadian case study examples. The proposed 
framework for implementation consists of six steps, with monitoring and reporting throughout: (1) community 
engagement, (2) watershed and climate risk assessment, (3) materiality assessment, (4) feasibility assessment, 
(5) economic benefit assessment, and (6) design, construction, and maintenance. The report puts forward 
several recommendations to support enhanced uptake of natural infrastructure solutions, emphasizing valuation 
methods, funding models and mechanisms, financial instruments, and forums for convening stakeholders. The 
report provides a useful resource for decision-makers and investors considering funding or investment in natural 
infrastructure and/or techno-economic appraisal of flood risk management strategy options that include NbS. It 
lacks technical details needed to support design and implementation guidance for NbS in coastal/river systems.
Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association – Adapting to Climate Change in Coastal 
Communities of the Atlantic Provinces, Canada: Land Use Planning and Engineering and Natural 
Approaches (2016)
This three-part series of guidance documents  [37], [102], [103] was developed as part of a suite of tools developed 
by the Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association (ACASA) to support community adaptation in Atlantic 
Canada. ACASA is a partnership among the provincial governments of Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, 
Prince Edward Island, and New Brunswick, Indigenous governments, and regional stakeholders, including non-
profit organizations and industry. The three parts of the guidance address different aspects of adaptation to sea-
level rise, coastal flooding, and erosion in Atlantic Canada:
	• Part 1 – Guidance for Selecting Adaptation Options
	• Part 2 – Land Use Planning Tools
	• Part 3 – Engineering Tools
The guidance is not exclusively focused on NbS but illustrates how they can be integrated within broader 
adaptation strategies (Procedural, Avoid, Retreat, Accommodate, Protect). The guidance describes distinguishing 
features, processes, climate change impacts, and possible adaptation strategies for a range of coastal and 
estuarine system types prevalent in Atlantic Canada [102]. These strategies can be implemented through a range 
of land use planning, policy, and regulatory tools [103]; many of which enable NbS (e.g., wetland conservation, 
shoreline management planning). A variety of the adaptation options and examples presented in the engineering 
guidance can be, or form part of, the NbS (e.g., beach nourishment, dune building) [37].  
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD AND EROSION 
RISK MANAGEMENT
68
csagroup.org
An accompanying online decision-making tool provides a range of engineering (grey to green) and land use 
options based on user input, and comes with further guidance for effective implementation options.  The 
engineering tools given are for different coastal conditions. A screening tool provides support in determining the 
feasibility of different options, and a number of coastal engineering concepts are presented, with some common 
opportunities and constraints associated with different measures.
This series of guidance documents provides useful regional examples, insights, and technical guidance to support 
the development of sustainable coastal adaptation solutions in Atlantic Canada, which include NbS. They provide a 
potentially useful framework and starting basis for potential future national guidance on design and implementation 
of NbS across Canada’s coastal regions. By covering aspects of land use planning, engineering and broader 
considerations for selecting adaptation options, this guidance demonstrates how NbS can be integrated within 
broader coastal zone management and flood/erosion risk management strategies.
SNC Lavalin – Greening Shorelines to Enhance Resilience (2014)  
This report [29] explores “soft” shore protection approaches to flood protection and sea-level rise adaptation in 
British Columbia coastal settings, as alternatives to hard shoreline armouring. The effectiveness of three soft shore 
protection techniques was evaluated (beach nourishment, nearshore rock features, and headland-beach system) 
and compared to “equally appropriate” hard engineering alternatives. The evaluation framework was based on an 
early version of the Green Shores© rating system, and the following criteria [29]:  
	• Adaptability to climate change related sea level rise;
	• Effectiveness in protecting the shoreline against flooding;
	• Effectiveness in providing ecological resilience; and
	• Relative cost, considering initial capital cost, maintenance cost and long-term replacement cost.
Both hard and soft solutions provided similar degrees of flood protection and probable service life based on 
one metre of relative sea-level rise. In all cases, the “soft” solution provided significant cost savings (30-70%) 
compared to the conventional, hard solution. The study provides a potentially useful framework and initial basis for 
development of Canadian guidance on evaluation of costs and benefits of coastal NbS.
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Watershed Science Centre – Adaptive Management of 
Stream Corridors in Ontario (2001)
This document [108], developed before NbS emerged as an established concept, provides an adaptive 
management framework and guidance to water resource engineers, fluvial geomorphologists, and land use 
planners concerned with surface water management in Ontario. The comprehensive document serves as an 
education tool and provides a basis for stream naturalization through management, design, and implementation. It 
identifies linkages between changes in land use and impacts on streams. It advocates for multi-disciplinary teams, 
recognizing the complexity involved in achieving functional systems, and multiple objective planning and design 
approaches. A seven-stage environmental management framework is presented: problem formulation, preliminary 
planning and assessment, detailed analysis for planning or design, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and 
adjustment. Stream management options described include prevention, protection, remediation, rehabilitation, 
enhancement, and restoration, all of which are compatible with NbS.
The guidance document provides a comprehensive “how-to” in stream restoration and could serve as a useful 
initial basis for developing guidance on riverine NbS in Ontario and other parts of Canada. Some updates would be 
required to capture advances in stream management practices in the 20 years since its publication.
CSA Group Research
In order to encourage the use of 
consensus-based standards solutions to 
promote safety and encourage innovation, 
CSA Group supports and conducts 
research in areas that address new or 
emerging industries, as well as topics and 
issues that impact a broad base of current 
and potential stakeholders. The output of 
our research programs will support the 
development of future standards solutions, 
provide interim guidance to industries on 
the development and adoption of new 
technologies, and help to demonstrate our 
on-going commitment to building a better, 
safer, more sustainable world.
© 2021 Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, as represented
 by the National Research Council Canada
