Extreme Weather and Climate Change: Population Health and 
Health System Implications
Kristie L. Ebi1, Jennifer Vanos2, Jane W. Baldwin3, Jesse E. Bell4, David M. Hondula5, 
Nicole A. Errett6, Katie Hayes7, Colleen E. Reid8, Shubhayu Saha9, June Spector6,10, Peter 
Berry11
1Center for Health and the Global Environment, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
98195, USA
2School of Sustainability, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA
3Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, Palisades, New York 10964, USA
4Department of Environmental, Agricultural, and Occupational Health, College of Public Health, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198, USA
5School of Geographical Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA
6Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, School of Public Health, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA
7Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 2S2, Canada
8Geography Department, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA
9Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA
10Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
98195, USA
11Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada
Abstract
Extreme weather and climate events, such as heat waves, cyclones, and floods, are an expression 
of climate variability. These events and events influenced by climate change, such as wildfires, 
continue to cause significant human morbidity and mortality and adversely affect mental health 
and well-being. Although adverse health impacts from extreme events declined over the past 
few decades, climate change and more people moving into harm’s way could alter this trend. 
Long-term changes to Earth’s energy balance are increasing the frequency and intensity of many 
extreme events and the probability of compound events, with trends projected to accelerate 
under certain greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. While most of these events cannot be 
completely avoided, many of the health risks could be prevented through building climate-resilient 
krisebi@uw.edu .
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K.L.E. conceptualized the article; K.L.E., J.V., J.W.B., J.E.B., D.M.H., N.A.E., K.H., C.E.R., S.S., J.S., and P.B. contributed to the 
writing, editing, revising, and finalizing of the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Annu Rev Public Health. 2021 April 01; 42: 293–315. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-012420-105026.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
health systems with improved risk reduction, preparation, response, and recovery. Conducting 
vulnerability and adaptation assessments and developing health system adaptation plans can 
identify priority actions to effectively reduce risks, such as disaster risk management and more 
resilient infrastructure. The risks are urgent, so action is needed now.
Keywords
climate change; climate variability; extreme events; population health; health systems
1. INTRODUCTION
Worldwide, in 2019, there were 396 disasters1 that killed 11,755 people, affected 95 million 
others, and cost nearly US$130 billion (28). Asia was the most affected continent with 
40% of the events, 45% of the deaths, and 74% of all people affected. Floods and storms 
accounted for 68% of the number of affected people worldwide. Anthropogenic greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions, land use change, and other activities impacting the global energy 
balance are altering the frequency and intensity of many extreme weather and climate 
events, with some regions experiencing increases in heat waves, floods, and droughts (84). 
Events influenced by climate change, particularly wildfires, also are increasing.
Risks from extreme weather and climate events arise from the intersection of the physical 
hazard (e.g., wind and rain), the extent of exposure to the hazard, the vulnerability of 
individuals and communities, and the capacity to prepare for, manage, and recover from 
extreme events.
A disaster generally is defined as a sudden, calamitous event that disrupts the functioning 
of a community or society and that exceeds its ability to cope using its own resources (81). 
The occurrence of an extreme event is not required for a community or region to experience 
extreme impacts, such as large increase in mortality; an extreme impact can arise from a 
moderately strong event when it occurs in a highly vulnerable population. The converse 
also is true, that an extreme event may not result in extreme impacts when communities are 
prepared.
Roughly 20% of disasters in 2019 occurred in North America, including the Caribbean and 
Central America, for total damages of US$55 billion, of which US$29 billion were insured 
(130). Loss events included Hurricane Dorian, which caused billions of dollars in damage, 
especially in the Bahamas, in late August to early September. Heavy losses that year also 
resulted from severe weather, floods, and a winter storm in the United States. A mixture of 
snowmelt triggered by unusually high temperatures in March and storms with torrential rain 
led to sustained and extensive flooding in Nebraska, South Dakota, Iowa, and Mississippi 
(49).
1Natural disasters are not solely the consequence of biophysical, meteorological, or climatological events; human activities, such as 
placement of infrastructure and movement of people into vulnerable regions, also are required.
Ebi et al.
Page 2
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Overall, the numbers and costs of disasters have been increasing for several decades due to 
increases in exposure (more people moving into harm’s way and increases in the values of 
property and infrastructure at risk), vulnerability of people and infrastructure, and climate 
change (170). Since 1980, the United States has experienced 265 weather and climate 
disasters in which the overall damages reached or exceeded US$1 billion; the total costs 
were greater than US$1.775 trillion (132), with an estimated 14,223 deaths (an average of 
356 per year), although the numbers of deaths are likely an underestimate (178).
Beyond the damage to infrastructure, extreme weather events and disasters can affect the 
health and well-being of individuals and can have catastrophic impacts on communities 
and health systems. People can suffer from a wide range of physical effects (e.g., heat 
exhaustion, injuries in severe storms, and respiratory illnesses from molds due to floods) 
as well as longer-term impacts on mental health. Health systems and facilities can be 
affected by impacts on patients and health care staff, medical and nonmedical supplies, 
facility operations, and critical infrastructures. To prepare for climate change, health-sector 
and emergency-management officials—as well as urban planners, neighborhood services 
staff, and others—require information about how hazards are projected to change, possible 
future exposures of people and property, likely changes in population health and health care 
infrastructure vulnerabilities, and needed capacities to prepare for and manage the events 
and their aftermath.
We review (a) the current impacts and projected risks of climate change on the health of 
populations and health systems from extreme weather and climate events and from wildfires, 
(b) the value of disaster management to reduce health risks from these changes, and (c) 
adaptation and mitigation measures that can explicitly address climate change in policies and 
planning processes.
2. EXTREME EVENTS INFLUENCED BY CLIMATE CHANGE
Global land surface air temperature has risen 1.53°C since the preindustrial period of 1850–
1900, with considerable variation in regional warming; this increase is much larger than the 
observed warming combined over land and oceans (0.87°C) (84). Climate models project 
robust differences in regional climate characteristics, including extremes.
Detection and attribution analytic methods are increasingly being applied to determine 
the effects of climate change on the frequency and/or magnitude of extreme events. For 
example, in mid-September 2019, torrential rainfall from Tropical Storm Imelda caused 
large-scale flooding in Southeast Texas, affecting an estimated 6.6 million people and 
resulting in rescues of over 1,000 people and 5 deaths (171). The recorded precipitation at 
the station with the highest total amount of rainfall from this event would be expected only 
approximately once every 1,200 years.
The 2019 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report on Climate Change 
and Land (84) concluded that warming since the period 1850–1900 has resulted in an 
increased frequency, intensity, and duration of extreme events in most land regions, 
including the following observations:
Ebi et al.
Page 3
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
•
The intensity of heavy precipitation events increased across the globe.
•
The frequency and intensity of droughts increased in some regions (including the 
Mediterranean, West Asia, many parts of South America, much of Africa, and 
Northeastern Asia).
•
Desertification in some dryland areas (including in sub-Saharan Africa, parts of 
East and Central Asia, and Australia) was associated with increased land-surface 
air temperature and evapotranspiration and decreased precipitation amounts in 
interaction with climate variability and human activities.
•
The frequency and intensity of dust storms increased over the last few decades 
due to land use and land cover changes and climate-related factors in many 
dryland areas, such as the Arabian Peninsula and broader Middle East and 
Central Asia.
Further, climate change is projected to continue and exacerbate these trends, including the 
following:
•
The frequency, intensity, and duration of extreme heat events are projected to 
continue to increase through the twenty-first century, with all regions expected to 
experience unprecedented temperatures.
•
The frequency and intensity of extreme rainfall events are projected to increase 
in many regions.
•
The frequency and intensity of droughts are projected to increase, particularly in 
the Mediterranean region and southern Africa.
There is a range of possible futures for each additional unit of global warming. For example, 
regional projections of annual maximum temperatures across climate models where the 
Earth warms 1.5°C under a scenario of high GHG emissions indicate there may be little 
change in the single hottest day in a year in many regions if realized warming falls into 
the lower quartile of projections (154). Alternatively, increases of 3°C to 5°C in maximum 
temperatures could occur over most regions in the upper quartile of projections. With Earth 
projected to warm 1.5°C between 2030 and 2052, the next few decades could be similar 
to today in many parts of the world; or regions could experience significant and very rapid 
warming. These projections have implications for the frequency and duration of extreme 
heat events; the extent of increases in precipitation, including from hurricanes; and the rate 
of sea-level rise that affects the health of future populations (particularly but not exclusively 
in coastal regions) and their health systems.
2.1. Tropical Cyclones or Hurricanes
Tropical cyclones (TCs) that make landfall are among the most dramatic and costly 
disasters. They have different names depending on the basin where they occur (hurricanes 
in the northern Atlantic and northeastern Pacific, typhoons in the northwestern Pacific, 
and cyclones in the southern Pacific or Indian Ocean) but are the same meteorological 
phenomena. They cause strong winds and flooding from intense rainfall and a surge of ocean 
water that causes dramatic damage to buildings and infrastructure along coastlines, often 
Ebi et al.
Page 4
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
including widespread utility outages. TCs have cost the United States close to US$1 trillion 
since 1980 (157). Low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) have suffered smaller total 
economic losses, but the losses are often a larger proportion of their nations’ economies and 
arguably have greater consequences for well-being (67).
Alongside physical damages, TCs are highly detrimental to human health (107). From 1963 
to 2012, there were 2,544 deaths in the United States (~50 per year) directly caused by 
the forces of TCs (e.g., drowning in floods caused by storm surge or extreme rainfall, or 
physical trauma caused by windborne debris) (142). A comparable number of TC-related 
deaths are indirectly caused in individuals with preexisting conditions exacerbated by the 
stress or strain of a storm. Hurricane Katrina alone caused 520 direct deaths and 565 indirect 
deaths (143). Accounts of individual TCs clearly indicate upticks in a variety of other health 
problems that do not necessarily result in death, including injuries, diseases, skin infections, 
and mental health impacts (e.g., 43, 73, 87, 141). New data sets of TC exposure history are 
increasing possibilities for robust, long-term epidemiological studies of these diverse health 
impacts from TCs (e.g., preterm birth; see 161) that will enhance our ability to predict and 
prepare for future TC health impacts.
A confounding challenge in projecting future TC impacts is the relatively low confidence in 
projections of TC changes with climate change. Projections suggest the most intense TCs 
will likely increase in frequency and exhibit higher precipitation rates; however, there is 
uncertainty whether the overall number of TCs may increase or decrease, with different 
trends projected depending on the modeling approach (46, 103, 154). However, other 
trends are clearly heightening TC risks to individuals and communities. Exposure to TCs 
is increasing as people move to and settle along coastlines (57), and potential damages from 
storm surge are increasing with sea-level rise (113).
2.2. Compound Events
Complicating projections of extreme-event impacts is the fact that many disasters 
are the result of combinations of extremes (sometimes called compound, interacting, 
interconnected, or cascading events) (140, 154). Compound extreme events consist of two or 
more events interacting across time and/or space, such as back-to-back extreme heat events 
or an extreme heat event coincident with a drought (184). The range of compound extremes 
that might endanger human health is large. The study of compound extremes is a nascent 
and rapidly evolving research area. In many cases, understanding of present and projected 
risks of a particular compound extreme event is lacking, including key societal drivers of 
vulnerability (144). We highlight a few types of compound climatic extreme events.
Heat waves are exacerbated when combined with other extreme events. Heat waves can 
enhance buildup of ozone and other pollutants, leading to combinations of heat and air 
pollution dangerous for human health (4, 111). A particularly striking example is the 
combination of high temperatures, wildfire, and smoke that results in high levels of air 
pollution across broad geographic areas. In recent summers, the western United States has 
been afflicted with multiple episodes; these are projected to become increasingly common in 
the future because of climate change (114).
Ebi et al.
Page 5
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Positive feedback loops also occur between heat waves and droughts that heighten 
temperature and desiccation (76, 185). Certain types of atmospheric waves can cause 
multiple simultaneous heat waves distributed across the Earth; this may increase the risk 
of multiple breadbasket failures (105). Many of the most impactful heat waves in terms 
of mortality might be better understood as the combination of a number of heat extremes 
occurring in sequence, separated by short cooler breaks—a temporally compound heat wave 
event. The proportion of heat wave hazards coming from these temporally compound heat 
waves is robustly projected to increase with global warming (7).
Past events highlight the dangers of compound extreme events involving TCs or extreme 
precipitation and related flooding. For example, in 2005, Hurricane Katrina led to massive 
flooding in New Orleans (153). Only a few weeks later, Hurricane Rita rebreached 
weakened levees, leading to flooding once again. The nonlinear impacts of these 
events likely exceeded vulnerability thresholds associated with protective infrastructures. 
Significant research remains to understand the dynamics of such compound hydrological 
extremes and to quantify risks to populations and communities (144).
3. POPULATION HEALTH AND HEALTH SYSTEM RISKS FROM EXTREME 
EVENTS INFLUENCED BY CLIMATE CHANGE
There is high annual variability in the numbers of deaths from all disasters, with an average 
of 60,000 deaths annually over the last decade, or 0.1% of all global deaths (148), with an 
irregular and overall declining trend. Most of these deaths were in a few intensive disasters, 
indicating that while the events may not be preventable, much of the loss of life can be 
avoided through improved forecasts and early warnings, more resilient infrastructure, and 
improved disaster risk management. However, there is a concern with climate change that 
future events may be too large or intense for effective preparation.
The next sections summarize population health and health system risks from high ambient 
temperatures, droughts, floods, and wildfires, followed by a discussion of the mental health 
risks associated with extreme events influenced by climate change.
3.1. High Ambient Temperatures
The range of health effects of high ambient temperatures include discomfort, severe illnesses 
requiring hospital care, mortality, and interactions with and modifications of work patterns, 
recreation, and other activities.
3.1.1. Morbidity and mortality from heat waves.—At the global scale, the number 
of hot days and nights has increased since the 1950s, while cold days and nights decreased 
(154). Rising temperatures are directly connected to human health through heat-related 
illnesses (e.g., heat exhaustion, heat syncope, and heat stroke) and death, with each 
individual’s risk highly dependent on their exposure, location, and susceptibility. There 
is a wide range of heat tolerance within populations and across regions. The human body 
can physiologically adapt to heat to a certain extent depending on individual factors, local 
climate, and types of heat exposure. Physiological factors (e.g., age, sex, preexisting illness, 
Ebi et al.
Page 6
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
and medication or drug use) (23, 98) and behavioral or contextual factors (e.g., employment, 
activity, clothing, income, and housing type) (6, 118) are known to affect thermoregulation 
across day-to-day or hour-to-hour heat exposures. For example, in Maricopa County, 
Arizona, 47% (93/197) of heat deaths in 2019 involved drug use as a cause of death or 
contributing factor (124). Extreme heat events can disrupt health systems and services, for 
example, through a surge in patient volumes, by closing operating theatres in high heat and 
humidity conditions, or through impacts on health care professionals and patients (156).
Reducing risks to health from current and projected high temperatures—outdoors and 
indoors—depends not only on physiological acclimatization but also on planned adaptation 
by public health officials in concert with partners in other sectors. Heat action plans and 
early warning systems that include a proactive response to assist vulnerable populations 
and build awareness among the public and key stakeholders can lead to the adoption 
of protective behaviors and reduction in morbidity and mortality (75, 156). Common 
components of heat action plans and warning systems include opening of public cooling 
shelters, targeted messaging, wellness checks, and water distribution (e.g., 9, 19). A study 
by Eisenman et al. (44) found that as temperatures increased, heat-related mortality was 
lower in census tracts with more publicly accessible cool spaces in Maricopa County, 
Arizona. These and other preventative measures that may reduce heat exposures and increase 
coping capacity as the climate warms are important for protecting health. Over longer time 
scales, communities can be modified or designed with new or altered technologies and 
infrastructures (e.g., cool facades, green roofs, shade structures, and reflective surfacing) to 
reduce heat exposures in urban areas (119, 172). Heat-health adaptation measures can be 
cost-effective and reduce utilization of health systems (61) but should be developed and 
updated based on information about projected climate conditions (74).
Heat-related mortality has been declining in many industrialized countries in recent decades 
(56). For example, deaths attributed to heat across 105 cities in the United States declined by 
almost 63% from 1987 to 2005 (12). However, the extent to which continued declines could 
be realized (or reversals avoided) largely depends on implementing effective adaptation 
strategies (60). Heat-related mortality trends and optimal adaptation pathways or measures 
differ by country based on culture, infrastructure, technology, and communication, among 
other factors. Few studies have assessed heat-related mortality in LMICs due to lack of data 
(56, 63, 134); over half of existing studies are from China (56%) or other Asian countries 
(14%). LMICs typically have low-resource environments [including a lower prevalence of 
air conditioning (AC)] and more often rely on altering behaviors and personal cooling to 
stay safe (O. Jay, K. Ebi, P. Berry, C. Broderick, R. DeDear, et al., submitted manuscript). 
These behaviors may include application of ice or ice towels, dousing skin, or saturating 
clothing with water with added ventilation (fans) (26). Yet the effectiveness of these 
actions depends on the climate context. For example, evaporative cooling with fans is more 
effective in humid locations, whereas self-dousing and/or wetting of clothing when using 
fans are preferable strategies in certain dry climates (128). Although AC use is growing 
exponentially as the most popular heat-exposure reduction strategy globally (11), it is costly 
and financially inaccessible for many of the most vulnerable, is energy intensive, emits 
waste heat into the environment (150), and can increase the risk of power outages.
Ebi et al.
Page 7
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Heat-reduction interventions may have economic and educational cobenefits. Park (137) 
found that high school student test performance was reduced by 14% on days with high 
(~32.2°C) outdoor temperatures compared to optimal (22.2°C) outdoor temperatures in 
New York state. Hot school days may also disproportionately impact minority students, 
accounting for ~5% of the racial achievement gap in the United States, in part because of 
inadequate access to AC (138).
Finally, there is growing evidence linking extreme heat and rising temperatures to increased 
hospitalizations for mood and behavioral disorders (22, 175) and evidence of increased 
risk of suicide related to heat waves and rising temperatures (17, 34, 99). These risks are 
projected to increase with further warming. Burke et al. (17) estimated that under a high 
GHG emission pathway, there could be 9,000 to 40,000 additional suicide deaths throughout 
Mexico and the United States by 2050. Mechanisms for how high temperatures impact 
mental health remain poorly understood, with various nonclimatic confounders to consider 
(e.g., macroeconomics and social factors); yet, biologically, there may be side effects from 
thermoregulation and neurological responses to heat that adversely affect mental health (17).
3.1.2. Occupational health.—Individuals working under heat stress are more likely 
to experience physiological heat strain (51) and heat-related illness, and exertional heat 
stroke and death can occur in young, otherwise healthy workers performing heavy physical 
labor (64). A global meta-analysis by Flouris et al. (51) found individuals working a single 
shift under heat stress conditions were four times more likely to experience occupational 
heat strain than in thermoneutral conditions (based on 11,582 workers across 9 studies), 
with ~0.7°C higher core temperatures (1,090 workers, 17 studies) and 14.5% higher urine 
specific gravity (a measure of solute concentration) (691 workers, 14 studies). In the 
United States between 2000 and 2010, 359 occupational heat-related deaths were reported 
(annual mean fatality rate 0.22 per 1 million workers), with agricultural and construction 
workers at particularly high risk (64). Indoor workers subject to inadequate ventilation and 
workers exposed to point heat sources are also at risk (152). Occupational heat stress is 
hypothesized to contribute to the global epidemic of chronic kidney disease of unknown 
etiology (177) and can lead to adverse birth outcomes among heat-exposed pregnant workers 
(106). Working populations with the most social and economic disadvantages are often 
more exposed to heat and may lack adequate health care access or other means to address 
exposures and health effects (122).
The risk of adverse occupational health effects is likely to increase as the frequency and 
severity of extreme heat waves increase (83). In a study of US agricultural workers, 
climate change at its current pace is projected to double crop worker heat risk by the 
mid-century and triple by the end-of-century, absent extensive restructuring of agricultural 
labor (164). Increasing temperatures from local land use changes can magnify the impacts 
of climate change, for example, in the setting of industrial clearing of tropical forests where 
communities depend on subsistence agriculture and other outdoor work (183) and in areas 
with growing urban heat island effects (152). In tropical and mid-latitude areas of the world, 
Dunne et al. (38) estimated that heat stress has already reduced labor capacity by 10% 
relative to the 1970s and projected a reduction of 40% by the year 2100 under a pathway 
Ebi et al.
Page 8
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
of high GHG emissions. Further decreases in labor productivity and associated economic 
impacts are projected, assuming adherence to occupational heat stress guidelines (38, 51).
3.1.3. Recreation.—High temperatures can also adversely affect people engaging in 
outdoor sports and recreation and represent a growing challenge for the sports industry 
(136). Heat is a leading cause of sudden death among athletes, and exertional heat illnesses 
cause thousands of debilitating health outcomes annually (18). For large events facing 
extreme heat (e.g., Tokyo Olympics), weather and climate data should be integrated into 
the decision-making process for event schedules and venue locations (79). Unpredictable 
disruptions from extreme weather may cost billions of dollars given the years of planning, 
hundreds of thousands of people involved, and global media attention, yet such safety 
precautions may help avoid serious risk to athletes (158). Coordination among local 
stakeholders in emergency medicine, public health, and events/operations is necessary 
to ensure that localized preparedness plans (e.g., identification of hot spots such as sun-
exposed locations, expected crowds, and midday events) systematically provide adequate 
support for both athletic and social activities.
3.2. Droughts
The frequency and intensity of droughts are increasing with rising global temperatures and 
changing precipitation patterns (165). These trends and associated risks are expected to 
continue to intensify with climate change (77). Internationally, over the last two decades, 
droughts affected more than one billion people (27). Africa is a quintessential setting for 
examination of the roles that drought can play in human health and society, as droughts there 
have led to mass migration, conflict, and devastating famine (54, 58). In the United States 
since 1980, droughts classified as billion-dollar disasters were estimated to have caused 
3,865 deaths, with most of the deaths due to heat waves accompanying drought (132).
Because of the difficulty in defining the beginning and end of a drought, the causal pathways 
connecting droughts to health outcomes can be complex and difficult to monitor (10, 117). 
The most commonly identified pathway is a reduction in water availability for societal 
uses, both in quantity and quality as concentrations of pollutants increase (129). Stagnant, 
warm waters from drought produce ideal conditions to promote growth of many freshwater 
pathogens (32). Simultaneously, sudden heavy rains during drought conditions can increase 
the likelihood of flooding.
Droughts are slowly evolving, and the disruptions to human systems can last for long 
periods with slow recoveries that can have delayed health impacts (159), such as through 
agricultural losses and environmental degradation (47). Increased particulate matter (PM) in 
the atmosphere resulting from drought and high winds can also lead to respiratory health 
issues and death (10, 29). These conditions can contribute to the spread of pathogens causing 
respiratory illnesses (such as coccidioidomycosis and meningitis; see 25, 53). Drought has 
also been linked to mental health issues and conflict (59, 173).
Ebi et al.
Page 9
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
3.3. Floods
Based on the Emergency Events Database, from 1969 to 2018, 10,009 extreme weather 
events that resulted in disasters caused over two million deaths and just under four 
million cases of disease (83). Floods (47%) and storms (30%) were the most common 
extreme weather events worldwide over the period 1969–2018, with an increasing trend 
(97). Globally, most direct weather-related deaths were caused by storms (39%), droughts 
(34%), and floods (16%). Drowning is the most common cause of death after the onset of 
flooding (139). Morbidity continues for more than 10 days after a severe flooding event. A 
comprehensive review of the health impacts of worldwide flood and storm disasters between 
1985 and 2014 concluded that the health impacts of these extreme events differ (151). The 
health impacts include increases and sometimes decreases in
•
Injuries, especially wounds, and carbon monoxide and gasoline poisoning after 
storms;
•
Cases of infectious and parasitic diseases, such as gastrointestinal illness, 
respiratory infections, and skin or soft tissue infections, after storms and floods;
•
Exacerbations of noncommunicable diseases after storms and floods;
•
Increased contact with health services after floods; and
•
Cardiopulmonary (floods) and skin complaints (storms and floods).
The results indicate increased needs for emergency and routine health care services.
Differential vulnerabilities increase risks during and after floods and storms. During 
Hurricane Harvey (Texas, 2017), physical health problems primarily affected individuals 
who did not evacuate. Disparities exist in disaster-related flooding exposure. Older adults 
were more likely to live in a household exposed to flooding from Superstorm Sandy (New 
York, 2012) (109). Socioeconomic disparities also were present, with poorer residents 
having higher risk. Increases in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and 
anxiety are associated with flooding (131, 174) and hurricanes (135). Floods also can 
decrease health-related quality of life (149).
Health care access and infrastructure can be severely affected by floods, including loss of 
records, impacts on water supplies and laboratory functions, reduced access to health care, 
and evacuation, with subsequent consequences for the communities served (21, 139). Health 
care access was particularly reduced for persons living in households where someone lost 
their job after Hurricane Harvey (50).
3.4. Wildfires
Many parts of the world have seen increases in the length of the wildfire season and 
increases in burned area (92). While there are many drivers of these increases (including 
historical wildfire suppression and increased intrusion of humans into wildland areas), 
climatic changes, including drought, have been implicated as a major contributor to changes 
in fire season length and acres burned (1, 179). These trends are projected to continue 
under a range of global climate models, with particular agreement among models in the 
mid-to-high latitudes (127). Globally, the mortality burden from wildfire smoke is estimated 
Ebi et al.
Page 10
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
to range between 260,000 and 600,000 (90); however, this estimate could now be considered 
an underestimate given increases in population globally and increases in extreme wildfires in 
North America, Australia, Brazil, and other locations since that study’s publication in 2012.
Wildfire smoke emits a variety of chemicals, including PM (suspended solid and liquid 
particles) and gases such as carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and volatile 
organic compounds. Additionally, many of these chemicals react to form more PM and 
ground-level ozone (85). Most studies of the population-health impacts downwind from 
wildfires focus on PM10 and PM2.5, as data on these are readily available and there is 
a robust literature on the health impacts of these particles. More research is needed to 
understand the health impacts of other components of wildfire smoke.
Wildfire smoke exposure is most consistently associated with adverse respiratory health 
outcomes (20, 145), with the clearest evidence for exacerbations of asthma whether 
measured in hospitalizations, emergency department visits, or physician visits (15, 55, 
160). Many studies find that lung function among people with asthma does not decline 
with exposure to wildfire smoke (112, 145), but there is some evidence of lung function 
decline of nonasthmatics (86, 100). These contradictory findings could be due to higher 
medication usage among those with asthma, thus protecting them from exacerbations during 
exposure. Many (15, 45) but not all (91) studies that investigate the relationship between 
wildfire smoke exposure and refills of rescue medications often used for asthma report 
significant positive associations. Associations between wildfire smoke exposure and other 
respiratory endpoints are not as consistent, but there is increasing evidence of associations 
for exacerbations of COPD and respiratory infections (145).
Wildfire smoke may impact specific cardiovascular endpoints such as out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrests (33, 93) and emergency department visits, particularly among the elderly (180). 
Studies with sufficient statistical power demonstrate a small but significant increase in 
mortality (37, 48, 89, 123). Additionally, there is increased interest in whether wildfire 
smoke affects birth outcomes. Babies whose gestation coincided with a wildfire had a 
significant but small decline in birth weight (78). An observed decline in birthweight 
was significantly associated with wildfire PM2.5 across multiple fire seasons in Colorado, 
with increased risk of preterm birth, gestational diabetes, and gestational hypertension (2). 
Further, wildfires are associated with adverse mental health (16, 35).
Understanding the populations that are most affected by wildfire smoke exposure is 
important for targeting public health adaptations to increased wildfires under a changing 
climate, yet very few epidemiological studies have investigated differential risk (104). There 
are higher rates of emergency department visits for asthma among females compared to 
males (55, 160). Studies investigating differential impacts by age are not consistent except 
for studies of asthma exacerbations that showed the highest risks for the elderly, followed 
by working age adults, and the lowest risks among children (15). Very few studies have 
investigated differential impacts of wildfire smoke by race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic 
status (SES) (104, 145), but there is some evidence of stronger associations between 
wildfire smoke and visits to the emergency department and hospitalizations in lower-SES 
neighborhoods (146).
Ebi et al.
Page 11
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Two studies projected the health risks of air pollution from wildfires under climate change, 
with one focused on the western United States (115) and the other on the continental United 
States (52). The latter study projected that overall PM2.5 concentrations would decrease 
owing to decreases in emissions from anthropogenic sources but that fire-related PM2.5 
emissions could offset some of these gains in some regions. The net result projected under 
high GHG emissions is that fire smoke could be the dominant source of annual average 
PM2.5 exposure in all regions by the year 2100. Although PM2.5 mortality is projected to 
decrease by 2100, the proportion of deaths due to wildfire-associated PM2.5 could increase 
(52).
Wildfires can present many challenges to health systems and impact the operations of 
health facilities through increased stress on services, health risks to staff and patients, and 
damage to infrastructure and operations (e.g., smoke inundation of hospitals and clinics). In 
2017, severe wildfires in the interior region of British Columbia, Canada, affected 19 health 
facilities or sites and led to the evacuation of 880 patients, caused the displacement of 700 
health professionals, and cost the Interior Health Authority CAN$2.7 million.
3.5. Mental Health
Extreme events and disasters can exacerbate or compound preexisting mental health needs 
or trigger new mental ill-health outcomes, acute or chronic and long-term (24). Substantive 
socioeconomic implications from destruction to homes, businesses, and communities can 
lead to financial stressors and community strain that can increase the likelihood for domestic 
or community-based violence (24). At the same time, many people exposed to extreme 
events demonstrate resiliency and experience very little to no mental distress (14). People 
exposed to extreme events also may experience a mixture of affirmative mental health 
outcomes like compassion, growth, and altruism as communities band together in the 
wake of a disaster and challenging mental health outcomes like stress, fear, anxiety, and 
compassion fatigue (71).
Climate change–related hazards (e.g., drought, sea-level rise, melting permafrost, and 
extreme weather events) affect well-being (24, 71). Impacts to mental well-being include 
a loss of a sense of place, referred to as solastalgia, and anxiety and grief related to a 
changing climate, often referred to as ecoanxiety, climate anxiety, climate trauma, ecogrief, 
or climate grief (3, 24, 30). These experiences are often framed as normative responses, so 
it is important to look broadly at the full range of mental health outcomes related to climate 
change and not to necessarily pathologize these outcomes (70). Those most at risk are those 
who already experience health inequities based on the social, environmental, and biological 
determinants of health (70).
Enhancing mental health literacy, access to mental health care and culturally relevant care, 
and a sense of community, as well as integrating mental health indicators into climate 
change and health assessments, support psychosocial adaptation to a changing climate 
(70). The cobenefits of climate change mitigation for mental well-being include active 
transportation that enhances mood and increased green space that can reduce stress levels 
and promote well-being through connections with the natural environment (80).
Ebi et al.
Page 12
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
4. INCREASING THE RESILIENCE OF HEALTH SYSTEMS
A global adaptation gap exists in efforts by health-sector officials to prepare for climate 
hazards such as weather-related disasters (166). Multiple opportunities exist to increase the 
climate resiliency of health systems and health facilities (182). Ministries and departments 
of health generally have programs with responsibility for managing disaster risks. However, 
these programs were developed without explicitly incorporating climate change (e.g., 
considering the implications of projections of future impacts), meaning they may be ill-
equipped to manage the health risks associated with increases in the frequency and intensity 
of extreme events. Furthermore, some climate-related hazards, like extreme heat, fall outside 
of the official or perceived domains of responsibility for professional disaster management 
agencies or are approached through a distributed governance model with no designated 
lead entity (68). The key policy levers for health-sector decision makers are climate change 
adaptation, GHG mitigation, and disaster risk management. To date, cross-sector adaptation 
efforts have been largely incremental, adjusting existing systems while maintaining their 
core structure and function. However, given the limitations of these systems to meet the 
increasing demands associated with experienced impacts or anticipated climate-related risks, 
transformational adaptations that seek to fundamentally change these systems are necessary 
(133).
Disaster risk management is often considered separately from adaptation, although there 
is growing integration between them to maximize protection of populations and health 
systems (8). Successful incorporation of climate change requires developing, implementing, 
evaluating, and modifying policies and programs to increase their effectiveness for what will 
be a very different future.
4.1. Adaptation and Mitigation
A major focus of adaptation is on promoting development of climate-resilient health systems 
(182). Building blocks of such systems include (a) a knowledgeable health workforce with 
the tools needed to promote climate resilience; (b) health information systems that support 
effective management of the health risks of extreme events; (c) effective service delivery, 
including preparation for emergencies; and (d) adequate financing (40). Preparing health 
systems for climate extremes and disasters requires robust information about current impacts 
and projected risks to inform adaptation planning (182). A critical step is developing 
a health national adaptation plan (HNAP) or subnational plan, including conducting a 
vulnerability and adaptation assessment (181). An HNAP helps ensure that the health risks 
of climate change are prioritized at community to national levels of decision-making to 
reduce vulnerabilities and build needed capacity and resilience. The process of developing 
an HNAP should be integrated with adaptation planning in other sectors (e.g., disaster risk 
management committees, hydro-meteorological services, agriculture, and water) and with 
development planning processes (181).
Vulnerability and adaptation assessments should include analyses of the ability of health 
systems and services to withstand extreme events and disasters; stress tests can provide 
information to officials to facilitate preparing for and managing more severe climate 
change–related shocks and stresses (39). The health impacts of extreme events can 
Ebi et al.
Page 13
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
compound until a tipping point is reached, resulting in significant changes in the affected 
system and more severe population-health outcomes. This was illustrated in 2017 when 
Hurricane Maria resulted in an estimated 4,645 excess deaths in Puerto Rico, with a third of 
those deaths from delayed or interrupted health care (101).
Health-sector officials have a wide scope to help reduce the future magnitude and pattern 
of extreme weather and climate events through the reduction of GHGs given the large 
carbon footprint of health-related activities related to energy, food, anesthetic gases, and 
transportation (94). In addition, significant health cobenefits (e.g., better respiratory and 
cardiovascular health through improved air quality) that help build resiliency can accrue 
through well-designed GHG mitigation efforts (65).
4.2. Disaster Risk Management
Disaster risk management includes “strategies, policies, and measures to improve the 
understanding of disaster risk, foster disaster risk reduction and transfer, and promote 
continuous improvement in disaster preparedness, response, and recovery practices” (168). 
Health-emergency management policies and actions to reduce risks from climate-related 
hazards can contribute to adaptation and resiliency-building efforts if they are informed 
by climate change considerations and information. Opportunities to integrate disaster risk 
management and climate change adaptation include alignment of financing strategies and 
mechanisms; development of dual- or multipurpose government policies and strategies; 
integration of both disaster risk management and adaptation into national and international 
organizations, institutions, and programs; application of widely adopted disaster risk 
management participatory hazard assessment approaches; and promotion of locally led 
interventions or frameworks that comprehensively address disasters from all hazards and 
environmental problems (82). Examples of specific disaster risk management measures that 
may concurrently foster climate change adaptation include heat wave warning and response 
programs, infrastructure resilience, and overall disaster preparedness (167).
Disaster risk management strategies should consider local context and place emotional 
and cognitive experiences and identities that link people to places (13). Place attachment 
has both positive and negative relationships with natural environmental risk perception 
and risk coping, which have the potential to influence the effectiveness of disaster risk 
management strategies (13). For example, strong place attachment is negatively associated 
with willingness to evacuate and relocate (13).
Community-based disaster risk management strategies are necessary to address community-
specific risks, integrate priorities for vulnerable groups, and acknowledge community 
assets and coping strategies (155). Given the importance of implementing adaptation 
measures at the local level, local public health agencies are uniquely positioned to build 
resilience (95, 96). Public health actors are well positioned to address climate change 
due to their professional responsibilities, experience, and expertise (8). Prior to a disaster, 
community-focused public health strategies can reduce climate disaster risk by reducing 
human vulnerability (96). Furthermore, public health activities implemented in the context 
of disasters—including rapid needs assessments, surveillance, and epidemiologic studies—
will become more important as the frequency of climate-related hazards increases (5).
Ebi et al.
Page 14
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
An opportunity for state and local health departments to engage in climate change adaptation 
activities is to build on existing all-hazards disaster preparedness and response capacity (36). 
A key action to close the health adaptation gap related to heat and weather extremes is 
to integrate disaster risk management into all health policies and to integrate health into 
disaster risk management plans and strategies (166). Additional collaborative opportunities, 
partnership, communication (within and across sectors), resources, authority, training, and 
capacity for state and local health department engagement in climate change adaptation 
activities are necessary (36).
4.3. Economic Considerations
Cross-disciplinary efforts combining population health, economics, and climate to value 
the adverse risks of exposures and benefits of adaptation strategies are a priority (83). 
While the reported estimates of economic losses associated with extreme weather events 
nationally (132) and globally (130) are huge, they provide limited information on the health 
impacts. The challenges in attributing health consequences to specific extreme events and/or 
variability in meteorological factors (e.g., temperature, precipitation, and humidity) limit 
economic valuation.
To assess the direct health costs associated with extreme events, studies used a combination 
of cost-of-illness measures (financial costs of utilizing medical care and pharmaceuticals) 
and willingness-to-pay-based estimates (e.g., value of statistical life) (147). Studies using 
reported medical diagnoses to estimate the changes in morbidity and/or mortality associated 
with a sample of climate-sensitive extreme events reported substantial health care costs 
(110). A statistical approach to determine the attributable fraction of morbidity and mortality 
associated with a specific environmental exposure, mostly extreme temperature (116), can 
be used in conjunction with climate and demographic projections to estimate future health 
care costs (108). Estimates of the economic burden in these studies are useful in informing 
local-level decision-making to prevent adverse outcomes (176).
Extreme temperatures impact health outcomes like labor productivity that have welfare 
implications for families, labor wages, and economies (102). Computable general 
equilibrium models can assess the economy-wide impacts of future climate scenarios based 
on a broader suite of human welfare indicators, such as nutrition (69). There is growing 
evidence of the economic impact of hurricanes on hospital evacuations and health care 
facilities (163).
In spite of the uncertainty and assumptions around capturing the health benefits and costs 
of climate impacts and solutions embedded across different sectors of the economy, these 
analyses provide critical inputs to policy decisions (66). The economic perspective is useful 
in choosing among alternatives given resource constraints. Coupled with spatially resolved 
information on the risk of climate hazards and vulnerable populations, this prioritization 
of health interventions could aid public health practitioners in implementing targeted 
interventions (120). Complementary to the health cobenefits of adaptation and mitigation 
strategies, health interventions related to water and sanitation could have larger societal 
benefits (121).
Ebi et al.
Page 15
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
While the success of efforts to reduce GHGs and avoid increases in extreme weather 
events are uncertain, the projected economic benefits of avoided mortality are significant 
(169). From an equity perspective, it is important to note that the economic consequences 
for specific hurricane-affected communities could be substantial even though the 
macroeconomic consequences may appear small in these large-scale assessments of climate 
impacts (31).
5. CONCLUSIONS
The coming decades will be characterized by increases in the frequency and intensity of 
many types of extreme weather and climate events, with the potential for significant impacts 
on populations and health care systems worldwide. Rigorous research conducted before, 
during, and after disasters can improve assessments of population health and health system 
vulnerabilities and capacities and help evaluate the effectiveness of integrated disaster 
risk management and adaptation strategies (126). Such strategies can be cost-effective; 
examples include city-level early warning systems (42), community intervention programs 
(88), individual-level occupational health interventions (162), and initiatives to build health 
facility resilience (72). The evidence base of additional health interventions that can cost-
effectively reduce the health risks of extreme events needs to be expanded.
A major challenge is the mismatch between research needs and the funding priorities of 
major health institutions and organizations (142). Overall funding for health adaptation is 
negligible (<1% of international climate adaptation finance). This led the 2018 Adaptation 
Gap Report to conclude “there is a significant global adaptation gap in health, as efforts 
are well below the level required to minimize negative health outcomes” (166, p. XIV). 
Research funding to understand and manage the health risks of climate change is even 
smaller (41, 62). Underlying reasons include the original framing of climate change as an 
environmental problem instead of as a whole-of-society challenge. Although the situation is 
changing, there is a tendency for health funders and health systems to continue to consider 
climate change as one of many environmental issues, such as nitrogen deposition in our 
waterways, where any additional cases of morbidity and mortality could be managed in the 
normal course of business by health care and public health institutions. Because the health 
risks of a changing climate are not new, funders do not see the need for additional research 
and intervention. Climate change is not yet consistently viewed as core to population health 
and is not widely considered a current, urgent issue. Another reason funding is so low is 
that health funders and institutions take a primarily reductionist, top-down perspective to 
health issues, focusing on proximate, individual-level risk factors (125). This medical-model 
view of population health has been highly successful in understanding and controlling many 
major causes of preventable morbidity and mortality but will be insufficient to protect health 
and well-being in the face of the significant social and environmental changes expected 
over the coming decades (41). Changing these mindsets through education and capacity 
building is vital. Investments in research, adaptation implementation, and evaluation guided 
by decision maker needs can increase resilience, helping to protect the most vulnerable 
individuals and health care infrastructure while addressing inequities in disaster risk, even as 
the climate changes.
Ebi et al.
Page 16
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived 
as affecting the objectivity of this review.
LITERATURE CITED
1. Abatzoglou JT, Williams AP. 2016. Impact of anthropogenic climate change on wildfire across 
western US forests. PNAS 113(42):11770–75 [PubMed: 27791053] 
2. Abdo M, Ward I, O’Dell K, Ford B, Pierce JR, et al. 2019. Impact of wildfire smoke on adverse 
pregnancy outcomes in Colorado, 2007–2015. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 16(19):3720
3. Albrecht G, Sartore GM, Connor L, Higginbotham N, Freeman S, et al. 2007. Solastalgia: the 
distress caused by environmental change. Australas. Psychiatry 15(Suppl. 1):S95–98 [PubMed: 
18027145] 
4. Analitis A, Michelozzi P, D’Ippoliti D, De’Donato F, Menne B, et al. 2014. Effects of heat waves on 
mortality: effect modification and confounding by air pollutants. Epidemiology 25:15–22 [PubMed: 
24162013] 
5. Anderson WA. 2009. Disaster Risk Management in an Age of Climate Change: A Summary of the 
April 3, 2008 Workshop of the Disasters Roundtable Washington, DC: Natl. Acad. Press
6. Ashley CD, Luecke CL, Schwartz SS, Islam MZ, Bernard TE. 2008. Heat strain at the critical 
WBGT and the effects of gender, clothing and metabolic rate. Int. J. Ind. Ergon 38(7–8):640–44
7. Baldwin JW, Dessy JB, Vecchi GA, Oppenheimer M. 2019. Temporally compound heat wave events 
and global warming: an emerging hazard. Earth’s Future 7(4):411–27
8. Banwell N, Rutherford S, Mackey B, Chu C. 2018. Towards improved linkage of disaster risk 
reduction and climate change adaptation in health: a review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 
15(4):793
9. Berisha V, Hondula D, Roach M, White JR, McKinney B, et al. 2017. Assessing adaptation 
strategies for extreme heat: a public health evaluation of cooling centers in Maricopa County, 
Arizona. Weather Clim. Soc 9(1):71–80
10. Berman JD, Ebisu K, Peng RD, Dominici F, Bell ML. 2017. Drought and the risk of hospital 
admissions and mortality in older adults in western USA from 2000 to 2013: a retrospective study. 
Lancet Planet. Health 1(1):e17–25 [PubMed: 29057392] 
11. Biardeau LT, Davis LW, Gertler P, Wolfram C. 2020. Heat exposure and global air conditioning. 
Nat. Sustain 3(1):25–28
12. Bobb JF, Peng RD, Bell ML, Dominici F. 2014. Heat-related mortality and adaptation to heat in the 
United States. Environ. Health Perspect 122(8):811–16 [PubMed: 24780880] 
13. Bonaiuto M, Alves S, De Dominicis S, Petruccelli I. 2016. Place attachment and natural hazard 
risk: research review and agenda. J. Environ. Psychol 48:33–53
14. Bonanno GA. 2004. Loss, trauma, and human resilience: Have we underestimated the human 
capacity to thrive after extremely aversive events? Am. Psychol 59:20–28 [PubMed: 14736317] 
15. Borchers-Arriagada N, Horsley JA, Palmer AJ, Morgan GG, Tham R, Johnston FH. 2019. 
Association between fire smoke fine particulate matter and asthma-related outcomes: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Environ. Res 179:108777 [PubMed: 31593836] 
16. Brown MRG, Agyapong V, Greenshaw AJ, Cribben I, Brett-Maclean P, et al. 2019. After the 
Fort McMurray wildfire there are significant increases in mental health symptoms in grade 7–12 
students compared to controls. BMC Psychiatry 19(1):18 [PubMed: 30630501] 
17. Burke M, González F, Baylis P, Heft-Neal S, Baysan C, et al. 2018. Higher temperatures increase 
suicide rates in the United States and Mexico. Nat. Clim. Change 8(8):723–29
18. Casa DJ, DeMartini JK, Bergeron MF, Csillan D, Eichner ER, et al. 2015. National Athletic 
Trainers’ Association position statement: exertional heat illnesses. J. Athl. Train 50(9):986–1000 
[PubMed: 26381473] 
19. Casanueva A, Burgstall A, Kotlarski S, Messeri A, Morabito M, et al. 2019. Overview of existing 
heat-health warning systems in Europe. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 16(15):2657
Ebi et al.
Page 17
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
20. Cascio WE. 2018. Wildland fire smoke and human health. Sci. Total Environ 624:586–95 
[PubMed: 29272827] 
21. Chambers KA, Husain I, Chathampally Y, Vierling A, Cardenas-Turanzas M, et al. 2020. Impact of 
Hurricane Harvey on healthcare utilization and emergency department operations. West. J. Emerg. 
Med 21(3):586–94 [PubMed: 32421505] 
22. Chan EYY, Lam HCY, So SHW, Goggins WB III, Ho JY, et al. 2018. Association between ambient 
temperatures and mental disorder hospitalizations in a subtropical city: a time-series study of Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 15(4):754
23. Cheshire WP, Fealey RD. 2008. Drug-induced hyperhidrosis and hypohidrosis. Drug Saf 
31(2):109–26 [PubMed: 18217788] 
24. Clayton S, Manning C, Krygsman K, Speiser M. 2017. Mental health and our changing climate: 
impacts, implications, and guidance Rep., Am. Psychol. Assoc., ecoAmerica, Washington, DC. 
https://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2017/03/mental-health-climate.pdf
25. Coopersmith EJ, Bell JE, Benedict K, Shriber J, McCotter O, Cosh MH. 2017. Relating 
coccidioidomycosis (valley fever) incidence to soil moisture conditions. GeoHealth 1(1):51–63 
[PubMed: 29124249] 
26. Cramer MN, Huang M, Moralez G, Crandall CG. 2020. Keeping older individuals cool in hot and 
moderately humid conditions: wetted clothing with and without an electric fan. J. Appl. Physiol 
128(3):604–11 [PubMed: 32027545] 
27. CRED (Cent. Res. Epidemiol. Disasters). 2015. The human cost of natural disasters 2015: a global 
perspective Rep., CRED, Brussels, Belg. https://www.emdat.be/human_cost_natdis
28. CRED (Cent. Res. Epidemiol. Disasters), USAID (US Agency Int. Dev.). 2020. Disaster year 
in review 2019. Cred Crunch Newsl 58, Cent. Res. Epidemiol. Disasters, Brussels. https://cred.be/
sites/default/files/CC58.pdf
29. Crooks JL, Cascio WE, Percy MS, Reyes J, Neas LM, Hilborn ED. 2016. The association between 
dust storms and daily non-accidental mortality in the United States, 1993–2005. Environ. Health 
Perspect 124(11):1735–43 [PubMed: 27128449] 
30. Cunsolo A, Ellis NR. 2018. Ecological grief as a mental health response to climate change-related 
loss. Nat. Clim. Change 8(4):275–81
31. Dellink R, Lanzi E, Chateau J. 2019. The sectoral and regional economic consequences of climate 
change to 2060. Environ. Resour. Econ 72(2):309–63
32. Delpla I, Jung AV, Baures E, Clement M, Thomas O. 2009. Impacts of climate change on surface 
water quality in relation to drinking water production. Environ. Int 35(8):1225–33 [PubMed: 
19640587] 
33. Dennekamp M, Straney LD, Erbas B, Abramson MJ, Keywood M, et al. 2015. Forest fire smoke 
exposures and out-of-hospital cardiac arrests in Melbourne, Australia: a case-crossover study. 
Environ. Health Perspect 123(10):959–64 [PubMed: 25794411] 
34. Dixon PG, Sinyor M, Schaffer A, Levitt A, Haney CR, et al. 2014. Association of weekly suicide 
rates with temperature anomalies in two different climate types. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 
11(11):11627–44 [PubMed: 25402561] 
35. Dodd W, Howard C, Rose C, Scott C, Scott P, et al. 2018. The summer of smoke: ecosocial 
and health impacts of a record wildfire season in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Lancet Glob. 
Health 6(Suppl. 2):S30
36. Doubleday A, Errett NA, Ebi KL, Hess JJ. 2020. Indicators to guide and monitor climate change 
adaptation in the US Pacific Northwest. Am. J. Public Health 110(2):180–88 [PubMed: 31855485] 
37. Doubleday A, Schulte J, Sheppard L, Kadlec M, Dhammapala R, et al. 2020. Mortality associated 
with wildfire smoke exposure in Washington state, 2006–2017: a case-crossover study. Environ. 
Health 19:4 [PubMed: 31931820] 
38. Dunne JP, Stouffer RJ, John JG. 2013. Reductions in labour capacity from heat stress under climate 
warming. Nat. Clim. Change 3(6):563–66
39. Ebi K, Berry P, Hayes K, Boyer C, Sellers S, et al. 2018. Stress testing the capacity of health 
systems to manage climate change-related shocks and stresses. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 
15(11):2370
Ebi et al.
Page 18
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
40. Ebi KL, Berry P, Bowen KJ, Campbell-Lendrum D, Cissé G, et al. 
2019. Health system adaptation to climate variability and change Backgr. Pap., 
Glob. Comm. Adapt., Rotterdam, Neth./Washington, DC. https://cdn.gca.org/assets/2019-12/
HealthSystemAdaptationToClimateVariabilityandChange.pdf
41. Ebi KL, Semenza JC, Rocklöv J. 2016. Current medical research funding and frameworks are 
insufficient to address the health risks of global environmental change. Environ. Health 15:108 
[PubMed: 27835959] 
42. Ebi KL, Teisberg T, Kalkstein L, Robinson F, Weiher R. 2004. Heat watch/warning systems save 
lives: estimated costs and benefits for Philadelphia 1995–98. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc 85(8):1067–
73
43. Edwards TD, Young RA, Lowe AF. 2007. Caring for a surge of Hurricane Katrina evacuees in 
primary care clinics. Ann. Fam. Med 5(2):170–74 [PubMed: 17389543] 
44. Eisenman DP, Wilhalme H, Tseng C-H, Chester M, English P, et al. 2016. Heat death associations 
with the built environment, social vulnerability and their interactions with rising temperature. 
Health Place 41:89–99 [PubMed: 27583525] 
45. Elliott CT, Henderson SB, Wan V. 2013. Time series analysis of fine particulate matter and asthma 
reliever dispensations in populations affected by forest fires. Environ. Health 12:11 [PubMed: 
23356966] 
46. Emanuel K, Sundararajan R, Williams J. 2008. Hurricanes and global warming: results from 
downscaling IPCC AR4 simulations. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc 89(3):347–68
47. Falkenmark M, Rockström J. 2008. Building resilience to drought in desertification-prone savannas 
in Sub-Saharan Africa: the water perspective. Nat. Resour. Forum 32(2):93–102
48. Faustini A, Alessandrini ER, Pey J, Perez N, Samoli E, et al. 2015. Short-term effects of particulate 
matter on mortality during forest fires in Southern Europe: results of the MED-PARTICLES 
project. Occup. Environ. Med 72(5):323–29 [PubMed: 25691696] 
49. Flanagan PX, Mahmood R, Umphlett NA, Haacker E, Ray C, et al. 2020. A hydrometeorological 
assessment of the historic 2019 flood of Nebraska, Iowa, and South Dakota. Bull. Am. Meteorol. 
Soc 101(6):E817–29
50. Flores AB, Collins TW, Grineski SE, Chakraborty J. 2020. Disparities in health effects and 
access to health care among Houston area residents after Hurricane Harvey. Public Health Rep 
135(4):511–23 [PubMed: 32539542] 
51. Flouris AD, Dinas PC, Ioannou LG, Nybo L, Havenith G, et al. 2018. Workers’ health and 
productivity under occupational heat strain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Planet. 
Health 2(12):e521–31 [PubMed: 30526938] 
52. Ford B, Val Martin M, Zelasky SE, Fischer EV, Anenberg SC, et al. 2018. Future fire impacts on 
smoke concentrations, visibility, and health in the contiguous United States. GeoHealth 2(8):229–
47 [PubMed: 32159016] 
53. Ford H, Wright J. 1994. Bacterial meningitis in Swaziland: an 18 month prospective study of its 
impact. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 48(3):276–80 [PubMed: 8051527] 
54. Freeman L 2017. Environmental change, migration, and conflict in Africa: a critical examination of 
the interconnections. J. Environ. Dev 26(4):351–74
55. Gan RW, Liu J, Ford B, O’Dell K, Vaidyanathan A, et al. 2020. The association between wildfire 
smoke exposure and asthma-specific medical care utilization in Oregon during the 2013 wildfire 
season. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol 30:618–28 [PubMed: 32051501] 
56. Gasparrini A, Guo Y, Hashizume M, Kinney PL, Petkova EP, et al. 2015. Temporal variation 
in heat-mortality associations: a multicountry study. Environ. Health Perspect 123(11):1200–7 
[PubMed: 25933359] 
57. Geiger T, Frieler K, Bresch DN. 2018. A global historical data set of tropical cyclone exposure 
(TCE-DAT). Earth Syst. Sci. Data 10(1):185–94
58. Gladstone R 2019. U.N. aid chief warns of looming ‘horror’ as Somalia again faces famine. 
New York Times, Jun. 5. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/05/world/africa/africa-famine-united-
nations-somalia.html
59. Gleick PH. 2014. Water, drought, climate change, and conflict in Syria. Weather Clim. Soc 
6(3):331–40
Ebi et al.
Page 19
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
60. Gosling SN, Hondula DM, Bunker A, Ibarreta D, Liu J, et al. 2017. Adaptation to climate change: 
a comparative analysis of modeling methods for heat-related mortality. Environ. Health Perspect 
125(8):087008 [PubMed: 28885979] 
61. Gosselin P, Mehiriz K, Tardif S, Lemieux M. 2018. Téléphone santé: un automate d’appel aux 
résultats prometteurs lors de vagues de chaleur ou de smog. Bull. d’information en santé environ, 
Oct. https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/documents/bise/bise_article_sata_final.pdf
62. Green D, Pitman A, Barnett A, Kaldor J, Doherty P, Stanley F. 2017. Advancing Australia’s role in 
climate change and health research. Nat. Clim. Change 7(2):103–6
63. Green H, Bailey J, Schwarz L, Vanos J, Ebi K, Benmarhnia T. 2019. Impact of heat on mortality 
and morbidity in low and middle income countries: a review of the epidemiological evidence and 
considerations for future research. Environ. Res 171:80–91 [PubMed: 30660921] 
64. Gubernot DM, Anderson GB, Hunting KL. 2015. Characterizing occupational heat-related 
mortality in the United States, 2000–2010: an analysis using the census of fatal occupational 
injuries database. Am. J. Ind. Med 58(2):203–11 [PubMed: 25603942] 
65. Haines A, McMichael AJ, Smith KR, Roberts I, Woodcock J, et al. 2009. Public health benefits 
of strategies to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions: overview and implications for policy makers. 
Lancet 374(9707):2104–14 [PubMed: 19942281] 
66. Hallegatte S, Henriet F, Corfee-Morlot J. 2011. The economics of climate change impacts and 
policy benefits at city scale: a conceptual framework. Clim. Change 104(1):51–87
67. Hallegatte S, Vogt-Schilb A, Bangalore M, Rozenberg J. 2017. Unbreakable: Building the 
Resilience of the Poor in the Face of Natural Disasters Washington, DC: World Bank Publ.
68. Hamstead Z, Coseo P, AlKhaled S, Boamah EF, Hondula DM, et al. 2020. Thermally resilient 
communities: creating a socio-technical collaborative response to extreme temperatures. Build. 
Cities 1(1):218–32
69. Hasegawa T, Fujimori S, Takahashi K, Yokohata T, Masui T. 2016. Economic implications of 
climate change impacts on human health through undernourishment. Clim. Change 136(2):189–
202
70. Hayes K, Berry P, Ebi KL. 2019. Factors influencing the mental health consequences of climate 
change in Canada. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 16(9):1583
71. Hayes K, Poland B. 2018. Addressing mental health in a changing climate: incorporating mental 
health indicators into climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments. Int. J. 
Environ. Res. Public Health 15(9):1806
72. Health Care Without Harm. 2018. Safe haven in the storm: protecting lives and margins 
with climate-smart health care Rep., Health Care Without Harm, Reston, VA. https://noharm-
uscanada.org/sites/default/files/documents-files/5146/Safe_haven.pdf
73. Hendrickson LA, Vogt RL, Goebert D, Pon E. 1997. Morbidity on Kauai before and after 
Hurricane Iniki. Prev. Med 26(5):711–16 [PubMed: 9327481] 
74. Hess JJ, Ebi KL. 2016. Iterative management of heat early warning systems in a changing climate. 
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci 1382(1):21–30 [PubMed: 27788557] 
75. Hess JJ, Lm S, Knowlton K, Saha S, Dutta P, et al. 2018. Building resilience to climate change: 
pilot evaluation of the impact of India’s first heat action plan on all-cause mortality. J. Environ. 
Public Health 2018:7973519 [PubMed: 30515228] 
76. Hirschi M, Seneviratne SI, Alexandrov V, Boberg F, Boroneant C, et al. 2011. Observational 
evidence for soil-moisture impact on hot extremes in southeastern Europe. Nat. Geosci 4(1):17–21
77. Hoegh-Guldberg O, Jacob D, Taylor M, Bindi M, Brown S, et al. 2018. Impacts of 1.5°C 
global warming on natural and human systems. In Global warming of 1.5°C: an IPCC special 
report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global 
greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the 
threat of climate change, ed. Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pörtner HO, Roberts D, Skea J, et al., 
pp. 175–311. Rep., Intergov. Panel Clim. Change, Geneva. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/
sites/2/2019/06/SR15_Full_Report_High_Res.pdf
78. Holstius DM, Reid CE, Jesdale BM, Morello-Frosch R. 2012. Birth weight following pregnancy 
during the 2003 Southern California wildfires. Environ. Health Perspect 120(9):1340–45 
[PubMed: 22645279] 
Ebi et al.
Page 20
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
79. Hosokawa Y, Vanos J. 2020. Extreme heat and health at Tokyo-2020ne: the need for scientific 
coalition across sectors. Temperature 7(2):111–13
80. Hunter MR, Gillespie BW, Chen SY-P. 2019. Urban nature experiences reduce stress in the context 
of daily life based on salivary biomarkers. Front. Psychol 10:722 [PubMed: 31019479] 
81. IFRC (Int. Fed. Red Cross Red Crescent Soc.). 2020. What is a disaster? IFRC https://
www.ifrc.org/en/what-we-do/disaster-management/about-disasters/what-is-a-disaster/
82. IPCC (Intergov. Panel Clim. Change). 2012. Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters 
to advance climate change adaptation: special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, ed. Field CB, Barros V, Stocker TF, Qin D, Dokken DJ, et al. Rep., Intergov. Panel 
Clim. Change, Cambridge, UK. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/managing-the-risks-of-extreme-events-
and-disasters-to-advance-climate-change-adaptation/
83. IPCC (Intergov. Panel Clim. Change). 2014. Climate change 2014: synthesis report. Contribution 
of Working Groups I, II and III to the fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change, ed. Pachauri RK, Meyer LA. Rep., Intergov. Panel Clim. Change, Geneva. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/05/SYR_AR5_FINAL_full_wcover.pdf
84. IPCC (Intergov. Panel Clim. Change). 2019. Summary for policymakers. In Climate change and 
land: an IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable 
land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems, ed. Shukla 
PR, Skea J, Calvo Buendia E, Masson-Delmotte V, Pörtner H-O, et al., pp. 3–36. Rep., 
Intergov. Panel Clim. Change, Geneva. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/4/2020/02/
SPM_Updated-Jan20.pdf
85. Jaffe DA, O’Neill SM, Larkin NK, Holder AL, Peterson DL, et al. 2020. Wildfire and prescribed 
burning impacts on air quality in the United States. J. Air Waste Manag. Assoc 70(6):583–615 
[PubMed: 32240055] 
86. Jalaludin B, Smith M, O’Toole B, Leeder S. 2000. Acute effects of bushfires on peak expiratory 
flow rates in children with wheeze: a time series analysis. Aust. N. Z. J. Public Health 24(2):174–
77 [PubMed: 10790937] 
87. Jiao Z, Kakoulides SV, Moscona J, Whittier J, Srivastav S, et al. 2012. Effect of Hurricane Katrina 
on incidence of acute myocardial infarction in New Orleans three years after the storm. Am. J. 
Cardiol 109(4):502–5 [PubMed: 22154089] 
88. Jing LI, Xin XU, Jun W, Yun Z, Song XP, et al. 2016. Analysis of a community-based intervention 
to reduce heat-related illness during heat waves in Licheng, China: a quasi-experimental study. 
Biomed. Environ. Sci 29(11):802–13 [PubMed: 27998386] 
89. Johnston FH, Hanigan I, Henderson S, Morgan G, Bowman D. 2011. Extreme air pollution events 
from bushfires and dust storms and their association with mortality in Sydney, Australia 1994–
2007. Environ. Res 111(6):811–16 [PubMed: 21601845] 
90. Johnston FH, Henderson SB, Chen Y, Randerson JT, Marlier M, et al. 2012. Estimated global 
mortality attributable to smoke from landscape fires. Environ. Health Perspect 120(5):695–701 
[PubMed: 22456494] 
91. Johnston FH, Webby RJ, Pilotto LS, Bailie RS, Parry DL, Halpin SJ. 2006. Vegetation fires, 
particulate air pollution and asthma: a panel study in the Australian monsoon tropics. Int. J. 
Environ. Health Res 16(6):391–404 [PubMed: 17164166] 
92. Jolly WM, Cochrane MA, Freeborn PH, Holden ZA, Brown TJ, et al. 2015. Climate-induced 
variations in global wildfire danger from 1979 to 2013. Nat. Commun 6:7537 [PubMed: 
26172867] 
93. Jones CG, Rappold AG, Vargo J, Cascio WE, Kharrazi M, et al. 2020. Out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrests and wildfire-related particulate matter during 2015–2017 California wildfires. J. Am. Heart 
Assoc 9(8):e014125 [PubMed: 32290746] 
94. Karliner J, Slotterback S, Boyd R, Ashby B, Steele K, Wang J. 2019. Health care’s climate 
footprint: how the health sector contributes to the global climate crisis and opportunities for action. 
Eur. J. Public Health 30(Suppl. 5):ckaa165.843
95. Keim ME. 2008. Building human resilience: the role of public health preparedness and response as 
an adaptation to climate change. Am. J. Prev. Med 35(5):508–16 [PubMed: 18929977] 
Ebi et al.
Page 21
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
96. Keim ME. 2011. Preventing disasters: public health vulnerability reduction as a sustainable 
adaptation to climate change. Disaster Med. Public Health Prep 5(2):140–48 [PubMed: 21402799] 
97. Keim ME. 2020. The epidemiology of extreme weather event disasters (1969–2018). Prehosp. 
Disaster Med 35(3):267–71 [PubMed: 32290884] 
98. Kenney WL, Craighead DH, Alexander LM. 2014. Heat waves, aging, and human cardiovascular 
health. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc 46(10):1891 [PubMed: 24598696] 
99. Kim Y, Kim H, Gasparrini A, Armstrong B, Honda Y, et al. 2019. Suicide and ambient 
temperature: a multi-country multi-city study. Environ. Health Perspect 127(11):117007 [PubMed: 
31769300] 
100. Kim Y, Knowles S, Manley J, Radoias V. 2017. Long-run health consequences of air pollution: 
evidence from Indonesia’s forest fires of 1997. Econ. Hum. Biol 26:186–98 [PubMed: 28460366] 
101. Kishore N, Marqués D, Mahmud A, Kiang MV, Rodriguez I, et al. 2018. Mortality in Puerto Rico 
after Hurricane Maria. N. Engl. J. Med 379(2):162–70 [PubMed: 29809109] 
102. Kjellstrom T, Kovats RS, Lloyd SJ, Holt T, Tol RSJ. 2009. The direct impact of climate change on 
regional labor productivity. Arch. Environ. Occup. Health 64(4):217–27 [PubMed: 20007118] 
103. Knutson TR, McBride JL, Chan J, Emanuel K, Holland G, et al. 2010. Tropical cyclones and 
climate change. Nat. Geosci 3(3):157–63
104. Kondo MC, De Roos AJ, White LS, Heilman WE, Mockrin MH, et al. 2019. Meta-analysis of 
heterogeneity in the effects of wildfire smoke exposure on respiratory health in North America. 
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 16(6):960
105. Kornhuber K, Coumou D, Vogel E, Lesk C, Donges JF, et al. 2020. Amplified Rossby waves 
enhance risk of concurrent heatwaves in major breadbasket regions. Nat. Clim. Change 10(1):48–
53
106. Kuehn L, McCormick S. 2017. Heat exposure and maternal health in the face of climate change. 
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 14(8):853
107. Lane K, Charles-Guzman K, Wheeler K, Abid Z, Graber N, Matte T. 2013. Health effects of 
coastal storms and flooding in urban areas: a review and vulnerability assessment. J. Environ. 
Public Health 2013:913064 [PubMed: 23818911] 
108. Lay CR, Mills D, Belova A, Sarofim MC, Kinney PL, et al. 2018. Emergency department visits 
and ambient temperature: evaluating the connection and projecting future outcomes. GeoHealth 
2(6):182–94 [PubMed: 32159014] 
109. Lieberman-Cribbin W, Gillezeau C, Schwartz RM, Taioli E. 2020. Unequal social vulnerability to 
Hurricane Sandy flood exposure. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol 10.1038/s41370-020-0230-6
110. Limaye VS, Max W, Constible J, Knowlton K. 2019. Estimating the health-related costs of 10 
climate-sensitive US events during 2012. GeoHealth 3(9):245–65 [PubMed: 32159045] 
111. Lin M, Horowitz LW, Payton R, Fiore AM, Tonnesen G. 2017. US surface ozone trends and 
extremes from 1980 to 2014: quantifying the roles of rising Asian emissions, domestic controls, 
wildfires, and climate. Atmos. Chem. Phys 17(4):2943–70
112. Lipner EM, O’Dell K, Brey SJ, Ford B, Pierce JR, et al. 2019. The associations between clinical 
respiratory outcomes and ambient wildfire smoke exposure among pediatric asthma patients at 
National Jewish Health, 2012–2015. GeoHealth 3(6):146–59 [PubMed: 32159037] 
113. Little CM, Horton RM, Kopp RE, Oppenheimer M, Vecchi GA, Villarini G. 2015. Joint 
projections of US East Coast sea level and storm surge. Nat. Clim. Change 5(12):1114–20
114. Liu JC, Mickley LJ, Sulprizio MP, Dominici F, Yue X, et al. 2016. Particulate air pollution from 
wildfires in the Western US under climate change. Clim. Change 138(3–4):655–66 [PubMed: 
28642628] 
115. Liu JC, Mickley LJ, Sulprizio MP, Yue X, Peng RD, et al. 2016. Future respiratory hospital 
admissions from wildfire smoke under climate change in the Western US. Environ. Res. Lett 
11(12):124018
116. Liu Y, Saha S, Hoppe BO, Convertino M. 2019. Degrees and dollars—health costs associated 
with sub-optimal ambient temperature exposure. Sci. Total Environ 678:702–11 [PubMed: 
31078861] 
Ebi et al.
Page 22
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
117. Lynch KM, Lyles RH, Waller LA, Abadi AM, Bell JE, Gribble MO. 2020. Drought severity and 
all-cause mortality rates among adults in the United States: 1968–2014. Environ. Health 19:52 
[PubMed: 32423443] 
118. Maller CJ, Strengers Y. 2011. Housing, heat stress and health in a changing climate: promoting 
the adaptive capacity of vulnerable households, a suggested way forward. Health Promot. Int 
26(4):492–98 [PubMed: 21307023] 
119. Mandal J, Fu Y, Overvig AC, Jia M, Sun K, et al. 2018. Hierarchically porous polymer coatings 
for highly efficient passive daytime radiative cooling. Science 362(6412):315–19 [PubMed: 
30262632] 
120. Marinucci GD, Luber G, Uejio CK, Saha S, Hess JJ. 2014. Building resilience against climate 
effects—a novel framework to facilitate climate readiness in public health agencies. Int. J. 
Environ. Res. Public Health 11(6):6433–58 [PubMed: 24991665] 
121. Markandya A, Chiabai A. 2009. Valuing climate change impacts on human health: empirical 
evidence from the literature. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 6(2):759–86 [PubMed: 
19440414] 
122. Marsh B, Milofsky C, Kissam E, Arcury TA. 2015. Understanding the role of social factors in 
farmworker housing and health. New Solut. J. Environ. Occup. Health Policy 25(3):313–33
123. Matz CJ, Egyed M, Xi G, Racine J, Pavlovic R, et al. 2020. Health impact analysis of PM2.5 from 
wildfire smoke in Canada (2013–2015, 2017–2018). Sci. Total Environ 725:138506 [PubMed: 
32302851] 
124. MCDPH (Maricopa Cty. Dept. Public Health). 2020. Heat-associated deaths in Maricopa 
County, AZ: final report for 2019. Rep, Maricopa Cty. Dept. Public Health, Phoenix, AZ. https://
www.maricopa.gov/ArchiveCenter/ViewFile/Item/4959
125. McMichael AJ. 1993. Planetary Overload: Global Environmental Change and the Health of the 
Human Species Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press
126. Miller A, Yeskey K, Garantziotis S, Arnesen S, Bennett A, et al. 2016. Integrating health research 
into disaster response: the new NIH disaster research response program. Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Public Health 13(7):676
127. Moritz MA, Parisien M-A, Batllori E, Krawchuk MA, Van Dorn J, et al. 2012. Climate change 
and disruptions to global fire activity. Ecosphere 3(6):49
128. Morris NB, English T, Hospers L, Capon A, Jay O. 2019. The effects of electric fan use 
under differing resting heat index conditions: a clinical trial. Ann. Intern. Med 171(9):675–77 
[PubMed: 31382270] 
129. Mosley LM. 2015. Drought impacts on the water quality of freshwater systems; review and 
integration. Earth-Sci. Rev 140:203–14
130. Re Munich. 2019. NatCatSERVICE: the Natural Catastrophe Loss Database 
Munich, Ger. Retrieved Novemb. 28. https://www.munichre.com/en/risks/extreme-
weather.html#Explore%20our%20solutions
131. Munro A, Kovats RS, Rubin GJ, Waite TD, Bone A, et al. 2017. Effect of evacuation and 
displacement on the association between flooding and mental health outcomes: a cross-sectional 
analysis of UK survey data. Lancet Planet. Health 1(4):e134–41 [PubMed: 28944321] 
132. NOAA (Natl. Ocean. Atmos. Adm.) NCEI (Natl. Cent. Environ. Inf.). 2020. Billion-dollar 
weather and climate disasters: overview. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
National Centers for Environmental Information https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/
133. Noble IR, Huq S, Anokhin YA, Carmin J, Goudou D, et al. 2014. Adaptation needs and options. 
In Climate change 2014: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Part A: global and sectoral 
aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, ed. Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ, Mach KI, Mastrandrea MD, pp. 
833–68. Rep., Intergov. Panel Clim. Change, Cambridge, UK/New York. https://www.ipcc.ch/
site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap14_FINAL.pdf
134. Odhiambo Sewe M, Bunker A, Ingole V, Egondi T, Oudin Åström D, et al. 2018. Estimated 
effect of temperature on years of life lost: a retrospective time-series study of low-, middle-, and 
high-income regions. Environ. Health Perspect 126(1):17004
Ebi et al.
Page 23
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
135. Orengo-Aguayo R, Stewart RW, de Arellano MA, Suárez-Kindy JL, Young J. 2019. Disaster 
exposure and mental health among Puerto Rican youths after Hurricane Maria. JAMA Netw. 
Open 2(4):e192619 [PubMed: 31026024] 
136. Orr M, Inoue Y. 2019. Sport versus climate: introducing the climate vulnerability of sport 
organizations framework. Sport Manag. Rev 22(4):452–63
137. Park J 2020. Hot temperature and high stakes. J. Hum. Resour 10.3368/jhr.57.2.0618-9535R3
138. Park RJ, Goodman J, Hurwitz M, Smith J. 2020. Heat and learning. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 
12(2):306–39
139. Paterson DL, Wright H, Harris PNA. 2018. Health risks of flood disasters. Clin. Infect. Dis 
67(9):1450–54 [PubMed: 30986298] 
140. Pescaroli G, Alexander D. 2018. Understanding compound, interconnected, interacting, and 
cascading risks: a holistic framework. Risk Anal 38(11):2245–57 [PubMed: 29906307] 
141. Picou JS, Hudson K. 2010. Hurricane Katrina and mental health: a research note on Mississippi 
Gulf Coast residents. Sociol. Inq 80(3):513–24 [PubMed: 20827859] 
142. Rappaport EN. 2014. Fatalities in the United States from Atlantic tropical cyclones: new data and 
interpretation. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc 95(3):341–46
143. Rappaport EN, Blanchard BW. 2016. Fatalities in the United States indirectly associated with 
Atlantic tropical cyclones. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc 97(7):1139–48
144. Raymond C, Horton RM, Zscheischler J, Martius O, AghaKouchak A, et al. 2020. Understanding 
and managing connected extreme events. Nat. Clim. Change 10(7):611–21
145. Reid CE, Brauer M, Johnston FH, Jerrett M, Balmes JR, Elliott CT. 2016. Critical review of 
health impacts of wildfire smoke exposure. Environ. Health Perspect 124(9):1334–43 [PubMed: 
27082891] 
146. Reid CE, Jerrett M, Tager IB, Petersen ML, Mann JK, Balmes JR. 2016. Differential respiratory 
health effects from the 2008 northern California wildfires: a spatiotemporal approach. Environ. 
Res 150:227–35 [PubMed: 27318255] 
147. Remoundou K, Koundouri P. 2009. Environmental effects on public health: an economic 
perspective. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 6(8):2160–78 [PubMed: 19742153] 
148. Ritchie H, Roser M. 2014. Natural disasters. Our World in Data https://ourworldindata.org/
natural-disasters
149. Robin C, Beck C, Armstrong B, Waite TD, Rubin GJ, Oliver I. 2020. Impact of flooding on 
health-related quality of life in England: results from the National Study of Flooding and Health. 
Eur. J. Public Health 30(50):942–48 [PubMed: 32227174] 
150. Salamanca F, Georgescu M, Mahalov A, Moustaoui M, Wang M. 2014. Anthropogenic heating of 
the urban environment due to air conditioning. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos 119(10):5949–65
151. Saulnier DD, Brolin Ribacke K, Von Schreeb J. 2017. No calm after the storm: a systematic 
review of human health following flood and storm disasters. Prehosp. Disaster Med 32(5):568–79 
[PubMed: 28606191] 
152. Schulte PA, Bhattacharya A, Butler CR, Chun HK, Jacklitsch B, et al. 2016. Advancing the 
framework for considering the effects of climate change on worker safety and health. J. Occup. 
Environ. Hyg 13(11):847–65 [PubMed: 27115294] 
153. Seed RB, Nicholson PG, Dalrymple RA, Battjes J, Bea RG, et al. 2005. Preliminary report on the 
performance of the New Orleans levee systems in Hurricane Katrina on August 29, 2005. Rep. 
UCB/CITRIS 05/01, Cent. Inf. Technol. Res. Interest Soc, Univ. Calif. Berkeley, Berkeley, CA. 
https://www.berkeley.edu/news/media/releases/2005/11/leveereport_prelim.pdf
154. Seneviratne S, Nicholls N, Easterling D, Goodess CM, Kanae S, et al. 2012. Changes in 
climate extremes and their impacts on the natural physical environment. In Managing the 
risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change adaptation: special report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed Field CB, Barros V, Stocker TF, Qin D, 
Dokken DJ, et al., pp. 109–230. Rep, Intergov. Panel Clim. Change, Cambridge, UK. https://
www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/SREX-Chap3_FINAL-1.pdf
155. Shaw R 2016. Community-based disaster risk reduction. Oxford Research Encyclopedia 
of Natural Hazard Science https://oxfordre.com/naturalhazardscience/view/10.1093/acrefore/
9780199389407.001.0001/acrefore-9780199389407-e-47
Ebi et al.
Page 24
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
156. Shumake-Guillemot J, Amir S, Anwar N, Arrighi J, Böse-O’Reilly S, et al. 2020. Protecting 
health from hot weather during the COVID-19 pandemic Tech. Brief, Glob. Heat Health Inf. 
Netw., Geneva
157. Smith AB. 2020. U.S. billion-dollar weather and climate disasters, 1980 – present (NCEI 
accession 0208268) Data Set, Natl. Ocean. Atmos. Adm. Natl. Cent. Environ. Inf., Silver Spring, 
MD, retrieved Novembr. 28. https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/metadata/landing-page/bin/iso?
id=gov.noaa.nodc:0209268
158. Smith KR, Woodward A, Lemke B, Otto M, Chang CJ, et al. 2016. The last Summer Olympics? 
Climate change, health, and work outdoors. Lancet 388(10045):642–44 [PubMed: 27533426] 
159. Stanke C, Kerac M, Prudhomme C, Medlock J, Murray V. 2013. Health effects of 
drought: a systematic review of the evidence. PLOS Curr. Disasters, June 5. 10.1371/
currents.dis.7a2cee9e980f91ad7697b570bcc4b004
160. Stowell JD, Geng G, Saikawa E, Chang HH, Fu J, et al. 2019. Associations of wildfire smoke 
PM2.5 exposure with cardiorespiratory events in Colorado 2011–2014. Environ. Int 133:105151 
[PubMed: 31520956] 
161. Sun S, Weinberger KR, Yan M, Anderson GB, Wellenius GA. 2020. Tropical cyclones and risk of 
preterm birth: a retrospective analysis of 20 million births across 378 US counties. Environ. Int 
140:105825 [PubMed: 32485474] 
162. Takakura J, Fujimori S, Takahashi K, Hijioka Y, Hasegawa T, et al. 2017. Cost of preventing 
workplace heat-related illness through worker breaks and the benefit of climate-change 
mitigation. Environ. Res. Lett 12(6):64010
163. Tex. Hosp. Assoc. 2017. Texas Hospital Association Hurricane Harvey analysis: Texas hospitals’ 
preparation strategies and priorities for future disaster response Spec. Rep., Tex. Hosp. Assoc., 
Austin
164. Tigchelaar M, Battisti DS, Spector JT. 2020. Work adaptations insufficient to address growing 
heat risk for US agricultural workers. Environ. Res. Lett 15(9):094035 [PubMed: 33133229] 
165. Trenberth KE, Dai A, Van Der Schrier G, Jones PD, Barichivich J, et al. 2014. Global warming 
and changes in drought. Nat. Clim. Change 4(1):17–22
166. UN Environ. Progr. (UNEP). 2018. The adaptation gap report 2018 Rep., United Nations 
Environ. Progr., Nairobi, Kenya. https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/27114/
AGR_2018.pdf
167. UN Int. Strategy Disaster Reduct. 2008. Climate change and disaster risk reduction Brief. Note, 
United Nations Int. Strategy Disaster Reduct., Geneva
168. UN Off. Disaster Risk Reduct. 2020. Disaster risk reduction & disaster risk management. 
PreventionWeb https://www.preventionweb.net/risk/drr-drm
169. US EPA (US Environ. Prot. Agency). 2017. Multi-model framework for quantitative 
sectoral impacts analysis: a technical report for the fourth national climate assessment 
Rep., US EPA, Washington, DC. https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_record_Report.cfm?
Lab=OAP&dirEntryId=335095
170. USGCRP (US Glob. Change Res. Progr.). 2018. Fourth national climate assessment, Vol. 
2: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States Rep, US Glob. Change Res. Progr., 
Washington, DC. https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/downloads/NCA4_2018_FullReport.pdf
171. van Oldenborgh GJ, van der Wiel K, Philip S, Kew S, Sebastian A, et al. 2019. Rapid attribution 
of the extreme rainfall in Texas from Tropical Storm Imelda Rapid Anal., World Weather 
Attrib., R. Neth. Meteorol. Inst., De Bilt, Neth. https://www.worldweatherattribution.org/rapid-
attribution-of-the-extreme-rainfall-in-texas-from-tropical-storm-imelda/
172. Vanos JK, Herdt AJ, Lochbaum MR. 2017. Effects of physical activity and shade on the heat 
balance and thermal perceptions of children in a playground microclimate. Build. Environ 
126:119–31
173. Vins H, Bell J, Saha S, Hess J. 2015. The mental health outcomes of drought: a systematic review 
and causal process diagram. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 12(10):13251–75 [PubMed: 
26506367] 
Ebi et al.
Page 25
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
174. Waite TD, Chaintarli K, Beck CR, Bone A, Amlôt R, et al. 2017. The English national cohort 
study of flooding and health: cross-sectional analysis of mental health outcomes at year one. 
BMC Public Health 17:129 [PubMed: 28129752] 
175. Wang X, Lavigne E, Ouellette-Kuntz H, Chen BE. 2014. Acute impacts of extreme temperature 
exposure on emergency room admissions related to mental and behavior disorders in Toronto, 
Canada. J. Affect. Disord 155(1):154–61 [PubMed: 24332428] 
176. Watkiss P, Hunt A. 2012. Projection of economic impacts of climate change in sectors of Europe 
based on bottom up analysis: human health. Clim. Change 112(1):101–26
177. Weaver VM, Fadrowski JJ, Jaar BG. 2015. Global dimensions of chronic kidney disease of 
unknown etiology (CKDu): a modern era environmental and/or occupational nephropathy? BMC 
Nephrol 16(1):145 [PubMed: 26282933] 
178. Weinberger KR, Harris D, Spangler KR, Zanobetti A, Wellenius GA. 2020. Estimating the 
number of excess deaths attributable to heat in 297 United States counties. Environ. Epidemiol 
4(3):e096 [PubMed: 32613153] 
179. Westerling AL, Hidalgo HG, Cayan DR, Swetnam TW. 2006. Warming and earlier spring 
increase western US forest wildfire activity. Science 313(5789):940–43 [PubMed: 16825536] 
180. Wettstein ZS, Hoshiko S, Fahimi J, Harrison RJ, Cascio WE, Rappold AG. 2018. Cardiovascular 
and cerebrovascular emergency department visits associated with wildfire smoke exposure in 
California in 2015. J. Am. Heart Assoc 7(8):e007492 [PubMed: 29643111] 
181. WHO (World Health Organ.). 2014. WHO guidance to protect health from climate change 
through health adaptation planning Rep., World Health Organ., Geneva. https://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/handle/10665/137383/9789241508001_eng.pdf
182. WHO (World Health Organ.). 2015. Operational framework for building climate resilient 
health systems Rep., World Health Organ., Geneva. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/
10665/189951/9789241565073_eng.pdf
183. Zeppetello LV, Parsons L, Spector J, Naylor R, Battisti D, et al. 2020. Large scale tropical 
deforestation drives extreme warming. Environ. Res. Lett 15(8):084012
184. Zscheischler J, Martius O, Westra S, Bevacqua E, Raymond C, et al. 2020. A typology of 
compound weather and climate events. Nat. Rev. Earth Environ 1:333–47
185. Zscheischler J, Seneviratne SI. 2017. Dependence of drivers affects risks associated with 
compound events. Sci. Adv 3(6):e1700263 [PubMed: 28782010] 
Ebi et al.
Page 26
Annu Rev Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 April 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
