CHAPTER 3
R E G I O N A L  P E R S P E C T I V E S  R E P O R T
Ontario
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 2 
Coordinating lead authors 
Allan G. Douglas, Climate Risk Institute
David Pearson, Laurentian University 
Contributing authors 
Neil Comer, Dillon Consulting Ltd. (previously with Risk Sciences 
International)
Christopher Lemieux, Wilfrid Laurier University 
Cindy Chu, Fisheries and Oceans Canada (previously with Ontario 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry)
Dak de Kerckhove, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry
Kerry Ann Charles, Cambium Indigenous Professional Services
Steve Hounsell, Ontario Biodiversity Council
Jacqueline Richard, Climate Risk Institute
Annette Morand, Natural Resources Canada (previously with Climate 
Risk Institute)
Allison Myles, Climate Risk Institute
Acknowledgements 
Throughout the development of this chapter, lead authors sought assistance and advice from many individuals who provided valuable 
information that informed sections of the chapter. Special thanks to:
Arthur R. Rodgers, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources 
and Forestry 
Jenny Gleeson, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry
Paul Gray, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry 
Tom Beechey, Independent
Scott Parker, Parks Canada
Dan Kraus, Wildlife Conservation Society Canada
Karen Hartley, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry
Louis Chora, Ontario Ministry of the Environment, Conservation 
and Parks
Paul Sampson, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry
Katie Hayes, Health Canada
Rebekka Schnitter, Health Canada
Nick Ogden, Public Health Agency of Canada
Yann Pelcat, Public Health Agency of Canada
Suzanne Seiling, Climate Risk Institute
Kirsten MacMillan, Climate Risk Institute
Anna Zaytseva, Climate Risk Institute
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 3 
Recommended citation 
Douglas, A.G. and Pearson, D. (2022). Ontario; Chapter 4 in Canada in a 
Changing Climate: Regional Perspectives Report, (ed.) F.J. Warren, 
N. Lulham, D.L. Dupuis and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario. 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 4 
Table of Contents 
Key Messages 
6
3.1 Introduction 
8
3.1.1 Geography
9
3.1.2 Social and demographic profile
10
3.1.3 Economic profile
11
3.1.4 Chapter approach
11
3.2 Ontario’s infrastructure is vulnerable to climate change 
12
3.2.1 Introduction
12
3.2.2 Flooding
12
3.2.3 Transportation in Northern Ontario
14
3.2.4 Climate change risk assessments 
16
Case Story 3.1: The Metrolinx adaptation strategy
18
3.2.5 Asset management 
18
3.2.6 Interdependencies 
20
3.3 Nature-based approaches help address climate change impacts on biodiversity and 
ecosystem services 
22
3.3.1 Introduction
22
3.3.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities
23
3.3.3 Resiliency and adaptation
25
Case Story 3.2: The Norfolk Sand Plain Natural Area
30
3.4 Adaptive management is key for addressing impacts in the Great Lakes Basin 
32
3.4.1 Introduction
33
3.4.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities
33
3.4.3 Resiliency and adaptation
38
Case Story 3.3: Local adaptation in the Great Lakes Basin 
41
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 5 
3.5 Adaptation improves forest health, carbon storage and biodiversity 
43
3.5.1 Introduction 
43
3.5.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities
45
3.5.3 Resiliency and adaptation
48
3.6 Climate change brings threats and opportunities to Ontario agriculture and food systems 
52
3.6.1 Introduction 
52
3.6.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities 
53
3.6.3 Resiliency and adaptation
56
Case Story 3.4: Understanding and addressing agroclimatic risks and opportunities
56
3.7 Existing human health inequities will be worsened by climate change 
59
3.7.1 Introduction
59
3.7.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities
62
3.7.3 Resiliency and adaptation
67
Case Story 3.5: Local actions to address extreme heat
68
3.8 Progress on adaptation remains limited in Ontario 
71
3.8.1 Introduction 
71
Case Story 3.6: Climate change adaptation by the Georgina Island First Nation
72
3.8.2 Adaptation planning
74
3.8.3 Implementation, monitoring and evaluation
74
3.9 Moving forward 
76
3.9.1 Governance
76
3.9.2 Access, format and interpretation of climate change data 
76
3.9.3 Uncertainty of climate change impacts on lake water balance 
77
3.9.4 Regional risk transfer to the Great Lakes Basin stemming from climate change
77
3.9.5 Climate change impacts on Indigenous culture and mental health
77
3.9.6 Innovative financial mechanisms 
78
3.10 Conclusion 
78
3.11 References 
80
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 6 
Key Messages 
Ontario’s infrastructure is vulnerable to climate change (see section 3.2)
As a result of interdependencies between multiple infrastructure types, climate change and especially 
extreme climate events can have cascading economic and social impacts. Flooding in the highly populated 
southern subregion, and impacts on winter roads in the northern subregion of the province demonstrate the 
range of risks. Targeted approaches to better understand the threats, and reduce infrastructure vulnerability 
are being used across the province.
Nature-based approaches help address climate change impacts on 
biodiversity and ecosystem services (see section 3.3)
Climate warming has driven and will continue to drive changes to species and create new opportunities for 
invasive species. Impacts on biodiversity are magnified through the cumulative effects of climate change, 
habitat loss, urbanization, pollution and other threats. Actions to mainstream nature-based solutions, 
including the establishment of protected areas, such as Indigenous Protected and Conserved Areas, can help 
maintain ecosystem services and reduce climate change risks, as well as mitigate climate change.
Adaptive management is key for addressing impacts in the Great 
Lakes Basin (see section 3.4)
The combined effects of climate change, land-use changes and other stressors are negatively impacting 
the Great Lakes Basin. Despite mechanisms to address complex governance challenges, adaptation efforts 
across the Basin remain relatively fragmented. Many communities have embraced adaptive management 
practices to address impacts in light of uncertainties in future changes.  
Adaptation improves forest health, carbon storage and biodiversity 
(see section 3.5)
Climate change impacts the composition, disturbance regimes, and timing of life cycle events in Ontario’s 
forests and forested landscapes. Changes in drought, pests, and fire and wind regimes are of particular 
concern given the resulting cumulative impacts. 
Climate change brings threats and opportunities to Ontario 
agriculture and food systems (see section 3.6)
Longer growing seasons and warmer average temperatures will benefit the agriculture sector in some parts of 
Ontario. However, projected reductions in summer rainfall along with more severe heatwaves, higher frequency 
of precipitation extremes, and increased risks from pests and diseases threaten farm operations, as well as 
supporting activities, such as food processing and distribution. Increased capacity and adaptation across the 
sector would permit the seizing of opportunities and management of risks posed by climate change.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 7 
Existing human health inequities will be worsened by climate change 
(see section 3.7)
Many non-climate factors, including income, housing quality and employment, play key roles in determining the 
vulnerability of communities and individuals to the health risks of climate change. Marginalized and low socio-
economic populations will experience disproportionate health impacts and will have increasing difficulty in coping 
and adapting. Regional and local assessments of climate change vulnerability that include consideration of health 
equity provide a foundation for stronger and more widespread adaptation action.
Progress on adaptation remains limited in Ontario (see section 3.8)
Levels of climate change adaptation planning and implementation vary considerably across Ontario, with 
the primary focus still placed on the assessment of risk and vulnerability. Although there are examples of 
implementation, there is little evidence of adaptation being mainstreamed into decision making broadly. 
Systems for monitoring and evaluating adaptation action and effectiveness remain inadequate in most 
jurisdictions.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 8 
3.1 Introduction 
Canada’s climate is warming at a rate about twice that of the global average (Bush and Lemmen, 2019). 
Ontario’s mean annual temperature increased by 1.3 ºC between 1948 and 2016, with mean annual 
precipitation increasing by 9.7% over the same period (Bush and Lemmen, 2019). Climate model projections 
indicate that these changes will continue, highlighting that the risks currently presented by climate change 
will become even greater in the future (see Figure 3.1). 
Figure 3.1: Interactive regional map of Ontario that draws from climatedata.ca and visualizes various climate 
variables from 1980 to 2100 using a high-emissions RCP 8.5 scenario. Source: climatedata.ca.
Gradual changes in mean climate conditions combined with changes in the frequency and magnitude of 
extreme weather events drive impacts that are having, and will continue to have, predominantly negative 
effects (Cohen et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019). The impacts associated with a changing climate have become 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 9 
more apparent in daily life, increasing risks to social, economic and ecological systems (Government of 
Ontario, 2015a; 2011a). While Ontario’s capacity to undertake adaptation actions to address these risks is 
relatively high in terms of institutional, technical, human and financial resources, this capacity has not yet 
been widely mobilized. This is despite clear recognition of the imperative of proactively managing the risks 
associated with climate change through effective adaptation (Environmental Commissioner of Ontario, 2018a).
3.1.1 Geography
Ontario’s diverse landscapes, topography and natural resources help shape social, economic and cultural 
characteristics across the province (see Figure 3.2). The climate ranges from sub-Arctic in much of the north 
to hot-summer humid continental in the southern tip of the province near Windsor. Climate change impacts 
and adaptation capacity will differ across landscapes in Ontario and within the context of regional social, 
economic, cultural and environmental diversity. 
Figure 3.2: Map of Ontario’s subregions. Source: Chiotti and Lavender, 2008.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 10 
This report characterizes Ontario as having three subregions. The South subregion extends from Point 
Pelee Island in the south to the Quebec border in east. It contains half of Canada’s most densely populated 
metropolitan centres, including the Greater Golden Horseshoe Area (which includes the Greater Toronto 
and Hamilton Area (GTHA) and the Kitchener-Waterloo Region), and the cities of Ottawa and London. Most 
of Ontario’s projected population growth will continue to be in urban areas, particularly within the Greater 
Toronto Area and primarily through migration (Ontario Ministry of Finance, 2021a). The region includes the 
Canadian portions of Lake Huron, Lake Erie and Lake Ontario, which are critical for regional shipping, industry, 
tourism and agriculture (Woudsma and Towns, 2017). 
The Central subregion includes the cities of Sudbury, Thunder Bay, Timmins, Sault Ste. Marie and North Bay, 
and has a much lower population density compared to southern areas of the province. The communities 
within this subregion remain largely dependent on natural resource industries, as well as on smaller, emerging 
sectors such as financial and business services, research and innovation, construction and tourism (Conteh, 
2017). The region contains over two-thirds of the province’s highway lines, which along with the rail network, 
provide important economic and social linkages between communities (Woudsma and Towns, 2017).
The North subregion, whose boundaries are consistent with those of the Far North as defined in the Far North 
Act (Government of Ontario, 2010), is sparsely populated. Despite covering 42% of the area of Ontario, this 
subregion contains only 0.17% of the province’s population (Ontario Ministry of Indigenous Relations and 
Reconciliation, 2017). It is primarily populated by small First Nation communities that rely on subsistence 
practices and winter road access in order to acquire necessary resources (Ontario Ministry of Indigenous 
Relations and Reconciliation, 2017). Extending to the coasts of Hudson Bay and James Bay, the subregion 
includes areas with continuous and discontinuous permafrost and peatlands that sequester large amounts 
of carbon dioxide (McLaughlin and Webster, 2014). If disturbed, peatlands can release stored carbon into the 
atmosphere, reversing the carbon sequestration process and enhancing global warming. There are relatively 
few social, economic or ecosystem similarities between the North subregion and the Central and South 
subregions of the province.
3.1.2 Social and demographic profile
Ontario has a population of 14.7 million people and its population was the fastest growing amongst Canadian 
provinces as of July 2020, growing by 1.3% over the preceding year (Ontario Ministry of Finance, 2021b). 
The rate of population growth varies across the province, with populations in urban centres of the South 
subregion growing faster than those in the Central and North subregions, which are remaining stable or 
declining in some areas. These trends are expected to continue to mid-century under a medium-growth 
scenario, with the provincial population projected to grow by 35.8% (5.3 million people) over the next 25 
years, largely resulting from increased net migration (Ontario Ministry of Finance, 2021c). Climate change will 
amplify existing social and economic stressors in high population urban centres (Wuebbles et al., 2019). 
More than 374,000 people in Ontario are registered Indigenous Peoples, including First Nations, Métis and 
Inuit; of this number, about 116,000 people speak Indigenous languages (Statistics Canada, 2017). The 
Indigenous population is distributed across the province, with about one-third living in large population 
centres, such as Thunder Bay, Sudbury, Sault Ste. Marie, Ottawa and Toronto (INAC, 2018; Statistics Canada, 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 11 
2017). Over one-quarter of Ontario First Nations Peoples live in remote communities of the North subregion 
that are only accessible by air or winter roads, two modes of travel that are highly dependent on weather and 
climate conditions (Ontario Ministry of Indigenous Relations and Reconciliation, 2017). 
3.1.3 Economic profile
The diversity of economic activity across the province’s subregions contributes greatly to the strength of 
Ontario’s overall economy (Ontario Chamber of Commerce, 2020). Goods-producing and service sectors 
are primary contributors to the provincial economy, with the large metropolitan areas of the South 
subregion experiencing the highest employment growth rate (Government of Ontario, 2021a). Efforts to 
diversify resource-dependent economies and to build overall resilience include expanding the service and 
manufacturing sectors and enhancing ecosystem resilience (Government of Ontario, 2011b). For parts of the 
North subregion, particularly in the chromium-rich “Ring of Fire” area, newly discovered diamond and metallic 
deposits present unprecedented opportunities for economic development, with associated concerns about 
impacts on cultural practices and ecosystems (Chong, 2014).
3.1.4 Chapter approach
Building on the findings of previous assessments, this chapter identifies climate change impacts and risks 
specific to Ontario, evaluates adaptation progress across the province, and reports on knowledge gaps and 
emerging issues. The chapter assesses the knowledge base pertaining to both impacts and adaptation in 
Ontario, which has grown substantially since completion of the 2008 national assessment report (Chiotti and 
Lavender, 2008). Ongoing research continues to strengthen the evidence base and, while literature on risks 
and impacts still dominates, research focused on adaptation and resilience has increased considerably over 
the past decade (Brinker et al., 2018; Zeuli et al., 2018; AECOM, 2015; Chu, 2015; Lemieux et al., 2013).
Academic and other literature sources have been supplemented by input received through engagement 
sessions held with key stakeholders and practitioners across the province. The Key Messages reflect the 
social, economic and ecological diversity of Ontario, as well as the breadth of climate change impacts. 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 12 
3.2 Ontario’s infrastructure is vulnerable to 
climate change 
As a result of interdependencies between multiple infrastructure types, climate change and especially 
extreme climate events can have cascading economic and social impacts. Flooding in the highly 
populated southern subregion, and impacts on winter roads in the northern subregion of the province 
demonstrate the range of risks. Targeted approaches to better understand the threats, and reduce 
infrastructure vulnerability are being used across the province.
Economies and society depend on well-functioning and resilient infrastructure for the continued delivery of critical 
services. Recent examples of infrastructure failures in Ontario, especially related to extreme rainfall and flooding, 
highlight both economic and social impacts. In the northern parts of the province, transportation infrastructure, 
in particular winter roads, are at risk. Local and regional governments in Ontario are starting to address the 
associated risks through risk assessments, asset management and design practices, emergency response 
planning, and strategic planning, including low impact development, that explicitly consider future climate 
conditions. Addressing the interdependencies that exist between different types of infrastructure, such as water, 
transportation, energy and telecommunications, is increasingly recognized as important to successful adaptation.
3.2.1 Introduction
Ontario’s communities vary in size, population, geography and social fabric (see Sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2). 
The infrastructure supporting these populations and economies varies in age and performance and will 
require significant investments in the coming decades (Canadian Infrastructure Report Card, 2019). These 
investments, encompassing maintenance, repair, reconstruction and new construction, present opportunities 
for climate change adaptation. Accounting for climate change risks in infrastructure renewal and upgrades 
yields broad and long-term social, environmental, and economic benefits (Adaptation to Climate Change 
Team, 2021; Canadian Climate Institute, 2021).
Widespread damage from extreme events in Ontario (see Section 3.2.2), including to human health and 
safety, has highlighted the vulnerabilities of infrastructure to climate change. This section focuses on 
flooding in southern Ontario and the impacts of climate change on winter roads in the north. It then 
discusses how adaptation is advancing across the province, through the application of infrastructure risk 
assessments and incorporation of climate change into infrastructure asset management. It concludes with 
a discussion on the importance of considering independencies between different types of infrastructure 
when planning for adaptation. 
3.2.2 Flooding
Climate impacts with the highest documented costs and frequency in Ontario include flooding related to 
extreme rainfall, rainfall on frozen ground, rapid snow melt and ice jams (Moudrak and Feltmate, 2019; 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 13 
Farghaly et al., 2015; Boyle et al., 2013). Extreme rainfall intensity is increasing in Ontario (Coulibaly et al., 
2016; Soulis et al., 2016; Mekis et al., 2015; Shephard et al., 2014; Cheng et al., 2012; Paixao et al., 2011), as it 
is in adjacent regions in the United States (Easterling et al., 2017; Walsh et al., 2014). Non-climatic stressors, 
such as urban growth and land-use changes, also serve to increase the risks associated with flood events in 
Ontario (Henstra et al., 2020; Oleson et al., 2015).
Flood-related damage to infrastructure has been a primary driver of the increases in both insured and 
uninsured losses across Ontario and in many other parts of Canada (Moudrak and Feltmate, 2019; Feltmate 
et al., 2017; Moghal and Peddle, 2016; IBC, 2015). Flooding events in cities have interrupted business activity 
and caused hardship and anxiety among residents (Manning and Clayton, 2018; Decent and Feltmate, 2018; 
Moudrak and Feltmate, 2017). The rising costs associated with flooding in Canada are estimated to be 
accompanied by significant productivity losses (Insurance Bureau of Canada and Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities, 2020; Davies, 2016). While reporting on insured losses paints a picture of high costs from 
urban flood events (see Table 3.1; Robinson and Sandink, 2021), additional uninsured damages increase the 
magnitude of total losses and are often unknown. However, estimates by the Insurance Bureau of Canada 
suggest that for every dollar of insured loss, there are three to four dollars of uninsured losses, which are 
borne by homeowners, business owners and governments (Moudrak et al., 2018).
Table 3.1: Examples of Ontario cities that have experienced extreme 
weather events in the past decade leading to significant insured losses
CITY
EVENT DATE
INSURED LOSS
Toronto
July 8, 2013
$1.024 billion
Windsor/Tecumseh/Essex
August 28 and 29, 2017
$177 million
Windsor/Tecumseh
September 28, 2016
$165 million 
Hamilton, Ottawa
July 2012
$104 million
Greater Toronto Area
August 2014
$84 million
Source: Adapted from Robinson and Sandink, 2021.

Given the vulnerability of Ontario’s infrastructure to extreme precipitation and flooding, adaptation approaches 
frequently involve the use of updated rainfall Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF) curves that determine the 
probability of a given rainfall event occurring (Simonovic et al., 2017; IBI Group, 2016; Soulis et al., 2015; 
Shephard et al., 2014 ). Methods to adjust IDF curves to account for climate change vary (Schardong et al., 
2020; Soulis et al., 2016) and can yield significantly different results. User-friendly Web interfaces (Ontario 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 14 
Ministry of Transportation, 2016; Schardong et al., 2020) and other technical guidance (Canadian Standards 
Association, 2019) are available for engineers and others to access updated IDF data, helping to facilitate 
the consideration of changing climate conditions in infrastructure-related decisions (Switzman et al., 2017; 
Sehgal, 2016; Soulis and Sarhadi, 2016; Solaiman and Simonovic, 2011).
To address extreme rainfall and flood risk, municipalities have traditionally employed end-of-pipe solutions to 
deal with stormwater. However, in recent years there has been an increase in the use of permeable surfaces 
and natural infrastructure to help control larger amounts of water (quantity) and to filter the water that 
recharges sub-surface aquifers (quality) (see Ecosystem Services chapter  of the National Issues Report; 
Eckart et al., 2017; Environmental Commissioner of Ontario, 2017, 2016). Hamilton, Toronto, Thunder Bay, 
London, Newmarket and many other Ontario municipalities and conservation authorities have been actively 
promoting climate change adaptation through low-impact development (LID), master planning and watershed 
adaptation strategies (Henstra et al., 2020). Successful LID pilots include the use of permeable pavement, 
bioswales, rain gardens, green roofs, infiltration trenches and other forms of stormwater management that 
can be particularly valuable in limiting the impacts of smaller event storms (see Cities and Towns chapter 
of the National Issues Report). Natural areas like ponds, wetlands and vegetated areas are increasingly 
being viewed as tools for flood prevention and have numerous environmental and social benefits (e.g., for 
biodiversity and water quality), the value of which is highlighted in robust total economic value assessments 
(Moudrak et al., 2018).
Forty-four Ontario municipalities have combined sewer overflow (CSO) systems that release untreated or 
partially treated sewage into receiving lakes and rivers, and that are at higher risk of surcharging during 
flooding due to inadequate design standards at the time of construction, increased impervious surfaces and 
urban growth (Environmental Commissioner of Ontario, 2018b). As municipalities seek to replace outdated 
CSO systems and improve stormwater infrastructure, consideration of projected increases in the frequency 
and magnitude of flooding events will significantly reduce the risk of sewer backup and damage in homes, 
and the accompanying human health risks (Kovacs et al., 2014). 
3.2.3 Transportation in Northern Ontario
Compared to more southerly and more densely populated areas of Ontario, infrastructure in the North 
subregion of Ontario services smaller, more dispersed and less populated communities, which are mostly 
Indigenous. Transportation infrastructure, which includes winter roads and air strips, is particularly crucial for 
the movement of goods and services into isolated communities. Warmer winters and temperature variability 
make winter road construction and maintenance difficult affecting road stability and safety, and ultimately 
impacting the supply of fuel, food and other staples (Hori et al., 2018a; 2018b). 
Winter roads in northern Ontario provide overland connection to provincial highways and railway systems (see 
Figure 3.3). Winter roads reduce transportation costs of goods, compared to other alternatives, provide more 
affordable access to services (such as health care), support the self-sufficiency and well-being of people who 
travel for cultural and community events, and enhance access to remote communities and mineral resources. 
The roads are partly ice roads, in that portions of them cross rivers and lakes, while other sections traverse 
land. One metre of good quality ice can support loads of 50,000 kg (NWT, 2015). Over recent years, the 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 15 
operating seasons have been shortening due to early thaw in the spring and warm spells in mid-season, as 
well as more frequent service disruptions due to variable weather events. These have resulted in softening of 
the road surface, deteriorating driving conditions requiring slower speeds and smaller loads, increased 
operations and maintenance costs, and increased risks to health and safety (Barrette, 2018; IBI Group, 2016).  
Figure 3.3: Methods and routes for accessing communities in Northern Ontario, including access by air, boat, rail 
and numerous road types. Winter roads are shown using red broken lines. Source: Ontario Ministry of Northern 
Development, Mines, Natural Resources and Forestry, 2019
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 16 
While conditions for more northerly locations may remain suitable for ice road construction in Northern 
Ontario through the middle of this century, even under high emission scenarios, seasonal warming and 
variability in weather conditions will affect more southerly locations and may preclude a viable ice road 
season (Hori et al., 2018b). Warm spells, such as those reported by winter road operators (Barrette, 2018; 
Kimesskenemenow Corporation, Ontario National Assessment Engagement Sessions, 2018–2019), and the 
trend toward fewer days of extreme cold (e.g., average number of days of -25 °C or lower decreased from 79 
days in the mid-1950s to 57 days in the mid-2010s; IBI, 2015) pose significant challenges for construction 
and maintenance. 
A range of solutions is available to help manage risks to winter/ice roads in the Far North, including the 
following: 1) using ice-penetrating radar for determining adequate ice thickness; 2) establishing permanent 
creek and small river crossings at key locations; 3) realigning some sections of road to be on land that is less 
susceptible to flooding during thaws or winter rain; 4) realigning some sections of road to be in corridors that 
are suitable for later upgrading to all-season roads; and 5) consistently using the best possible construction 
and maintenance protocols (Barrette, 2018). Moving from roads to airships or hovercraft for transporting 
heavy loads continues to be discussed as an option (IBI Group, 2016). In addition to technical solutions, 
communities have considered other alternatives, including the possibility of having all-weather roads and 
increasing self-sufficiency with respect to consumables (Reid, 2015). Adaptation responses are ultimately at 
the discretion of the community and dictated by regional circumstances and capacity.
3.2.4 Climate change risk assessments 
Climate change risk assessments are key tools for understanding infrastructure vulnerability and options 
to enhance resilience. Since 2007, more than 20 engineering-focused climate change risk assessments 
have been conducted in Ontario as part of a national effort to train engineers on how to consider climate 
change in infrastructure decisions (see Table 3.2). Most of these assessments were completed using the 
Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) protocol, which is a systematic, risk-
based approach to reviewing how different weather and climate drivers affect infrastructure performance 
and life expectancy (Engineers Canada, 2016). The protocol has also been adapted for application in First 
Nations communities (First Nations Infrastructure Resilience Toolkit (FN-IRT); Félio and Lickers, 2019) and is 
planned to be released in summer 2022. The resulting assessments reveal the thresholds at which different 
infrastructure systems will be compromised when exposed to extreme weather and climate variability, and 
validate the interdependencies between infrastructure systems. They also identify and prioritize locations 
and populations that are most vulnerable in terms of climate change impacts on infrastructure and related 
service disruptions (Zeuli et al., 2018). Furthermore, they help raise awareness about climate risks among 
senior managers (AECOM, 2015) and, more broadly (Chiotti et al., 2017), signal the need for collaboration and 
coordination regarding adaptation responses, and serve as a catalyst for the creation and implementation of 
adaptation measures (Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada, 2015a; 2015b). Risk assessments are 
usually the first step in developing a comprehensive climate change adaptation strategy (see Case Story 3.1). 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 17 
Table 3.2: PIEVC infrastructure vulnerability assessments completed 
in Ontario
INFRASTRUCTURE 
TYPE
LOCATION OF 
ASSESSMENT
REFERENCE
Energy
Toronto
Toronto
Ottawa
Province-wide
AECOM (2012)
AECOM (2015)
Stantec (2019)
Toronto Region Conservation Authority (2015)
Transportation
Greater Sudbury
Toronto
Toronto
R.V. Anderson Associates Limited (2008)
GENIVAR Inc. (2011a)
AECOM, TRCA, and RSI (2016)
Water and 
Wastewater
Toronto
Prescott
Welland
Leamington/Kingsville/Essex
GTA/Mississauga
Akwesasne First Nation
Ottawa
Windsor
Moose Factory / Moose Cree 
First Nation
GENIVAR Inc. (2010)
GENIVAR Inc. (2011b)
AMEC (2012)
GENIVAR Inc. (2013)
Greater Toronto Airport Authority (2014)
Stantec (2017)
R.V. Anderson Associates Limited (2017)
Landmark Engineers Inc. (2019)
Stantec (2018a)
Food Services
GTA
Zeuli et al. (2018)
Buildings
Ottawa
Southwest Ontario
Oneida Nation of the Thames
Kasabonika Lake First Nation
HOK Canada (2008)
Golder Associates (2012)
Stantec (2018b)
Stantec (2020)
Natural Infrastructure
GTA
Risk Sciences International (2018)
Ports
Toronto
AECOM (2019)
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 18 
Case Story 3.1: The Metrolinx adaptation strategy
Metrolinx is a crown corporation responsible for the multimodal transportation system in the Greater Toronto 
and Hamilton Area (GTHA). A leader in adaptation in the transportation sector, the corporation designed the 
2018 Metrolinx adaptation strategy built upon a vulnerability assessment undertaken by an interdisciplinary 
team using the Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) protocol (AECOM et al., 
2016) and a Planning for Resilience report (Chiotti et al., 2017). The strategy outlines seven key adaptation 
measures for improving resiliency of rail transportation to weather extremes and changes in climate 
(Metrolinx, 2018). These measures include the following:
1.	 Improving infrastructure, such as enhancing and monitoring embankments, incorporating of low 
impact development (LID), and increasing culvert size and stormwater capacity to reduce risks of 
flooding and washouts;
2.	 Using a higher preferred rail laying temperature of 37.8 °C as the revised construction standard to 
preheat tracks, reducing the risk of track warping and buckling (“sun kinks”) during heat waves;
3.	 Improving monitoring, such as weather forecasting, ballast integrity sensors (to detect washout in 
the free-draining aggregate that supports the railway track), and real-time stream levels and flood 
conditions at track level, to reduce vulnerability to extreme precipitation events;
4.	 Developing a corporate-wide Winter Plan to prepare for severe snowfall, freezing rain and extreme 
winter temperatures to allow for operations to be sustained;
5.	 Enhancing emergency response and operating procedures during and after extreme weather 
events;
6.	 Updating operational protocols for trains in case of high water conditions caused by extreme 
precipitation events and flooding; and
7.	 Upgrading standards for back-up power generation at stations and facilities to ensure power 
supply during prolonged blackouts caused by extreme weather events.
The Metrolinx adaptation strategy was one of the first of its kind for rail infrastructure. The plan 
development process included elements of asset management, design practices, emergency response 
planning and preparedness, and regional and strategic planning, along with engagement and education 
activities. The process and resulting plan can be considered as good practice for other Ontario and 
Canadian metropolitan settings.
3.2.5 Asset management 
Municipalities and other infrastructure owners and managers have begun to incorporate adaptation into their 
asset management practices (see Cities and Towns chapter of the National Issues Report; Kenny et al., 2019; 
Kenny et al., 2018; Metrolinx, 2018; Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2017; Félio, 2017; Ontario Chamber 
of Commerce, 2017; Ernst and Young, 2016; Félio, 2016). New statutory and regulatory requirements have 
been an important driver of this activity. Of particular importance is the 2015 Jobs and Prosperity Act, with 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 19 
regulation 588/17 requiring municipalities to develop and implement an asset management plan and 
supporting policies for municipal infrastructure (Ontario e-Laws, 2018). The regulation also requires 
municipalities to “consider actions that may be required to address vulnerabilities that may be caused by 
climate change…” (Ontario e-Laws, 2018). Another key driver has been the Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities Municipal Asset Management Program, which since 2016 has funded 157 projects in Ontario 
focused on improving asset management practices (Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2020). Integrating 
climate change into the planning, maintenance, renewal and rehabilitation cycle of infrastructure assets 
ensures their longevity and helps to safeguard service levels for communities (see Figure 3.4; Canadian 
Infrastructure Report Card, 2019; 2016).
Figure 3.4: Example of asset deterioration curve for roads showing how reoccurring, planned investments in 
adaptation and the preservation of assets during the initial degradation phase (e.g., from “excellent” to “good”) 
are significantly more cost-effective than reactive management through rehabilitation or reconstruction for 
conditions ranging from “fair” to “very poor”. Source: Canadian Infrastructure Report Card, 2019; 2016.
Under the Environmental Assessment Act, the Ontario Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Parks 
(MECP) has issued guidance on how best to consider climate change in the environmental assessment 
process. Additionally, the Ontario Provincial Policy Statement 2014 states that “planning authorities should 
promote green infrastructure” (Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing, 2020) that delivers 
additional benefits in the areas of human health and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 20 
3.2.6 Interdependencies 
Ontario’s water and wastewater, transportation, energy and telecommunications infrastructure, buildings and 
other forms of infrastructure are highly interconnected. In many cases, interdependencies exist, which means 
that the safe and consistent operation of one asset contributes to a similarly safe and consistent operation 
of another. Disruptions, caused by climate events or other factors, can lead to multiple and compounded 
infrastructure failures, affecting the delivery of critical services and routine business operations (see Sector 
Impacts and Adaptation chapter of the National Issues Report). Infrastructure interdependencies are not just 
physical, but also pertain to ownership, responsibility and liability. Businesses are often shared users and 
owners of infrastructure, and while they can take steps independently to be more climate resilient (through, 
for example development of business continuity plans, acquiring suitable insurance, etc.), they still remain 
dependent on the climate resiliency of neighbouring services. Decision making in such situations requires 
tools and planning processes that incorporate complex interdependencies (Bondank and Chester, 2020; 
Farhad et al., 2019; Zeuli et al., 2018; AECOM 2017).
The City of Toronto led a high-level risk assessment to identify interdependencies and adaptation responses 
that span multiple sectors (hydroelectricity, transportation, water and wastewater, food and agriculture, 
etc.) (AECOM, 2017). One example highlighted how a natural gas provider and district energy supplier are 
dependent on Toronto Hydro for electricity, and Toronto Hydro in turn relies on infrastructure like the City’s 
road network and stormwater system, with the result that flooding associated with extreme rainfall could 
cascade through all electricity assets and lead to failure (see Figure 3.5; AECOM, 2017).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 21 
Figure 3.5: Interdependencies in utilities within the Greater Toronto Area. Source: AECOM, 2017.
The Toronto risk assessment exemplifies the collaboration required to mobilize adaptation. It sheds light 
on the cascading impacts of climate change, as well as efficiencies in planning that can make adaptation 
more cost-effective. The assessment also highlighted the need for information sharing protocols, detailed 
engineering-level investigations, enhanced funding and more proactive infrastructure planning and policy 
development (AECOM, 2017).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 22 
3.3 Nature-based approaches help address 
climate change impacts on biodiversity and 
ecosystem services 
Climate warming has driven and will continue to drive changes to species and create new opportunities for 
invasive species. Impacts on biodiversity are magnified through the cumulative effects of climate change, 
habitat loss, urbanization, pollution and other threats. Actions to mainstream nature-based solutions, 
including the establishment of protected areas, such as Indigenous Protected and Conserved Areas, can 
help maintain ecosystem services and reduce climate change risks, as well as mitigate climate change. 
Ontario includes a wide range of ecosystems, from forests, wetlands and grasslands in the south, to tundra, 
expansive wetlands, peatlands and coastal marshes in the Far North. These ecosystems provide important 
services to Ontarians, including provisioning services such as food and water, and regulating services such as 
flood and disease control. Changes in climate are placing added pressure on ecosystems, through changes 
to the composition, structure and function of ecosystems, changes to the geographic ranges of species, 
disruptions to the timing of life stage events and, in some cases, altering genetic diversity. In the absence of 
effective protection and restoration measures, heavily populated parts of the province and areas labelled for 
economic development could see additional declines in biodiversity and ecosystem services. Rapid and scaled-
up interventions that target ecological resilience and foster natural adaptation will help manage climate change 
risks and protect ecosystem services on which communities rely.
3.3.1 Introduction
Biodiversity is defined as “the variability among living organisms from all sources including inter alia, 
terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are a part: 
this includes diversity within species, between species and of ecosystems” (United Nations Convention on 
Biological Diversity, 1992). Biodiversity includes the goods and services that ecosystems provide, including 
those on which humans depend for our survival, health, safety and/or prosperity (Ontario Biodiversity Council, 
2015, 2011). Weather and climate combined with physical site conditions largely determine which species 
can survive and which cannot (Nituch and Bowman, 2013). Given the climate’s relative stability over the 
past several millennia, entire ecosystems and their associated species have evolved to cope with prevailing 
climate and soil conditions (Brinker et al., 2018).
The Ontario Biodiversity Strategy recognizes climate change as one of the greatest threats facing biodiversity 
(Ontario Biodiversity Council, 2011, 2015). Existing stresses on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems can be 
exacerbated by climate impacts, such as changes in the frequency and magnitude of extreme weather, the 
extent and duration of freshwater ice cover, vegetative phenology, breeding activity and insect emergence, 
with cascading effects on food webs. A number of other provincial strategies and programs address 
biodiversity and ecosystem impacts, including the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry (MNRF) 
Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, 2017b), the Wetland 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 23 
Conservation Strategy (Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, 2017c); and the 50 Million Tree 
Program (Forests Ontario, 2016).
3.3.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities
3.3.2.1 Terrestrial ecosystems
Natural selection pressures under climate change and other human-created stresses are changing the 
structure and composition of many of Ontario’s ecosystems, as well as the socio-economic services and 
functions that they provide (Brinker et al., 2018; Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, 2017b). 
Ontario species already demonstrating shifts in distribution include the common opossum, white-tailed 
deer, southern flying squirrel and Nodding Ladies’ Tresses orchid (Kennedy-Slaney et al., 2018; Nituch 
and Bowman, 2013). Peatlands in the northern subregion store immense amounts of carbon, providing a 
regulating ecosystem service (see Ecosystem Services chapter of the National Issues Report). Warming 
winter temperatures causing permafrost thaw, enhanced microbial action and peat decay in the soils will lead 
to further loss of carbon to the atmosphere (Turetsky et al., 2020; Natali et al., 2019; McLaughlin et al., 2018). 
Drier conditions in peatlands also increase fire risk with long-lasting smouldering and subsequent carbon 
release (McLaughlin et al., 2018; Turetsky et al., 2014).
Warming will be greatest in parts of the North subregion (see Figure 3.1), where potential northward 
migration of terrestrial species is limited by Hudson Bay and James Bay. Ecosystems located further south, 
most notably in the mixedwood plains ecozone (southwestern Ontario, and parts of central and northeastern 
Ontario) will experience less warming, but impacts will be exacerbated by habitat fragmentation from 
increasing land-use pressures and pollution in the human-dominated landscapes of southern Ontario (Brinker 
et al., 2018; McLaughlin et al., 2018; Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, 2017b; 2017c; 
McLaughlin and Webster, 2014;Varrin et al., 2007). Species with generalist habitat requirements 
(e.g., raccoons, coyote and deer) and greater dispersal abilities are capable of colonizing new areas, 
diversifying food sources and thriving within broader thermal thresholds, and will manage to adapt to 
changing conditions. This also includes invasive terrestrial and aquatic species that will be able to thrive and 
expand their ranges, contributing to a changed and possibly simplified ecosystem structure (McDermid et 
al., 2015a; Government of Ontario, 2012). Species with poor dispersal capabilities, or with specialized and 
narrow habitat requirements, will be the most vulnerable to changing conditions (Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Forestry, 2017b; Nituch and Bowman, 2013; Government of Ontario, 2012). Other species, 
such as types of fish, insects and plants, will decline in population as temperature or moisture conditions 
approach or exceed their tolerance limits (Brinker et al., 2018). 
Climate change will influence changes in species interactions, including competition and predation, and 
impacts from diseases, pests and invasive species. Problems occur when climate change has different 
effects on predator and prey species, producing a mismatch in timing between life cycle events that limit food 
availability, ultimately affecting successful breeding for many species (see Ecosystem Services chapter of the 
National Issues Report; Guzzo and Blanchfield, 2016; Nantel et al., 2014; Joyce and Rehfeldt, 2013; Klaus and 
Lougheed, 2013). In the North and Central subregions, the distribution of deer, moose and caribou is expected 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 24 
to change substantially over the current century, in part because of changes in temperature and precipitation. 
White-tailed deer distribution is limited at its northern boundary by the severity of winter climate. Studies 
suggest that warmer winter temperatures and less deep snow will remove this limitation and contribute to 
expanding the northern distribution of white-tailed deer in Ontario by 2100 (Kennedy-Slaney et al., 2018). Even 
small changes in the abundance of common species can have cascading effects on ecosystem composition 
and structure, and on the services that those ecosystems provide (Brinker et al., 2018; McDermid et al., 
2015b; Government of Ontario, 2012).
The cumulative impacts of climate change, habitat loss and fragmentation, and other drivers will continue 
into the future, resulting in declining viability of some species in Ontario (Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Forestry, 2017b). Where landscape connectivity is limited, vulnerable populations have 
an increased risk of becoming locally or regionally extinct (Nituch and Bowman, 2013). For example, 
the Great Lakes and the Saint Lawrence River are significant barriers for wildlife; with increasing habitat 
fragmentation from urban and agricultural development, connectivity for many terrestrial species will decline. 
Even generalist native species, such as the bobcat, are experiencing disrupted gene flow where landscape 
connectivity is low (Marrotte et al., 2020). The extent to which species can navigate routes through the Great 
Lakes region will be important for the future biodiversity of areas north of the Great Lakes. Species living in 
warmer habitats to the south of the Ontario-U.S. border will continue to follow shifting temperature zones into 
Ontario, ultimately leading to the emergence of novel ecosystems (Nituch and Bowman, 2013). Impacts on 
biodiversity may include reorganization of species, replacement of dominant or keystone species, and pass-
through effects on higher trophic levels (Nituch and Bowman, 2013).
3.3.2.2 Aquatic ecosystems and watersheds
Aquatic species have adapted to temperatures that optimize their physiological processes (Brinker et al., 
2018; Alofs et al., 2014). Changes in precipitation patterns alter the amount of available habitat for many 
species, and increasing water temperatures modify the thermal regimes of lakes, rivers and wetlands (Minns 
et al., 2014; Chu, 2015). Increasing water temperatures can have cascading effects that alter the growth, 
reproduction and survival of aquatic organisms. As temperatures continue to warm, fish species will migrate 
northward to follow their favoured climate, resulting in increased growth, survival and abundance for warm-
water species such as smallmouth and largemouth bass, but decreases in cold-water species such as lake 
trout (Edwards et al., 2016; Guzzo and Blanchfield, 2016; Sharma et al., 2009). The warming trend in Ontario 
has already facilitated the range expansion and establishment of warm-water fish species in northern 
regions of Ontario (Alofs et al., 2014), and has caused shifts in the abundances of different species within 
assemblages (Staudinger et al., 2021). 
Changes in Ontario’s climate are affecting the timing of important life stage events, such as spawning or lake-
riverine migrations, and selecting for certain evolutionary traits (Myers et al., 2017; Lynch et al., 2016). Such 
phenological shifts have been recorded among several fish species, including smallmouth bass in Algonquin 
Park, whose spawning is advancing significantly earlier in the spring (Ridgway et al., 2017). These changes 
alter the competition and predator-prey relationships among wildlife and increase the likelihood of invasive 
species establishment (Brinker et al., 2018; Chu et al., 2018b; Sharma et al., 2009).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 25 
Extreme high and low water levels in lakes affect the amount of suitable habitats for native plant and animal 
species, particularly in wetland environments. Coastal wetlands in southern Ontario are particularly vulnerable 
to climate change, which adversely impacts wildlife habitat availability, bird migration patterns and overall 
ecosystem health (Chu et al., 2018b; Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, 2017c; Chu, 2015; 
McDermid et al., 2015b).
Aquatic species have an inherent capacity to adapt to a certain amount of ecological change because of 
their genetic and behavioural plasticity (Kelly et al., 2014; Stitt et al., 2014); however, the pace of ecological 
change associated with climate change is extending beyond the tolerance range of many species (Moritz 
and Agudo, 2013; Quintero and Wiens, 2013). Improved understanding of the natural variation in aquatic 
ecosystems and their capacity to rebound from perturbations (e.g., Gutowsky et al., 2019; van Zuiden et 
al., 2016; Stitt et al., 2014; Gronewold et al., 2013 and Sharma et al., 2007) helps to inform and prioritize 
effective adaptation measures.
3.3.3 Resiliency and adaptation
More than 14% of the 15,800 plant and animal species in Ontario that have been assessed by scientists are 
considered vulnerable, rare or rapidly declining, and their future survival is uncertain (Canadian Endangered 
Species Conservation Council, 2016). Opportunities to enhance the resilience of species to a changing 
climate vary depending upon available habitat, species vulnerability and available management tools (see 
Box 3.1). Integrating species vulnerability assessments into habitat and species management, restoration 
and species recovery planning can help to enhance resilience, as can judiciously applied assisted migration 
(see Section 3.5.3) in forest and other habitat restoration activities (Brinker et al., 2018; Douglas et al., 2014; 
Lemieux et al., 2014; Chu and Fischer, 2012; Gleeson et al., 2011; Ste-Marie et al., 2011).
Box 3.1: Assessing species vulnerability
The NatureServe Climate Change Vulnerability Index (Young and Hammerson, 2015) was used to assess the 
relative vulnerability to climate change of 280 species in Ontario’s Great Lakes Basin (Brinker et al., 2018; 
Young and Hammerson, 2015). The Index assesses species exposure to climate change, as well as sensitivity 
and adaptive capacity, in order to derive a vulnerability score (see Figure 3.6). The categories of the indexed 
scores range from "Insufficient evidence" and "Less vulnerable" to "Extremely vulnerable", and they are 
accompanied by statistically based confidence ratings (see Figure 3.7). 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 26 
Figure 3.6: Determining factors of the Climate Change Vulnerability Index. Source: Young and Hammerson, 2015.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 27 
Figure 3.7: Climate change vulnerability indexed scores and confidence levels. Sources: Brinker et al., 2018; 
Young and Hammerson, 2015
Results showed that 175 of the 280 species assessed are vulnerable to climate change, of which 11 are 
extremely vulnerable, 49 highly vulnerable and 115 are moderately vulnerable. Molluscs, fish, amphibians and 
lichens were most vulnerable. Vascular plants and mammals varied widely in assessed vulnerability, while 
birds, insects and spiders, and reptiles were found to be the least vulnerable. The common risk factor for all 
groups was the species’ past exposure to precipitation variations across their habitat range, and ultimately 
their ability to adapt to future hydrological changes within their niche. Other important factors include 
species’ temperature tolerance, the ability of seeds to migrate, barriers to movement and habitat specificity 
(Brinker et al., 2018).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 28 
A number of guidance documents are available to assist ecosystem managers and practitioners to include 
climate change in planning and management practices (e.g., Environment Canada, 2013; Gleeson et al., 2011). 
Key approaches for enhancing ecosystem resilience include the following: protecting intact ecosystems; 
increasing connectivity through the protection and implementation of ecological corridors (see Box 3.2) and 
regional/urban biodiversity strategies; and strategically using native species suited to new locations and 
predicted climatic conditions in habitat restoration efforts. Actions that can boost the resiliency of aquatic 
ecosystems and organisms are as follows (Myers et al., 2017; Chu, 2015; Gleeson et al., 2011):
1.	 Restricting withdrawals of surface and groundwater from vulnerable lakes, rivers and wetlands;
2.	 Providing nest boxes or rehabilitating nesting habitats for vulnerable wetland birds;
3.	 Maintaining natural water levels in lakes and wetlands, and flow rates in rivers;
4.	 Restoring or enhancing riparian vegetation along stream shorelines;
5.	 Identifying and protecting refugia; and
6.	 Limiting human development and industrial activities. 
Box 3.2: Assisting wildlife migration
Measures that keep wildlife safe from roads, such as fencing and dedicated wildlife tunnels and bridges, are 
critical infrastructure components that help achieve habitat connectivity objectives in Ontario (see Figure 3.8). 
Ontario continues to develop policies that direct municipalities to identify, conserve and link natural features 
for the movement of native plants and animals across the landscape to ensure the long-term protection of 
biodiversity in an era of rapid climate change.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 29 
Figure 3.8: First photo shows a wildlife overpass on Highway 69. Second photo shows a diversion fence in Bruce 
Peninsula National Park. The fence helps to direct wildlife towards an eco-passage, while the grating shown in 
the third photo maximizes the amount of natural sunlight inside, creating an attractive passage for species-at-
risk. Source: First photo courtesy of Timercraft Consultation Inc. Latter photos courtesy of Christopher Lemieux.
3.3.3.1 Parks and protected areas
Ontario features a network of approximately 700 parks and other types of protected areas that include 
National and Provincial Parks, Conservation Reserves, Nature Conservancy of Canada (NCC) Sites and at 
least 40 other designations (Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2021; Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Forestry, 2012; Gray et al., 2009). These comprise about 10.7% of the province’s total 
terrestrial area and provide important habitat for biodiversity, as well as space for recreation, research, 
monitoring and education. 
Ecosystem resilience to climate change can be supported through performance targets for conservation, 
such as those within the 2020 Biodiversity Goals and Targets for Canada (biodivcanada, 2020). The Strategy 
sets targets for conservation of terrestrial and inland waters, as well as coastal and marine areas. In Ontario, 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 30 
the Ontario Biodiversity Strategy also sets targets in areas that include engaging people, reducing threats, 
enhancing resilience and improving knowledge (Ontario Biodiversity Council, 2021; 2015; 2011). The federal 
government’s reaffirmation of its commitment to protect 30% of land and ocean by 2030, and to ensure that 
action and investment for nature and climate change are central to COVID-19 recovery planning (Office of the 
Prime Minister, 2019), have implications for Ontario’s conservation efforts.
A significant body of knowledge focuses on the impacts of climate change on species distribution and 
ecosystem structure and function (e.g., Chu et al., 2018a; Parker, 2017; Dove-Thompson et al., 2011; 
McKenney et al., 2010), and the implications for protected areas management (Barr et al., 2020; Gutowsky 
and Chu, 2019; Parker, 2018; 2017; Lemieux et al., 2014; Canadian Parks Council, 2013; Lemieux et al., 2011). 
The literature highlights that managing for climate change impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem function 
will require an adaptive, flexible, forward-looking and collective approach (Gross et al., 2016; Lemieux et 
al., 2010). This includes developing and sustaining relationships and communication networks among 
various levels of government, scientists and other partners, and increasing participation from Indigenous 
communities in all aspects of conservation planning and management (Lemieux et al., 2011).
Protected areas have fixed boundaries that cannot easily change as the ecosystems and species that they 
were established to conserve migrate in response to the changing climate. Therefore, enhancing connectivity 
between existing natural and protected areas is a key adaptation goal (Lemieux et al., 2011). Connectivity 
can be enhanced through the protection or restoration of “greenway” and “blueway” networks, such as natural 
corridors, riparian areas (zones between aquatic and dry-land habitat), rivers and lakes, or other habitats 
that connect natural areas (Andrew et al., 2014). Connectivity mapping for terrestrial ecosystems has been 
completed across Ontario and applied to multiple species to evaluate genetic connectivity for informing 
landscape planning and efforts to build ecosystem resilience (Marrotte et al., 2017). Such networks enable 
range shifts for certain species, as well as the exchange of genetic material, and enhanced resilience to cope 
with significant disturbance (e.g., large forest fires and pest outbreaks) and disruption by human activity (see 
Case Story 3.2).
Case Story 3.2: The Norfolk Sand Plain Natural Area
The Norfolk Sand Plain Natural Area in southwestern Ontario (see Figure 3.9) is home to more than 
45 provincially, nationally or globally rare plants and animals―one of the highest densities of rare and 
endangered wildlife in Canada (Nature Conservancy of Canada, 2019). Long Point Provincial Park is a 
Provincially Significant Wetland,, an internationally recognized wetland under the Ramsar Convention, a 
UNESCO Biosphere Reserve and a nationally significant Important Bird Area. 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 31 
Figure 3.9: Pre (left) and post (right) photos of the Nature Conservancy of Canada Williams Wetland restoration 
project within the Norfolk Sand Plain Area. Source: Nature Conservancy of Canada, 2019.
The Nature Conservancy of Canada has been restoring agricultural fields in the area since 2006, improving 
connectivity between existing core areas. Wetland restoration has created additional habitat for species-
at-risk, including the Blanding’s turtle (Emydoidea blandingii). The wetlands also act as a staging area for 
migratory shorebirds and waterfowl. In addition to enhancing the climate resilience of the Norfolk Sand Plain 
Natural Area, the restored wetlands play a valuable role in protecting ecological services in the area. These 
include maintaining and improving water quality by filtering nutrients and sediment from overland flow, 
recharging groundwater, holding flood waters and reducing erosion. The natural area has become critical for 
conserving species and habitats unique to Canada’s Carolinian Life Zone and for achieving conservation at a 
landscape level (Nature Conservancy of Canada, 2019).
In the Far North of Ontario, the provincial government and local First Nations are engaged in a process to 
jointly prepare community-based land-use plans that will designate areas for protection as well as areas 
for sustainable use (Government of Ontario, 2010). Many large areas of high regional and continental 
conservation value in North America lack formal protection, with the Hudson Bay Lowlands and Northern 
Forests of Ontario included in a list of biomes with the lowest rates of protection for high-value climate 
refugia and corridors (Stralberg et al., 2020). 
Nature-based approaches that encourage the protection, sustainable management and restoration of 
natural or modified ecosystems and simultaneously provide human well-being and biodiversity benefits 
significantly improve the chances of successfully responding and adapting to climate change (Smith, 2020). 
Protection of Canada’s most carbon-dense/high-biodiversity ecosystems has also been identified as the most 
effective nature-based approach for obtaining short-term results on immediate (by 2030) reduction in annual 
greenhouse gas emissions through the maintenance of carbon sinks for carbon storage (Smith, 2020). In 
addition to targeted protection, other approaches that would result in large benefits for biodiversity, as well as 
co-benefits for carbon storage include the following: growing 30% of managed forests that are currently over 
60 years old to ecological maturity and protecting them; additional tree planting; and increasing the length of 
time between harvests. 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 32 
Applying nature-based approaches will require collaboration between the Province, conservation authorities, 
municipalities, Indigenous communities and the broader public. The establishment of Indigenous Protected 
and Conserved Areas (IPCAs) in Ontario represent an opportunity for Indigenous governments to have a 
primary role in protecting and conserving ecosystems through Indigenous laws, rights, governance and 
knowledge systems, and such areas can support and encourage further research and capacity building 
(The Indigenous Circle of Experts, 2018). A Memorandum of Understanding has been reached between the 
Mushkegowuk Council and the Government of Canada to assess the feasibility of creating a National Marine 
Conservation Area (NMCA) in western James Bay and southwestern Hudson Bay (Parks Canada, 2021). 
The combined understanding of climate change impacts and adaptation solutions that emerge from 
consideration of local knowledge, Indigenous Knowledge and Western science can serve to reduce climate 
risks to safety, property and infrastructure, while at the same time promoting the resilience of Ontario’s 
ecosystems and communities. Establishing information networks to facilitate ongoing knowledge exchange 
within the conservation community is one of the most important practices that organizations can employ in an 
era of rapid climate change (Gross et al., 2016). Within Ontario, the overall organizational capacity to conserve 
biodiversity and foster the partnerships necessary to implement adaptation options is considered low (Barr et 
al. 2020; Office of the Auditor General of Ontario, 2020; Lemieux and Scott, 2011; Lemieux et al., 2010).
3.4 Adaptive management is key for addressing 
impacts in the Great Lakes Basin 
The combined effects of climate change, land-use changes and other stressors are negatively impacting 
the Great Lakes Basin. Despite mechanisms to address complex governance challenges, adaptation efforts 
across the Basin remain relatively fragmented. Many communities have embraced adaptive management 
practices to address impacts in light of uncertainties in future changes.  
The Great Lakes Basin is a region of high environmental, social and economic importance to Ontario. Climate 
change has resulted in a range of physical, chemical and ecological impacts on the lakes themselves, which 
are amplified by the impacts of urbanization, agricultural practices and other human activities. Seasonal 
lake ice cover and water levels both show high year-to-year variability, necessitating adaptation actions that 
address a range of future conditions. The international setting of the Basin necessitates the involvement of 
the Canadian and American national governments, as well as that of provincial, state and local governments 
in order to develop regional responses to climate change. While a number of functional governance 
mechanisms are in place, implementation of adaptation actions remains fragmented. Leadership is emerging 
from several municipalities employing adaptive management practices that involve continuous monitoring, 
evaluation and improvement of management plans. Strong and coordinated adaptation efforts across the 
Basin can help to protect communities, and to sustain the resources and services that the area provides.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 33 
3.4.1 Introduction
The Great Lakes Basin play a critical role in shaping Ontario’s environmental, social, cultural and economic 
landscape. As a region, including both Canada and the U.S., the Great Lakes–Saint Lawrence Basin covers 
more than 765,000 square kilometres, contains 21% of the world’s fresh surface water, and is home to more 
than 8.5 million Canadians (22% of the population) (Council of the Great Lakes Region, 2017). Surrounding 
communities rely on the freshwater resource for drinking water, recreation and tourism, manufacturing, 
fishing, agriculture and shipping industries. 
Climate change is considered one of the greatest threats facing the Great Lakes Basin, exacerbating risks 
associated with land-use changes and other human activities, resulting in changes to the physical, chemical 
and ecological characteristics of the lakes, and presenting social and economic risks to surrounding 
communities (Brinker et al., 2018; Government of Ontario, 2016a; McDermid et al., 2015b). The widespread 
impacts of climate change have been well documented, as discussed in Section 3.4.2 (Great Lakes Integrated 
Sciences and Assessments (GLISA) and Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC), 2018; International 
Joint Commission Great Lakes Water Quality Board, 2017; McDermid et al., 2015b) and are projected to 
worsen over the coming decades (Bonsal et al., 2019; Derksen et al., 2019; Angel et al., 2018; GLISA and 
ECCC, 2018; McDermid et al., 2015b). The risks associated with climate change are presented in Annexes to 
both the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement (Government of Canada and Government of the United States, 
2012) and the Canada-Ontario Agreement on Great Lakes Water Quality and Ecosystem Health (Government 
of Canada and Government of Ontario, 2014). Solutions lie in coordinated and collaborative adaptation 
planning and management across the Basin.
3.4.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities
3.4.2.1 Environmental Impacts
The Great Lakes directly influence and regulate the regional weather by moderating seasonal temperatures 
and generating local precipitation through lake effects (Mortsch, 2016; McDermid et al., 2015b; Gula and 
Peltier, 2012). In recent years, the impacts of changing climate have been manifested through changes in ice 
cover and water temperatures, (Zuzek, 2020; Bonsal et al., 2019; Derksen et al., 2019; Byun and Hamlet, 2018; 
Di Liberto, 2018). Changes in ice cover and water levels have been assessed as part of this assessment (see 
the Changes in Snow, Ice, and Permafrost Across Canada chapter and the Changes in Freshwater Availability 
Across Canada chapter of Canada's Changing Climate Report).
Warming air temperatures contributed to a 71% decline in annual average ice cover across the Great Lakes 
in the period from 1973 to 2010, with the greatest declines occurring in Lake Ontario, Lake Superior and Lake 
Michigan (Derksen et al., 2019; Mason et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2012). Heavy ice cover occurring in 2014, 
2015 and 2018 obscured any apparent trend, such that the record is marked by high inter-annual variability, 
but no long-term trend (see Figure 3.10; Derksen et al., 2019). Projections of future ice cover for Lake Ontario 
and Lake Erie indicate near ice-free conditions by the middle to the end of the 21st century under the RCP 8.5 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 34 
scenario (Zuzek, 2020; Hewer and Gough, 2019). Seasonal ice cover is an important factor influencing wave 
formation, shoreline erosion, evaporation and lake levels (Zuzek, 2020; Zuzek, 2019; Lenters et al., 2013).
Figure 3.10: Observed Great Lakes annual maximum ice cover (%) from 1973 to 2018. The red dashed line 
indicates the long-term average. Source: NOAA - Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory, 2019.
Water levels of the Great Lakes have fluctuated over the past century, driven by natural variability, human 
interventions (e.g., detention diversions) and climate change. Both record low and record high levels 
have been experienced over the past few years. From 1998 to 2013, lower than average water levels were 
experienced across the lakes, with notable lows in Lake Michigan and Lake Huron during the winter of 
2012/2013. These lows were followed by a rapid increase in water levels starting in 2014, largely attributed 
to decreased evaporation rates and increased regional precipitation (Derksen et al., 2019; Gronewold et al., 
2016). In July 2019, each lake was observed to be near or above record-high water levels, with Lake Superior, 
Lake Erie and Lake Ontario hitting record-high values (see Table 3.3). The high water levels accelerated 
shoreline erosion and caused flooding events throughout the summer of 2019 (Seglenieks and Caldwell, 
2019). It is expected that year-to-year and multi-year variability in lake levels will remain large, with potential 
for an increase in ranges (Bonsal et al., 2019; McDermid et al., 2015b; Gronewold et al., 2013; MacKay and 
Seglenieks, 2013). Extreme and unpredictable water levels are associated with significant economic costs 
(e.g., Shlozberg et al., 2014), such that management for both extreme high and low water levels along 
Ontario’s shorelines will be required moving forward.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 35 
Table 3.3: Great Lakes water levels in July 2019 compared to the long-
term (1918–2019) monthly average
JULY 2019 MONTHLY MEAN WATER LEVEL
Lake
Compared to Monthly Average 
(1918–2019)
Compared to 2018
Superior
35 cm above
21 cm above
Michigan-Huron
79 cm above
39 cm above
Erie
80 cm above
31 cm above
Ontario
79 cm above
74 cm above
Source: Adapted from Seglenieks and Caldwell, 2019.

Annual surface water temperatures of the Great Lakes have increased by between 0.02 °C and 0.06 °C per 
year since 1980 (United States Environmental Protection Agency and Environment and Climate Change 
Canada, 2021). The trend has been gradual but steady, with recent increases being driven by warming 
during the spring and summer months (NOAA, 2021; United States Environmental Protection Agency and 
Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2021). Surface water temperature is influenced by many factors, 
including regional air temperatures, solar radiation and ice cover conditions from the previous winter (United 
States Environmental Protection Agency and Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2021; Zhong et al., 
2016). While water temperature projections are more complex compared to air temperature projections, 
models indicate that surface water temperatures across the Great Lakes will continue to warm under a 
changing climate (Wuebbles et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2018; McDermid et al., 2015b).
The lengthened ice-free season and increasing surface water temperatures have led to earlier springtime and 
later fall lake stratification, which extends the period between turnover (Angel et al., 2018; Wuebbles et al., 
2019; McDermid et al., 2015b). The physical process of turnover allows for dissolved oxygen and nutrients to 
be circulated and vertically mixed. As the duration between overturning events lengthens, there is less vertical 
mixing of dissolved oxygen and nutrients, which impacts water quality and biological function (Anderson et 
al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2018; McDermid et al., 2015b). During the warm winters of 2012 and 2017, surface water 
temperatures in parts of Lake Ontario did not fall below 4 °C (the maximum density of water), such that the 
overturn process was not initiated, resulting in inadequate oxygen and nutrient mixing (Wuebbles et al., 2019; 
Angel et al., 2018; McDermid et al., 2015b). Longer periods between stratification can be detrimental for cold-
water species, as the latter are pushed closer to the surface to obtain adequate oxygen, but then challenged 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 36 
by unsuitable thermal conditions (Collingsworth et al., 2017; Lynch et al., 2016; Dove-Thompson et al. 2011; 
Minns et al. 2011). 
Warming surface water temperatures, coupled with increased nutrient and sediment runoff from land-use 
changes (urban development, loss or conversion of wetlands, etc.), provide optimal conditions for algae 
growth, increasing the likelihood and magnitude of algal bloom events (Wuebbles et al., 2019; McDermid 
et al., 2015b; d’Orgeville et al., 2014). Cyanotoxins within algal blooms can have significant human health 
impacts. Without adequate drinking water filtration systems, or through accidental exposure, these toxins can 
cause a variety of symptoms, such as abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, sore throat and dry cough 
(Chorus and Bartram, 1999). Lake Erie, the shallowest of the Laurentian Great Lakes, has been particularly 
vulnerable to algal blooms and has experienced declining water quality in recent years as surface 
water temperatures and nutrient loading have increased (Wuebbles et al., 2019; d’Orgeville et al., 2014). 
Continued warming water and nutrient loading from agriculture operations suggest that the prevalence of 
algal blooms could further increase. To address this risk, the 2018 Canada-Ontario Lake Erie Action Plan 
identified more than 120 actions to help achieve the goal of reducing phosphorus entering Lake Erie by 
40 % by 2025 (Environment and Climate Change Canada and the Ontario Ministry of the Environment and 
Climate Change, 2018).
The Great Lakes Basin provides habitat for more than 3,500 plant and animal species, including all three 
thermal guilds of fish species (cold-, cool- and warm-water species), as they co-exist in thermally stratified 
waters (Wuebbles et al., 2019; Milner et al., 2018a). Climate change impacts exacerbate non-climate 
ecological threats, such as habitat loss, pollution and invasive species resulting from human activity 
(Mortsch, 2016; McDermid et al., 2015b). These impacts will increase risks to fish, migratory birds and 
other native species that rely on healthy and resilient aquatic and coastal ecosystems (International Joint 
Commission Great Lakes Water Quality Board, 2017; Chu, 2015; McDermid et al., 2015b).
The physical impacts to the Great Lakes are projected to influence aquatic ecosystem function, impacting 
a range of processes, including nutrient cycles and uptake, phenological cues, lake productivity and 
turbidity and substrate conditions (Collingsworth et al., 2017; Alofs et al., 2014). Research indicates that the 
composition of fish communities in the Great Lakes will change as cold-water habitat becomes limited for 
native cold-water fish species and warm-water species expand their ranges northward (Collingsworth et al., 
2017; Alofs et al., 2014; Sharma et al., 2008; 2007). There are several factors that could compound these 
impacts, including predator-prey mismatches, metabolism and growth rates of fish species, altered dissolved 
oxygen availability, and an increased incidence of disease, pathogens and invasive species (see Section 3.3; 
Collingsworth et al., 2017; Chu, 2015; McDermid et al., 2015b).
Changing lake dynamics and warming temperatures will increase the risk for the introduction of new 
species and the expansion of existing, invasive species (e.g., sea lamprey, zebra and quagga mussels, and 
phragmites), pathogens and diseases, as ranges shift northward (Wuebbles et al., 2019; Chu et al., 2015; 
McDermid et al., 2015b; Pagnucco et al., 2015). Coastal wetlands within the Basin have been labelled as some 
of the most vulnerable ecosystems to climate change in southern Ontario (see Section 3.3; Environment and 
Climate Change Canada, 2021; Chu, 2015; McDermid et al., 2015b).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 37 
3.4.2.2 Social and Economic Impacts
Climate change impacts cascade through social and economic systems within the Great Lakes Basin. They 
include impacts on ecosystem services (e.g., reduced soil erosion control, water purification); commercial 
and industrial activities (e.g., forestry, mining, shipping); agricultural productivity; tourism and recreation; 
infrastructure and assets, and disruptions to demand and delivery of natural resources (e.g., fisheries, energy 
production) (Brinker et al., 2018; Government of Ontario, 2016a; Bartolai et al., 2015; Chu, 2015; Abdel-Fattah 
and Krantzberg, 2014a, 2014b). Increased water level variability is projected to have significant economic 
implications for industry, shipping and navigation, hydroelectric generation, and agriculture and tourism 
(Wuebbles et al., 2019; Angel et al., 2018; Zamuda et al., 2018; Shlozberg et al., 2014). 
Variable water levels and declining water quality stress and water treatment infrastructure. Some local water 
treatment systems in Ontario have reached capacity during extreme rainfall and flooding events, requiring 
the system to release untreated or inadequately treated water into the watershed (Wuebbles et al., 2019). 
These events have many social, health and economic implications for communities and ecosystems. Damage 
from extreme weather, including flood-related damage (e.g., water damage, erosion) can have physical and 
psychological impacts, affecting human health and well-being (Council of Canadian Academies, 2019; Hayes 
et al., 2019; Gough et al., 2016).
High water levels and lengthened ice-free periods in the Great Lakes Basin cause flooding and erosion that 
have resulted in significant property damage and economic costs (see Figure 3.11; IJC Great Lakes-St. 
Lawrence River Adaptive Management Committee, 2020; Zuzek, 2020; Moudrak et al., 2018). 
Figure 3.11: Left: Eroding bluffs along Lake Erie at Wheatley Provincial Park in 2018. Right: August 27, 2019 
flooding at Erie Shore Drive. Increased shoreline erosion and flood risk are attributed to changes in lake levels, ice 
cover and exposure to wave energy. Source: Zuzek, 2020.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 38 
Understanding of the cumulative and cascading impacts of climate change and other environmental 
stressors is limited (Wuebbles et al., 2019; Milner et al., 2018a). Cumulative impact assessments, which 
include social and economic components, are effective in examining how decisions related to land-use 
management and planning within the Great Lakes Basin interact with climate change (Milner et al., 2018a).
3.4.3 Resiliency and adaptation
Climate change presents new threats to the Great Lakes Basin, but opportunities for sustainable development 
and growth arise with effectively implemented adaptation measures. Adaptation planning and implementation 
have progressed across Ontario communities within the Basin over the past decade, with many different 
agencies, groups and partnerships participating (see Box 3.3). The governance of the Great Lakes is highly 
complex because of its transboundary, multi-jurisdictional nature. Over the years, various binational 
(e.g., International Joint Commission), national, provincial and state institutions and agencies have developed a 
number of initiatives and agreements to better protect and sustain the Great Lakes (e.g., the Great Lakes Water 
Quality Agreement; the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Cities Initiative; the Great Lakes–St. Lawrence River Basin 
Sustainable Water Resources Agreement). Despite this, adaptation efforts across the Basin remain relatively 
piecemeal and fragmented, highlighting the recognized need for more coordinated and collaborative adaptation 
approaches amongst governing agencies (see Figure 3.12; International Joint Commission Great Lakes Water 
Quality Board, 2017; McDermid et al., 2015b). 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 39 
Box 3.3: Mobilizing adaptation in the Great Lakes Basin
Adapting to climate change in the Great Lakes Basin requires transboundary leadership and coordination 
amongst all orders of government, organizations and agencies (International Joint Commission Great Lakes 
Water Quality Board, 2017). 
The importance of adaptation is emphasized in Ontario’s Great Lakes Protection Act, 2015, which states that 
the basin is “particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change and, in the face of additional cumulative 
pressures such as development, population growth, loss and degradation of natural features, pollution and 
invasive species, three of Ontario’s four Great Lakes are in decline” (Government of Ontario, 2015b). The Act 
calls for coordinated action, monitoring and reporting throughout the basin to identify impacts and improve 
provincial capacity to respond and to increase resiliency. The Act also mandates updating of Ontario’s 
Great Lakes Strategy (Government of Ontario, 2016a) every six years to measure progress and identify 
knowledge gaps.
The Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Cities Initiative is an example of how local municipalities in Ontario, 
Quebec and several U.S. states are working together on pilot projects to advance local adaptation efforts and 
provide opportunities for building technical capacity (Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Cities Initiative, 2017). 
This binational initiative provides a platform to share climate data and adaptation resources (Great Lakes and 
St. Lawrence Cities Initiative, 2017).
In Ontario, Conservation Authorities (CAs) play an important role in implementing adaptation measures, and 
in monitoring and reporting on local conditions in their jurisdictions. With a mandate to support provincial and 
municipal responsibilities in resource management, CAs are key participants in provincial flood forecasting 
and in communicating flood warnings to local government and emergency responders. CAs also support 
municipalities to delineate natural hazards (e.g., floodplain mapping) as part of land-use planning. Several 
CAs are advancing the development, updating and implementation of natural infrastructure plans, shoreline 
erosion strategies, and stormwater management strategies that address climate change impacts for 
municipalities and others (Conservation Ontario, 2018). CAs across Ontario vary in size and capacity and, 
therefore, not all provide the same level of services to their municipalities and the province.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 40 
Figure 3.12: Key elements of a binational approach to climate change adaptation and resilience, developed by the 
Great Lakes Water Quality Board. Source: International Joint Commission Great Lakes Water Quality Board, 2017.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 41 
Many conservation authorities, Indigenous communities, property owners, service providers and some 
regional and municipal governments in Ontario have adopted adaptive management principles in responding 
to climate impacts in the Great Lakes Basin (Conservation Ontario, 2018; Abdel-Fattah and Krantzberg, 
2014a, 2014b; Andrey et al., 2014). Adaptive management involves continuous monitoring, evaluation and 
improvement of management plans, strategies and programs, and is designed to enhance resiliency in an 
ongoing fashion (see Water Resources chapter of the National Issues Report; Leger and Read, 2012; Gleeson 
et al., 2011). Examples of implemented adaptation measures in Ontario communities include the following: 
flexible fish harvest regulations (e.g., slot size limits, catch limits, season lengths) for species that are 
vulnerable to, or that benefit from, climate change; restoring banks and shorelines to reduce erosion and flood 
risks; and modifying municipal zoning and building codes to account for increased coastal flooding (Myers et 
al., 2017; Lenarduzzi, 2016; Moghal and Peddle, 2016; Abdel-Fattah and Krantzberg, 2014a; Huff and Thomas, 
2014; Lemieux et al., 2014).
Many regional and sectoral vulnerability and risk assessments have been, and are being, completed across 
the basin to identify priority impacts and to begin planning and implementation of adaptive solutions 
(Perdeaux et al., 2018). While some of this work is driven by statutory and regulatory requirements 
(see Section 3.2.3), the number of climate change adaptation plans and strategies developed by local 
governments will increase as more communities experience the direct impacts of the changing climate (see 
Case Story 3.3). Even with these adaptation planning efforts, examples of adaptation implementation and 
evaluation remain limited (National Assessment Engagement sessions, 2019).
Case Story 3.3: Local adaptation in the Great Lakes Basin 
Ontario communities within the Great Lakes Basin are increasingly experiencing impacts and risks associated 
with climate change. Coastal flooding, shoreline erosion and declining water quality have damaged public 
and private infrastructure and property, raised public health and safety concerns, decreased tourism and 
recreational opportunities, and caused productivity losses in local industries (e.g., shipping, agriculture, 
fisheries) (City of Thunder Bay, 2015; McDermid et al., 2015b; City of Kingston, 2014a; City of Windsor, 2012). 
Several municipalities have assessed local risks and vulnerabilities associated with climate change and 
identified adaptive solutions to minimize the impacts (see Figure 3.13; International Joint Commission Great 
Lakes Water Quality Board, 2017).
Thunder Bay, Windsor and Kingston (all members of the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Cities Initiative) 
focused much of their adaptation efforts on planning and implementing low-impact development projects, 
conserving and restoring natural environments, and identifying areas of high vulnerability (see Figure 3.13; 
City of Thunder Bay, 2015; City of Kingston, 2014a; City of Windsor, 2012). 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 42 
Figure 3.13: Three examples of low-impact development projects. a) Memorial Avenue biofiltration low-impact 
development in Thunder Bay. b) Green roof low-impact development on the Lou Romano Water Reclamation 
Plant in Windsor. c) Alwington Avenue bioswale project in Kingston. Sources: a) City of Thunder Bay, 2015; b) 
Courtesy of the City of Windsor; c) Courtesy of the City of Kingston.
The City of Thunder Bay’s innovative Climate Adaptation Strategy (City of Thunder Bay, 2015) and associated 
Web portal have increased local communication and education on climate change. The City has moved 
forward with implementing measures to reduce local flood risk and improve the quality of stormwater runoff 
through various low-impact development projects, including a biofiltration facility. The City of Windsor, 
an early champion of adaptation, has promoted green roofs as a means to reduce risks associated with 
stormwater runoff and flooding, as well as heat events (City of Windsor, 2020). Since the release of their 
Climate Change Adaptation Plan, green roofs have been installed throughout the city on both private and 
municipal buildings. A recent study ranked the City of Kingston’s Climate Action Plan (City of Kingston, 2014) 
as the top plan in Canada for effectively addressing both greenhouse gas emissions reduction and climate 
change adaptation (Guyadeen et al., 2019). Kingston has also begun investing in low-impact development 
projects to reduce climate risks. Projects include increasing usage of permeable pavement, implementing 
bioswale gardens, and increasing underground stormwater storage (City if Kingston, 2014). All three 
municipalities recognize the importance of adaptive management in their projects and have invested in 
monitoring performance over time (City of Thunder Bay, 2015; City of Kingston, 2014; City of Windsor, 2012).
As municipalities in the Great Lakes Basin continue to implement and monitor adaptation measures, 
governing agencies have highlighted the importance of sharing lessons learned between jurisdictions and 
increasing coordination across sectors and all orders of government (International Joint Commission Great 
Lakes Water Quality Board, 2017). 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 43 
3.5 Adaptation improves forest health, carbon 
storage and biodiversity 
Climate change impacts the composition, disturbance regimes, and timing of life cycle events in Ontario’s 
forests and forested landscapes. Changes in drought, pests, and fire and wind regimes are of particular 
concern given the resulting cumulative impacts. 
Impacts of climate change on Ontario forests include the northward spread of pests and diseases, and damage 
from extreme weather events, such as drought and wind. Earlier flowering or bud burst, lengthening of the 
growing season and changing forest composition have all been observed in Ontario’s forested landscapes 
in response to increased temperatures. Overall, climate change has the potential to cause both direct and 
indirect (through enhanced proliferation of pests and disease) damage to Ontario’s forests. Developing and 
implementing adaptation strategies, combined with supportive forest management policies and practices, help 
to reduce the vulnerability of Ontario’s trees to climate change, while building a more resilient forest landscape. 
Sustaining a resilient forested landscape also creates benefits for carbon sequestration and storage, provides 
ecosystem services for a variety of plants and animals, and maintains habitat connectivity to accommodate 
species range shifts. 
3.5.1 Introduction 
Ontario’s landscape is 66% forested and accounts for one fifth of Canada’s forest area (Government of 
Ontario, 2021b). The area includes four broad forested regions: the Hudson Bay Lowlands in the North 
subregion, the boreal forest in North and Central subregions, the Great Lakes–St. Lawrence forest in the 
Central and South subregions, and the deciduous forest in the South subregion (see Figure 3.14; Government 
of Ontario, 2019a).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 44 
Figure 3.14: Forest regions in Ontario. Source: Government of Ontario, 2016b.
Ontario’s forests support more than 147,000 direct and indirect jobs (Government of Ontario, 2020) and 
generated over $18.0 billion in total revenue in 2019 (Government of Ontario, 2020). Social and cultural 
benefits are harder to quantify, but Ontario’s forests are a source of significant cultural, aesthetic and spiritual 
importance to Ontarians, especially to Indigenous Peoples (Natural Resources Canada, 2018). Recreational 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 45 
activities such as camping, hiking, berry picking and hunting are also supported by forests (Government of 
Ontario, 2020).
The unmanaged forests of the Northern subregion sequester significant amounts of carbon. Total carbon 
storage in this area is projected to increase by between 16.7% to 20.7% by the end of the century under all 
Shared Socio-economic Pathway scenarios (see Section 2.22 in Bush et al., 2022 for an explanation of these 
scenarios), but stands are heavily influenced by wildfire (Ter-Mikaelian et al., 2021). Carbon storage potential 
in managed forests in the province exceeds that of unmanaged forests, but both are heavily influenced by fire 
and other stressors (Ter-Mikaelian et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2018). 
3.5.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities
Warmer winter temperatures have reduced the number of extreme cold days in Ontario, increasing the 
survival rate of forest pests, such as the emerald ash borer, forest tent caterpillar, spruce budworm and 
gypsy moth (Natural Resources Canada, 2019; Price et al., 2013; Candau and Fleming, 2011; Regniere et al., 
2009). Warmer winters have also reduced resistance to cold and promoted earlier spring bud burst in boreal 
conifers, making them vulnerable to late spring frosts. For example, in northwestern Ontario in the spring of 
2012, warm temperatures in March caused de-hardening, then were followed by freezing temperatures in 
April, resulting in a massive needle browning event, which affected more than 250,000 hectares of forest (see 
Figure 3.15; Rossi, 2015; Man et al., 2013). Recovery from browning may take several years, during which time 
the tree may be more susceptible to other stressors such as insects and disease (Man et al., 2013).
Figure 3.15: Aerial (left) and ground (right) views of damaged jack pine plantations near Upsala, Ontario, taken in 
May and June 2012. Source: Man et al., 2013.
Increasing summer temperatures accompanied by minimal increases in precipitation are projected to lead to 
drier conditions, more frequent drought and greater fuel loads (e.g., combustible organic matter) across the 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 46 
province, driving an increase in the frequency, intensity, extent, and timing and duration of forest fires (Wotton 
et al., 2017; Flannigan et al., 2016; Boulanger et al., 2014; Gauthier et al., 2014). The annual area burned 
from wildfires could double by the 2040s and increase eightfold by 2100, under a high-emissions scenario 
(Podur and Wotton, 2010). By the end of the century, the area burned by large fires (see Figure 3.16), the 
number of days where fire is likely to occur, and the number of days where fire intensities exceed suppression 
resources are all expected to increase significantly, creating challenges for wildfire management (Wotton et 
al., 2017; Gauthier et al., 2015). Wildfires have cascading impacts, affecting human health and well-being, and 
causing economic disruptions and losses (see Sector Impacts and Adaptation chapter of the National Issues 
Report; and the Natural Hazards chapter of the Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate). Fires can affect 
forestry operations and timber supply, while smoke from fires can taint the taste of agricultural crops such 
as grapes and berries, disrupt transportation and force evacuation of residents in proximal communities, 
notably Indigenous communities in the north of the province (see Figure 3.17). Forced evacuations by air from 
Indigenous communities without road access, such as those that occurred in Pikangikum, Deer Lake and Poplar 
Hill in 2021, are especially harmful to community members. Residents of Pikangikum were scattered between 
communities as far away as Cornwall, at a distance of 1,600 km, for almost one month (CBC News, 2021).
Figure 3.16: Mean annual area burned by large fires (fires larger than 200 ha) in Ontario from 1981 to 2010 (left) 
and projected mean annual area burned by large fires in Ontario near the end of the century (2071‒2100) under a 
high-emissions scenario (RCP8.5) (right). Source: Boulanger et al., 2014
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 47 
Figure 3.17: Glow and haze from wildfire during the evacuation of Pikangikum, July 10, 2021. Photo courtesy of 
Mandi Chan-Peters.
More frequent, severe and widespread outbreaks of pests and diseases are expected due to milder winter 
temperatures, with damage from pests increasing, particularly in the North and Central subregions of the 
province (Government of Ontario, 2019b; Candau et al., 2018; James et al., 2017; Pureswaran et al., 2015; Huff 
and Thomas, 2014; Regniere et al., 2009; Williamson et al., 2009). Damage to eastern spruce from budworm 
results in increased fire risk after defoliation, as breakage of dead tree tops and windthrow (trees uprooted or 
broken by wind) gradually build up an accumulation of “ladder fuels” that can lead to more forest fire ignitions, 
and allow the flames to extend higher into the forest canopy (James et al., 2017). Longer periods of moisture 
deficit driven by increased temperatures, lower seasonal precipitation and other factors, such as wind, will 
result in periods of decreased water availability, which also increase the risk of fire ignition (Candau et al., 
2018; James et al., 2017).
Warming imposes constraints on the growth of several boreal species, including balsam fir and larch, which 
could restrict their survival by the end of the century under a high greenhouse gas emissions scenario (Yeung 
et al., 2019; Boulanger et al., 2017). Traits, such as sensitivity to drought-induced mortality and potential 
for migration failure, affect the vulnerability of tree species and populations to climate change (Aubin et 
al., 2018). For example, drought events in the southern part of the white spruce’s range during the growing 
season in Ontario have exceeded the species’ drought tolerance capacity, significantly increasing mortality 
and reducing growth rates (Sang et al., 2019). Projected temperature increases and the frequency and 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 48 
severity of the growing season drought will likely result in a gradual retraction of white spruce from its current 
southern range edge (Weng et al., 2019). 
Resilient forests provide a range of ecosystem services to society (see Ecosystem Services chapter of the 
National Issues Report). The influence of climate change on forest disturbance regimes will have negative 
consequences for the provision of ecosystem services and carbon storage (Thom and Seidl, 2016). However, 
considering climate change projections and impacts in forest management planning will help to achieve 
management objectives, including biodiversity, productivity and carbon storage (Ontl et al., 2020).
At longer timescales, shifting climate envelopes will result in a general northward migration of tree species 
in Ontario, although the pace of climate change is likely to exceed the natural ability of forests to adapt 
(Brecka et al., 2018; Pedlar and McKenney, 2017; Janowiak et al., 2014; Huff and Thomas, 2014; Colombo, 
2008). Some populations of northern conifers respond negatively to temperature increases and are expected 
to decline at the southern edge of their range, decreasing their dominance in the population by up to 30% 
(Candau et al., 2018; Pedlar and McKenney, 2017; Janowiak et al., 2014; Thomson et al., 2010). 
3.5.3 Resiliency and adaptation
Initiatives to enhance the climate resilience of forests and forested landscapes are being undertaken at 
regional and local scales, and involve a wide range of actions. At the provincial level, the 2017 Ontario 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry climate adaptation strategy includes forest-specific actions such 
as the following: 1) reviewing tree seed and nursery stock transfer policies to ensure that they are based on 
the best available science; 2) exploring opportunities to improve provincial monitoring programs to take stock 
of climate change impacts; and 3) improving knowledge about specific tree species and habitats known to be 
vulnerable to climate change (Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, 2017b). 
In 2018, the Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority completed a comprehensive study of the impacts of 
climate change on tree planting and forest management, and identified ways that local programs might adapt 
(Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority, 2018). Their list of adaptation options included the following 
examples: 1) increasing the genetic and structural diversity of planted stock; 2) preparing for earlier planting 
time frames; 3) increasing post-planting tending activities; and 4) selecting climate-appropriate tree species 
(Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority, 2018). 
Climate change adaptation to increase forest resilience can also help to achieve carbon storage objectives. 
A range of options has been documented that can help manage climate change risks on forested landscapes 
(Edwards et al., 2015). Some forest management measures that support ecosystem services and overall 
forest health also promote carbon storage (Swanston et al., 2016). The Practitioners Menu of Adaptation 
Strategies and Approaches for Forest Carbon Management provides a suite of 31 approaches using seven 
different strategies that provide broad responses to climate change (Ontl et al., 2020).
A key challenge for forest adaptation is addressing the fact that the pace of climate change is likely to exceed 
the natural ability of forests to adapt (see Section 3.5.2). Many jurisdictions across Canada are examining 
the potential value of assisted migration, i.e., human interventions to deliberately relocate species to new, 
more climate-suitable locations (Edwards, 2015; Eskelin et al., 2011). Since 2010, six assisted migration trials 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 49 
have been implemented in Ontario to compare locally sourced and more southern-sourced seeds (Forests 
Ontario, 2018). The movement of tree seeds beyond their current seed transfer zones requires approval from 
the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry (Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, 
2017a). The Ministry is using SeedWhere to inform updates to the Ontario Tree Seed Transfer Policy (see Box 
3.4; McKenney et al., 2009). 

Box 3.4: SeedWhere – A climate matching tool for assisted migration
SeedWhere is a simple tool developed to assist in making seed transfer decisions for forest regeneration or 
other ecological restoration activities (McKenney et al., 2009; 1999). The tool identifies locations whose 
climate is similar to a point of interest and then uses two methods (the Gower metric and the Universal 
Response Function approach) to calculate climate similarity. SeedWhere can be used with any number of 
climate variables and was developed to incorporate climate changes. The tool can be used for both seed 
procurement and deployment (see Figure 3.18; Van Bogaert and Lorente, 2017). 
Figure 3.18: Sample output of SeedWhere, showing seed procurement and deployment for seeds in Sudbury, 
Ontario. Source: Van Bogaert and Lorente, 2017; “Seed sources for planting at Sudbury, ON” and “Deployment 
areas for seed from Sudbury, ON”, Canadian Forest Service, reproduced with the permission of the Department of 
Natural Resources Canada. 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 50 
A range of actions has been documented to help improve forest resilience in the context of changing climate 
(see Table 3.4). These adaptive strategies will improve forest health for recovery and enable a transition to 
new stand structure (Sang et al., 2019).
Table 3.4: Examples of adaptation options for forests and 
forested landscapes
THEME
ADAPTATION OPTION
SOURCE
Assisted 
Migration/Seed 
Sources
Using seeds, germplasm and other genetic material from across 
a greater geographic range. This may entail importing seedlings 
from farther away that are better adapted to current/future 
climate conditions.
Swanston et 
al., 2012
Fire
Using prescribed burning or other fuel treatments to reduce fire 
risk, reduce forest vulnerability to insect outbreaks and prepare 
forest stands for regeneration.
Swanston 
et al., 2012; 
Gauthier et al., 
2014; Huff and 
Thomas, 2014
Forest 
Management 
Planning
Developing flexible forest management policies, plans and 
practices capable of responding to changes.
Gauthier et al., 
2014
Habitat 
Connectivity
Establishing or restoring forest cover along natural features, such 
as rivers or property lines, which may improve species’ ability to 
naturally adapt and migrate.
Johnston 
et al., 2010; 
Swanston et al., 
2012; Gauthier 
et al., 2014
Harvesting
Harvesting forests that are most vulnerable to disturbance (e.g., 
insect outbreaks) or general decline before they reach their 
otherwise optimal rotation age, which allows better adapted 
species or populations to move in.
Gauthier et al., 
2014; Huff and 
Thomas, 2014
Monitoring
Evaluating the adequacy of existing environmental and biological 
monitoring networks for tracking the impacts of climate change 
on forest ecosystems, identifying inadequacies and gaps in these 
networks, and identifying options to address them.
Gauthier et al., 
2014
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 51 
THEME
ADAPTATION OPTION
SOURCE
Pests/Diseases
Increasing preparedness for insect and pest management, 
improving pest monitoring and maintaining or improving the 
ability of forests to resist the spread of pests and pathogens.
Johnston et al., 
2010; Huff and 
Thomas, 2014
Wind
Varying the shape and size of clearcuts and leaving patches or 
stream buffers to reduce vulnerability to potential for increased 
windthrow disturbance.
Gauthier et al., 
2014
Species 
Diversity
Active management of understory regeneration to help forests 
make the transition to new and better adapted compositions 
more quickly by reducing competition from undesirable, poorly 
adapted or invasive species.
Swanston et 
al., 2012
Education/
Communication
Engaging members of the public in a dialogue on forest values 
and management under a changing climate, and involving them 
in an assessment of forest management adaptation options.
Johnston et al., 
2010; Gauthier 
et al., 2014

Knowledge of the rate, magnitude and location of changes in forest composition and distribution remains 
highly uncertain (Candau et al., 2018). Adaptation in forests is further complicated by the long timelines 
involved, as forest management decisions made today will have effects far into the future (Lemmen et al., 
2014). It is also important that adaptation objectives align with other objectives, such as biodiversity and 
species-at-risk. Ultimately, a comprehensive and integrated systems approach that accounts for the full range 
of climate impacts and the interactions between them will best improve understanding of tree vulnerability to 
climate change and how to support the adaptation of trees (Johnson, 2009). Collaborative initiatives, such as 
the Forestry Adaptation Community of Practice (see Box 3.5), are helpful in this regard.
Box 3.5: Forestry Adaptation Community of Practice
The Forestry Adaptation Community of Practice (FACoP) is an online platform dedicated to advancing 
adaptation in Canada’s forestry sector. The platform allows industry members, researchers, policymakers and 
others involved in Canadian forestry and climate change adaptation to share information and best practices. 
The FACoP features recent papers/articles on climate change and forests, upcoming forestry-related events, an 
online library with hundreds of resources, discussion forums with member-driven topics, recordings of webinars 
featuring a variety of forestry and climate change experts, and more. Membership in the FACoP is free.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 52 
3.6 Climate change brings threats and 
opportunities to Ontario agriculture and 
food systems 
Longer growing seasons and warmer average temperatures will benefit the agriculture sector in some 
parts of Ontario. However, projected reductions in summer rainfall along with more severe heatwaves, 
higher frequency of precipitation extremes, and increased risks from pests and diseases threaten farm 
operations, as well as supporting activities, such as food processing and distribution. Increased capacity 
and adaptation across the sector would permit the seizing of opportunities and management of risks 
posed by climate change.
Warmer average temperatures and longer growing seasons present opportunities for agriculture in Ontario, 
including the expansion of production in some regions and increased potential for specialty crops. These 
benefits could be offset, and potentially overwhelmed, by negative impacts associated with extreme 
precipitation and increased drought, resulting in increases in soil erosion, moisture stress, crop damage and 
livestock fatalities. Resulting risks are increased by vulnerabilities in the food processing, distribution and retail 
systems that are dependent on critical infrastructure. Disruptions in supply chains caused by extreme weather 
events cascade through the broader supply chain, often impacting vulnerable populations with pre-existing food 
security and access challenges. Traditional mechanisms to deal with climate impacts, such as crop insurance, 
may not be sustainable, highlighting the need for accelerated action on adaptation. Achieving the full potential 
of resilience measures requires investments in areas such as infrastructure and labour, in addition to supportive 
policy in areas of agriculture, water management and land use.
3.6.1 Introduction 
Agri-food is a multi-faceted sector that is inextricably linked to other economic sectors and is co-dependent 
on infrastructure components, such as electricity, transportation and telecommunications (see Sector 
Impacts and Adaptation chapter of the National Issues Report). According to the 2016 census, Ontario’s 
agricultural sector employed over 800,000 people (approximately 11.5% of provincial employment) and 
contributed $39.5 billion to the provincial economy (OMAFRA, 2016). Ontario is also Canada’s top agri-food 
exporting province (OMAFRA, 2016).
The province’s prime agricultural lands are located mostly in the South subregion and provide current 
and future opportunities for agriculture. Farm-level agriculture is enshrined in the social fabric of rural 
communities throughout this subregion. Smaller, but potentially important areas for agriculture are found in 
the Central subregion, particularly the Great Clay Belt (Cochrane district), Manitoulin Island, Kenora, Rainy 
River, Dryden and Thunder Bay districts. Further expansion of growing areas in Ontario is possible with 
ongoing climate change (Robinson et al., 2020; Morand et al., 2017c).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 53 
The vulnerability of agricultural systems to climate change depends largely on the characteristics of local 
farming systems and the specific crops that are grown. Farmers frequently implement adaptive measures 
and seek new technologies in order to better manage on-site weather and climate risks (Holland and Smit, 
2014). These measures often involve the use of crop-specific, commodity-specific and region-specific 
responses and tools to improve the productivity of farming operations, including cultivar selection, adjusting 
the timing of cropping operations, fertilizer and pesticide application, crop rotation, tillage practices, tile 
drainage and irrigation optimization (Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, 2021a; Ontario 
Cover Crops Steering Committee, 2017; Council of Canadian Academies, 2013). 
3.6.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities 
Observed increases in seasonal and annual temperatures in parts of Ontario are reflected by changes 
in agroclimatic indices, which show increases in average growing season length, the number of growing 
degree days (GDDs) and rates of average evapotranspiration (Bootsma, 2012; 2011). Continued warming 
and increases in accumulated crop heat units (CHUs: a temperature-based index used to determine growth 
potential of corn) will support new crop establishment and/or range expansion into other parts of the 
province, including in more northerly regions where water availability and soil conditions are suitable (Qian 
et al., 2012). For example, in the Great Clay Belt region, where just over 18% of the 1.8 million ha of prime 
agricultural land is currently used in agricultural production, growing season length is projected to increase 
from 160 days in the 2020s to over 180 days in the 2050s under a high-emissions scenario (Robinson et 
al., 2020; Morand et al., 2017b). However, such benefits of climate change may be offset, or potentially 
overwhelmed, by a range of negative impacts, including the increased frequency and intensity of extreme 
weather events, which can lead to enhanced soil erosion, increased moisture stress, crop damage and an 
increase in livestock fatalities (Motha and Baier, 2005). The rapid rate of climate change, particularly changes 
in extreme temperature and precipitation events, may challenge adaptation efforts (Kulshreshtha et al., 2010; 
Wall et al., 2007). 
A wide range of climatic and non-climatic factors influences crop growth and yield. While key factors, 
including geographic location, soil type, weather patterns and extreme events, are outside the control of 
producers, responses such as the choice of cultivars, tillage, irrigation and fertilization practices and timing of 
major operations provide opportunities to improve yield in any given year (Morand et al., 2017c; Brklacich and 
Woodrow, 2016; Holland and Smit, 2013). 
A large number of studies have examined how climate risks to crops and commodities could affect future 
productivity. These include impacts on maize (Qian et al., 2019; He et al., 2018; Morand et al., 2017a; 
Zaytseva, 2016; Gaudin et al., 2015), soy (He et al., 2018; Jing et al., 2017; Zaytseva, 2016), wheat (Qian et al., 
2019; He et al., 2018), canola (Qian et al., 2019; Qian et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018), grapes (Hewer and Gough, 
2019; Shaw, 2017; Holland and Smit, 2014) and maple syrup (Sugar Maple) (Brown et al., 2015; Richardson, 
2015). Dynamic crop models are often used to quantify climate change impacts on crop yields (see Table 
3.5), enabling more focused impact assessments (Luo, 2011). Differences and biases in crop models, as 
well as the climate scenarios and downscaling methods used, create uncertainties in projected crop yield 
changes (Li et al., 2018). The use of multi-model ensembles reduces biases present in individual models and 
is recommended in assessments (Qian et al., 2020). 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 54 
Table 3.5: Estimates of annual yield change under climate change for 
specific crops in Ontario
CROP
ANNUAL 
YIELD 
CHANGE
CLIMATE CHANGE 
MODEL AND 
SCENARIO
TIME FRAME
REFERENCE
Maize
+9‒12%
+13‒17%
CanRCM4 – RCP 4.5 
CanRCM4 – RCP 8.5
2071‒2100
2071‒2100
He et al., 2018
+41%
Multi-model ensemble 
– CANGRD – RCP 8.5
2041‒2070
Morand et al., 2017a
Soybean
N/C
N/C
CanRCM4 – RCP 4.5
CanRCM4 – RCP 8.5
2071‒2100
2071‒2100
He et al., 2018
Winter Wheat
-15‒16%
-32%
CanRCM4 – RCP 4.5
CanRCM4 – RCP 8.5
2071‒2100
2071‒2100
He et al., 2018
Canola
-21%
-33%
-27%
-50%
CanRCM4 – RCP 4.5
CanRCM4 – RCP 8.5
CanRCM4 – RCP 4.5
CanRCM4 – RCP 8.5
2041‒2070
2041‒2070
2071‒2100
2071‒2100
Qian et al., 2018
Notes: CanRCM4 is the Canadian Regional Climate Model large ensemble (Environment and Climate 
Change Canada, 2020). RCP 4.5 is a moderate emissions scenario, and RCP 8.5 is a high-emissions 
scenario.

Feed and pasture forage for livestock represents 10% of Ontario’s agricultural production (Ontario Ministry of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, 2016). Forage production, particularly in northern locations, is constrained 
by growing season length and the resulting number of harvests. Projected increases in forage yield will 
provide benefits to livestock farming (Payant et al., 2021; Thivierge et al., 2017) along with agricultural 
expansion opportunities in northern regions (Chapagain, 2017). Livestock are also negatively affected by 
exposure to extreme or prolonged heat (Smith and Eastwood, 2017; Bishop-Williams et al., 2015), and other 
weather-related factors including wildfire (Schultz and Lishman 2018), extreme cold (Tarr, 2015; Richardson, 
2003) and extreme precipitation (Cheng et al., 2022; Rojas-Downing, 2017).
Climate change will lead to increased movement and establishment of invasive alien species, including pests, 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 55 
disease and competing plants, which will threaten agricultural production (see section 7.4 of the Sector 
Impacts and Adaptation chapter of the National Issues Report; International Plant Protection Convention 
Secretariat, 2021). Increased annual temperatures allow pests to expand the northern bounds of their 
range, while warmer winters allow proliferation of certain pests (Baute, 2020; Taylor et al., 2018). As climate 
envelopes shift northward to create or expand suitable temperature conditions, the southernmost areas 
of Ontario stand to be the first to experience new invasive alien species, particularly in areas where their 
movement may be facilitated by transportation across the international border. Earlier and longer growing 
seasons may provide a more abundant food source for pests and, in some cases, may warrant additional 
application of management techniques, such as herbicides or pesticides (Baute, 2020; Taylor et al., 2018).
Aspects of food processing, distribution and retail that complement primary agricultural production and 
that are dependent on buildings, transportation, electricity, telecommunications and fuel supply also face 
exposure to climate risks. Disruptions caused by extreme weather events cascade through the broader supply 
system and highlight the need for adaptation at many levels and by many actors (Toronto Medical Officer of 
Health, 2018; Zeuli et al., 2018). In many cases, impacts to the food supply chain cascade down to vulnerable 
populations with pre-existing food security and access challenges (Mbow et al., 2019; C40 Cities, 2018). 
A systematic review of food system vulnerability was commissioned by Toronto Public Health to identify 
risks to the food supply chain and impacts on public health, specifically for vulnerable populations. While 
concluding that Toronto’s food system is relatively resilient to climate change, six main vulnerabilities were 
identified, along with recommendations to improve climate resilience (see Table 3.6; Zeuli et al., 2018). 
Table 3.6: Vulnerabilities and adaptation options in the food supply 
chain of Toronto and surrounding areas
MAIN AREA OF VULNERABILITY
POSSIBLE ADAPTATION OPTIONS
Flood risk
Business continuity planning; forms of insurance; improved 
awareness of the potential for flood risk
Electricity, road network and fuel 
infrastructure 
Backup power generation capacity; planned alternate routes; 
disaster support hubs
The Ontario Food Terminal
Power supply redundancy
Food access in inner suburban 
neighbourhoods
Business continuity planning; forms of insurance; backup power 
generation; local community food resilience action plans; food 
emergency response plans
Food insecurity and the food 
assistance network
Addressing of underlying issues that lead to food insecurity
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 56 
MAIN AREA OF VULNERABILITY
POSSIBLE ADAPTATION OPTIONS
Coordination, collaboration, 
planning and preparedness
Defined roles for coordination oversight; promotion of emergency 
planning guidance
Source: Adapted from Zeuli et al., 2018.
3.6.3 Resiliency and adaptation
Principles for building climate resilience apply to the province broadly, with several province-wide programs 
serving to enhance climate change education, engagement and capacity support for the agriculture sector as 
a whole (Morand et al., 2017c). Programs such as the Canadian Agricultural Partnership (Agriculture and Agri-
Food Canada, 2021), the Canada-Ontario Environmental Farm Plan (Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and 
Rural Affairs, 2021b), and business risk management programs, delivered by the provincial agency Agricorp, 
provide access to clean technology funding, as well as mechanisms for promoting climate change adaptation 
and increased adoption of best management practices for soil health, water quality and other ecosystem 
goods and services. 
Specific adaptation options are usually dependent on local-scale circumstances, and include actions such as 
diversifying crops, introducing different crop rotations, managing water on-site, and adjusting the timing of 
seeding (Qian et al., 2018; Morand et al., 2017a; Gaudin et al., 2015). Tender fruit growers use wind machines 
or frost fans to protect fruit against early spring frost, and hail nets and hail cannons to protect against hail 
storms (Ontario Apple Growers, 2018). Tender fruit, grain and oilseed growers are selecting new cultivars 
better suited to projected climate conditions (Hewer and Gough, 2018; He et al., 2017; Shaw, 2017; Holland 
and Smit, 2014). Understanding specific vulnerabilities and options to enhance climate resilience can be 
assisted by decision-support tools (see Case Story 3.4). 
Case Story 3.4: Understanding and addressing agroclimatic risks 
and opportunities
The Ontario Climate and Agriculture Assessment Framework (Morand et al., 2017c) is a spatially explicit 
decision-support tool that assesses baseline and future agro-climatic risks and opportunities. It uses global 
climate model output to understand future crop suitability, as measured in growing degree days (GDDs), 
crop heat units (CHUs), potential evaporation and yield. It also gives a land suitability rating score under the 
influence of climate change, building on the Land Suitability Rating System developed by Agriculture and 
Agri-Food Canada (Agronomic Interpretations Working Group, 1995). The initial design of the OCAAF was 
tested and refined through application to two areas and production systems: forage-based beef production in 
Ontario’s Great Clay Belt (looking specifically at timothy hay) and corn production in southwestern Ontario.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 57 
In both areas, climate change was found to bring opportunities to the agricultural sector through longer 
growing seasons, increasing growing degree days and crop heat units, and increased crop yields (see Table 
3.7). However, climate change also presents risks that will require effective adaptation. For example, between 
the months of May and September in southwestern Ontario, the region is projected to see a 16% increase in 
potential evaporation, increasing moisture stress. Increased spring precipitation, high-intensity rainstorms 
and rain-on-snow events will increase risks of excess soil moisture in the Great Clay Belt, where soil drainage 
is already poor. 
Table 3.7: Summary of changes projected by 2050 under a high-
emissions scenario (RCP 8.5) for two regions of Ontario using the 
Ontario Climate and Agriculture Assessment Framework
TIMOTHY HAY IN THE GREAT 
CLAY BELT
CORN IN SOUTHWESTERN 
ONTARIO
Temperature
Annual: +2.9°C
Winter: +4.7°C
Spring: +3.2°C
Summer: +3.2°C
Autumn: +3.3°C
Annual: +3.3°C
Winter: +3.6°C
Spring: +2.8°C
Summer: +3.2°C
Autumn: +3.1°C
Precipitation
Annual: +9%
Winter: +19%
Spring: +15%
Summer: +1%
Autumn: +7%
Annual: +6%
Winter: +13%
Spring: +13%
Summer: no change
Autumn: +3%
Growing season length
+50 days 
+28 days
Growing Degree Days 
(GDD) 5* and Crop Heat 
Units (CHU)
GDD = +566 (40% increase)
CHU = +390 (25% increase)
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 58 
TIMOTHY HAY IN THE GREAT 
CLAY BELT
CORN IN SOUTHWESTERN 
ONTARIO
Land Suitability Rating 
System** scores
Shift from Class 5 (very severe 
limitations) to Class 3 (moderate 
limitations)
Shift from Class 1 (no limitations) to 
Class 2 (slight limitations) 
Yield (kg/ha) 
+2,160 (30% increase)
+3,300 (41% increase)
* GDD5 is a measure of the accumulation of days where the daily mean temperature is above 5 degrees 
Celsius.
** Land Suitability Rating System is a procedure for rating the suitability of land for agricultural spring-
seeded small grains (and hardy oilseeds). 
Source: Morand et al., 2017b.

Adaptation and policy options were developed for each region and production system, providing guidance 
on how to reduce climate risks and seize opportunities. For example, in southwestern Ontario, subsurface 
drip irrigation could help manage water at the farm level and reduce fluctuations in moisture availability. To 
capitalize on the improving growing conditions in the Great Clay Belt, incentives could be developed to attract 
new beef farmers to the area, with the goal of expanding the industry and strengthening food security in 
northern Ontario (Morand et al., 2017c).

The presence of mechanisms to support, enable or encourage adaptation does not necessarily result in 
uptake. In the absence of increased adaptation, traditional mechanisms such as agri-insurance programs 
may experience deficits and require additional investment by government to ensure their sustainability over 
time (Auditor General of Ontario, 2017). Efforts to adapt to climate change are frequently driven by economic 
opportunities, such as the expansion of grape production for wine, or land-use changes for the expansion 
of beef farming (Hewer and Gough, 2019; Morand et al., 2017b; Shaw, 2017; Beef Farmers of Ontario, 2014; 
Holland and Smit, 2014). Recognizing the full potential of these efforts requires investments in areas such as 
infrastructure and labour, as well as supportive policy in areas of land use, water and agriculture (Chapagain, 
2017; Morand et al., 2017b; Barbeau et al., 2015).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 59 
3.7 Existing human health inequities will be 
worsened by climate change 
Many non-climate factors, including income, housing quality and employment, play key roles in determining 
the vulnerability of communities and individuals to the health risks of climate change. Marginalized and 
low socio-economic populations will experience disproportionate health impacts and will have increasing 
difficulty in coping and adapting. Regional and local assessments of climate change vulnerability that include 
consideration of health equity provide a foundation for stronger and more widespread adaptation action.
Determinants of human health include many interrelated social and demographic factors, such as income 
level, education, literacy, social status, gender, race and culture at the scale of individuals or communities. 
Priority populations for adaptation are groups of people with increased risk of poor health outcomes, and those 
who can benefit from public health interventions. Marginalized populations are disproportionately vulnerable 
to climate-related changes. Local or regional climate change vulnerability and adaptation assessments that 
include consideration of equity can help target short- and long-term adaptation interventions. Assessments 
completed for many areas of the province are leading to greater efforts to monitor changing risks, provide 
appropriate education and outreach to the public, and implement measures to improve climate change 
resilience. Actions to address the underlying social determinants of health are critical for decreasing social 
disparities and population vulnerability, as well as advancing adaptation.
3.7.1 Introduction
Climate change increases existing threats to population health and compounds existing pressures on key 
factors such as water quality, food security and shelter (see Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate; 
Decent and Feltmate, 2018; Watts et al., 2018; Zeuli et al., 2018; Gough et al., 2016; Berry et al., 2014b). 
Vulnerable and marginalized populations, including those with existing social and health inequities, existing 
or underlying health issues, or economic disparities, face a disproportionally larger burden from the impacts 
of climate change (see Figure 3.19; Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience Results, 2018; 
Berry et al., 2014b). 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 60 
Figure 3.19: Health vulnerabilities for different populations experiencing a heat wave. Source: Adapted from 
Salas et al., 2019.
Extreme weather has significant impacts on human health (Decent and Feltmate, 2018; Rajaram et al., 2016). 
These include direct impacts to health and safety, for example from heat events (e.g., heat stress), wildfires 
(e.g., loss of trees, homes, impacts on people), extreme wind (e.g., injuries from flying debris), and from heavy 
rainfall causing flooding (e.g., drowning) as well as indirect impacts (e.g., illness from poor water quality or 
exposure to mold, psychosocial trauma) (see Figure 3.20; Council of Canadian Academies, 2019; Gough et al., 
2016; Paterson et al., 2012). The impacts of extreme weather events on mental health include incidences of 
post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety and grief (see Figure 3.21; Hayes et al., 2019; Hayes et al., 
2018). The threat of climate change itself can lead to emotional distress, including “ecoanxiety,” “ecoparalysis” 
and “solastalgia,” which refers to the distress and isolation resulting from the transformation and degradation 
of one’s home environment (Galway et al., 2019; Hayes et al., 2018; Albrecht et al., 2007).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 61 
Figure 3.20: Linkages between climate change-related disasters and human health impacts. Source: Council of 
Canadian Academies, 2019.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 62 
Figure 3.21: Factors influencing the psychosocial health impacts of climate change. Source: Hayes et al., 2019.
3.7.2 Impacts and vulnerabilities
Extreme heat
Extreme heat events are projected to continue to increase with climate change (Zhang et al., 2019), leading to 
increased risk of heat-related illness and excess deaths (Chen et al., 2016; Gough et al., 2016; Margolis, 2013). 
By 2100, under a high-emissions scenario, Ontario would see 38 (28.1–44.5) more hot days each year, while 
under a low-emissions scenario there would be 4.7 (2.8–6.8) (Zhang et al., 2019). Extreme high temperatures 
are associated with increased rates of hospitalization for coronary heart disease and stroke (Bai et al., 2018), 
diabetes (Bai et al., 2016), increased respiratory related deaths (Chen et al., 2016), and more emergency room 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 63 
visits for mental and behavioural illness in Toronto (Wang et al., 2014). Ontario public health officials ranked 
extreme heat as their biggest concern among climate change impacts (Paterson et al., 2012). Heat warnings 
are triggered by regional (northern, southern and extreme southwestern) data on temperature intensity and 
duration, and also include humidity thresholds (Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care, 2016). During 
a baseline period from 1971 to 2000, the frequency of a heat event (three consecutive days of maximum 
temperature greater than 32°C– Ontario Ministry of Labour) in all Public Health Units (PHUs) was less than 
one per year. By 2050, the vast majority of PHUs (28 out of 36) will experience at least one heat event annually 
and, by the 2080s, 33 out of 36 PHUs will see more than one extreme heat event per year (Gough et al., 2016). 
Windsor-Essex has noted a relationship between extreme temperature-related illnesses and increasing emergency 
department visits as the number of record heat days increases (Windsor-Essex County Health Unit, 2019). 
Heat levels are intensified in urban centres where extensive concrete and paved surfaces produce an Urban 
Heat Island effect (Mohsin and Gough, 2012; Gough et al., 2001). In the absence of expanded adaptation, 
increased temperature extremes will lead to greater risk of heat-related illness and mortality, particularly among 
vulnerable populations, such as the elderly, young children, physically disabled, those living alone and those 
who work outdoors (Bai et al., 2018; 2016; Guo et al., 2018; McDonald et al., 2016). Projections of extreme heat 
in Ontario show significant increases in high temperatures over the current century (see Table 3.8; Canadian 
Centre for Climate Services, 2019). 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 64 
Table 3.8: Projections of the number of days with maximum temperatures 
above 30°C for Thunder Bay, Sudbury, Toronto, Niagara Falls and Windsor 
to the middle and end of the century under moderate- (RCP 4.5) and 
high- (RCP 8.5) emission scenarios
NUMBER OF DAYS WITH MAXIMUM TEMPERATURE >30 °C
HISTORICAL
ANNUAL VALUES
1950‒
2005
2050s
2080s
RCP 4.5
RCP 8.5
RCP 4.5
RCP 8.5
MEDIAN*
MEDIAN
RANGE
MEDIAN
RANGE
MEDIAN
RANGE
MEDIAN
RANGE
Thunder Bay
2
12
1‒21
12
4‒27
18
8‒28
35
14‒53
Sudbury
4
17
4‒22
22
11‒37
27
10‒36
47
20‒62
Toronto
11
35
20‒53
47
21‒61
51
29‒71
74
46‒90
Niagara 
Falls
7
31
19‒54
45
19‒65
50
26‒67
75
43‒95
Windsor
18
48
33‒67
61
31‒82
68
43‒93
94
67‒105
*Historical median values determined by calculating the median of annual values from 1950 to 2005.
Source: Environment and Climate Change Canada et al., 2019.

Vector-borne diseases
Warming temperatures and resulting shifts in bioclimatic envelopes have contributed to the expansion of 
certain disease vectors, including animals, ticks and insects (Gough et al., 2016; Berry et al., 2014b). 
Mosquito-borne diseases have increased by approximately 10% in Canada in the last two decades (Ludwig et 
al., 2019). Some of these diseases, including the Chikungunya virus, which has historically been limited to 
travel-related cases, could expand to parts of southern Ontario as temperatures increase and conditions 
become more favourable for transmission (Ng et al., 2017). The observed northward expansion of the 
blacklegged tick in Ontario, which is responsible for transmitting Lyme disease, is in part due to temperature 
increases (Cheng et al., 2017; Clow et al., 2017; Werden et al., 2014). The number of confirmed and probable 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 65 
Lyme disease cases observed in Ontario PHUs was three times higher in 2017 than the average from 2012 to 
2016, and twice as high in 2018 (Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion, 2019; Nelder et al., 
2018). Northward and westward expansion of the distribution of blacklegged ticks and the associated risk of 
Lyme disease are projected to continue throughout this century in response to changing climate (see Figure 
3.22; Gasmi, 2019; Sagurova et al., 2019).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 66 
Figure 3.22: Risk maps for populations of the blacklegged tick (Ixodes scapularis) vector of Lyme disease 
historically (1971‒2000) and under future emissions scenarios (2020s, 2050s and 2080s). The climate data 
was derived using the Canadian Regional Climate Model version 4.2.3 and was forced by a high (A2) emissions 
scenario. Red = areas of high risk, orange = areas of medium risk, green = areas of low risk and grey = areas of 
no risk of tick populations. Within “no risk” areas, there is a low, but real risk of acquiring Lyme disease due to 
adventitious ticks dispersed by migratory birds. Source: Courtesy of Nick Ogden.  
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 67 
Health impacts in the North subregion
Indigenous communities in Ontario’s North subregion have experienced flooding on several occasions. 
Whether driven by rapid snow melt, rain on frozen ground or ice jams in the large rivers, flooding in the spring 
season can bring significant anxiety. Extreme weather and flooding increase the risk of water contamination, 
water-borne illness and vector-borne disease, and can disrupt critical health care services in hospitals and 
clinics, as well as in other institutions (Giordano et al., 2017; Clarke, 2009; Brunkard et al., 2008; Cretikos et al., 
2007). Anxiety and other mental health conditions are also triggered through evacuations related to wildfire, 
as well as flooding, and when critical transportation and energy infrastructure is disrupted, highlighting how 
impacts cascade through an interdependent system (Cunsolo 2018; 2014). These conditions can reverberate 
over time in the form of post-traumatic stress disorder, emotional fatigue, substance misuse and a lost sense 
of place (Bourque and Cunsolo Willox, 2014). 
Food insecurity is also causing health impacts. Moose, a major source of wild food for many central and 
northern Ontario First Nations, is in decline in much of the region (Arsenault et al., 2020). Climate change, 
through later frost onset and earlier spring warming, is increasing exposure to fatal parasites transferred 
from white-tailed deer (Priadka et al., 2022). Deer are expanding northward in response to shorter winters 
and decreased snow depth allowing easier movement and access to browse (the leaves, twigs, and buds that 
deer eat) (Dawe and Boutin, 2016). Alteration of habitat by human and climate influences that reduces the 
density of the forest canopy is amplifying the impacts on moose by allowing easier access for predators and 
increasing the accumulation of snow on the ground, making it more difficult for younger animals to negotiate 
the snow and find browse (Priadka et al., 2022). In Biigtigong Nishnaabeg (Pic River) First Nation, on the 
north shore of Lake Superior, residents are adapting to the northward shift in the moose population by using 
a mobile app to pass on information to others about moose sightings, as well as signs of visible parasitic 
diseases on moose in their Traditional Territory (Popp et al., 2018). 
People in thirty-one First Nation communities in the North subregion rely on winter roads to travel south in 
winter (see Section 3.2.2) for medical services from specialists and in hospitals, as well as to obtain food 
and other essential supplies (Ontario Ministry of Energy, Northern Development and Mines, 2019). Winter 
roads transect the traditional territories of most communities in the Nishnawbe Aski Nation and many in 
Grand Council Treaty #3. Personal snowmobile travel on frozen lakes and rivers supports hunting and fishing, 
which are not only integral components of subsistence living, but are also fundamental to Indigenous culture 
(Cunsolo Willox et al., 2014). However, safety is increasingly compromised by thin ice during warmer winter 
weather, notably in sections that span large water bodies (Hori et al., 2018a; 2018b). Unreliable access for 
heavy transport vehicles limits commercial food deliveries, making healthier food options such as fresh fruit 
and vegetables either not available or too expensive. In response, many have begun to develop family and 
community gardens, taking advantage of a lengthening growing season, and are also building greenhouses 
(Sioux Lookout First Nations Health Authority, 2019).
3.7.3 Resiliency and adaptation
Public Health Units (PHUs) across the province are, to varying extents, already assessing and managing 
the impacts of climate change on human health (Paterson et al., 2012). Addressing public health risks from 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 68 
climate change and extreme weather is mandated through the Ontario Public Health Standards, which 
references climate change in sections related to population health assessment, healthy environments, 
and prevention and control of infectious and communicable diseases (Ontario Ministry of Health and 
Long-Term Care, 2018b; Paterson et al., 2012). Some PHUs (e.g., Peel Region, London Middlesex, Simcoe 
Muskoka and Grey-Bruce) have undergone comprehensive studies and have published climate change 
vulnerability assessments and adaptation plans (Grey-Bruce Health Unit, 2017; Levison et al., 2017; Berry et 
al., 2014a; Region of Peel, 2012). These analyses detail local risks, highlight improvements to monitoring and 
implementation of adaptation measures, and consider how climate change goals can be aligned with health 
equity (Buse, 2018). 
The Ontario Climate Change and Health Toolkit contains guidelines (Ebi et al., 2016) and a workbook 
(Paterson et al., 2016) for conducting climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments, 
as well as a climate modelling study (Gough et al., 2016) that forecasts key health impacts for PHUs. A 
complementary National Climate Change and Health Workbook and Knowledge Primer to guide adaptation 
planning for health professionals is currently in development. 
Early warning systems and associated response measures are a key feature of health adaptation initiatives 
in Ontario. The provincial harmonized heat warning, established in 2016, provides a consistent approach and 
methodology for monitoring weather forecasts, identifying signals of a potential localized heat event and 
notifying PHUs that, in turn, can provide targeted, heat-related warnings and messages (Ontario Ministry of 
Health and Long-Term Care, 2016). The standardized messaging provided by these alert systems include 
details about the event itself (onset, intensity, duration), as well as response messaging, for example about 
who is at risk and potential symptoms of heat stress or stroke (Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term 
Care, 2018b). PHUs can escalate heat warnings and, alongside emergency management and municipal 
stakeholders, implement additional measures to protect vulnerable populations from extreme heat. 
Implementation of these heat alert systems in Hamilton, Toronto, Sudbury, Kingston and Windsor provides 
valuable lessons learned (see Case Story 3.5; Guilbault et al., 2016). 
Case Story 3.5: Local actions to address extreme heat
A series of 20 case studies examined how cities across Canada are adapting to extreme heat (Guilbault et 
al., 2016). The analysis identified core elements of heat alert and response systems designed to reduce the 
risk of illness and fatality during extremely hot days (see Figure 3.23). It also highlighted the following seven 
lessons learned: 
•	
Many communities are taking action now. Actions include Heat Alert and Response Systems, 
as well as preventative actions like incentivizing urban greening through green or cool roofs that 
reflect or absorb sun rays, and tree planting programs to increase the urban tree canopy and 
reduce heat island effects (e.g., Toronto Public Health). 
•	
A culture of prevention is the trigger for action. While decision-makers are often motivated to 
implement resilience measures after a major event such as a flood or wildfire hits a community, 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 69 
some communities have taken action to prepare for extreme heat before fatalities occur after 
witnessing impacts outside of their community. 
•	
There is great value in existing networks and partnerships. Public health officials can 
work alongside existing networks and partnerships, including with city officials, emergency 
services, school boards, seniors’ homes and community members, to assess risks, implement 
preventative measures and develop robust planning responses. In Ontario, many PHUs, including 
the Northwestern, Middlesex-London, Peel, and Simcoe-Muskoka health units, have leveraged 
relationships with their communities and other partners to conduct vulnerability assessments and 
develop adaptation plans.
•	
Evaluation and continuous innovation are essential. There are opportunities to assess the 
efficacy of existing plans and systems, and to identify innovations tailored to the individual 
community. 
•	
Focus preparedness on the most vulnerable. Programs need to focus on assessing vulnerability 
and ensuring that strategies are aligned with high-risk populations, like seniors who do not have 
access to air conditioning. 
•	
Invest in prevention to reduce the risk of loss. There are opportunities to invest in multifaceted 
solutions that extend past traditional public health interventions, like urban planning policies. 
•	
National and provincial leadership supports local preparedness. Support includes funding, 
education and a community of practice where lessons learned can be shared across jurisdictions 
(e.g,. Health Canada’s HealthADAPT program). 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 70 
Figure 3.23: Core elements of heat alert and response systems. Source: Guilbault et al., 2016, published by the 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.

Warning systems are also in place to identify mosquito-borne disease outbreaks like West Nile virus. Such 
systems can be adapted and improved to incorporate weather forecasting to supplement conventional public 
health surveillance techniques, similar to those piloted by the Peel Region Public Health Unit (Ogden et al., 
2019; Wang et al. 2011). 
The strong linkages between a population’s social and economic circumstances and its health (Keon and 
Pépin, 2009) are recognized as key factors in determining vulnerability to climate health impacts (City of 
Toronto, 2016; Toronto Public Health, 2015; Berry et al., 2014b; Toronto Public Health, 2008). Programs that 
target the underlying causes of inequity will lessen climate risks and improve overall quality of life (Buse, 
2018). Institutional capacity to protect vulnerable populations through the provision of emergency services, 
access to hospitals, cooling and warming centres, and other actions contributes significantly to reducing 
health-related impacts of climate change. The presence of green spaces is also associated with improved 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 71 
health outcomes, including improved air quality and provision of shade for cooling (Kingsley and EcoHealth 
Ontario, 2019; Mitchell and Popham, 2008). 
3.8 Progress on adaptation remains limited 
in Ontario 
Levels of climate change adaptation planning and implementation vary considerably across Ontario, with 
the primary focus still placed on the assessment of risk and vulnerability. Although there are examples 
of implementation, there is little evidence of adaptation being mainstreamed into decision making 
broadly. Systems for monitoring and evaluating adaptation action and effectiveness remain inadequate 
in most jurisdictions. 
Climate change assessments completed across the province paint a clear picture of the risks to society as 
a whole. Data, research, knowledge and information products on climate change impacts have improved 
awareness about the need to adapt in conjunction with significant efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
While various tools, frameworks and supporting mechanisms have been developed and applied to support the 
adaptation process, adaptation action in Ontario remains primarily focused on defining climate change risks, 
with relatively few examples of implementation. Regions and cities, public health units, conservation authorities 
and some Indigenous communities are leading in addressing climate change within their jurisdictions. 
Scaled-up adaptation implementation, as well as concrete and systematic ways to measure and report on the 
effectiveness of adaptation actions that have been implemented are important.
3.8.1 Introduction 
Implementation of adaptive measures and the mainstreaming of adaptation into existing decision-making 
processes initially require efforts to methodically build knowledge and assess risks (see Figure 3.24; 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy, 2019; ICLEI, 2016; Canadian Council of Ministers of 
the Environment, 2015; Douglas et al., 2011; Gleeson et al., 2011; Black et al., 2010). The core elements of 
a risk-based approach for climate resilience are consistent with international standards such as ISO 31000 
(2018), ISO 14090 (2019) and ISO 14091 (2019). These processes, supported by appropriate expertise and 
resources, provide a backdrop for planning and implementation to occur (see Case story 3.6).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 72 
Figure 3.24: The adaptation cycle as presented in the Blackfeet Climate Change Adaptation Plan. Source: Wagner 
et al., 2018.

Case Story 3.6: Climate change adaptation by the Georgina Island 
First Nation
Georgina Island First Nation, located along the east shore of Lake Simcoe, is dealing with a number of climate 
change impacts that have disrupted the community. Warmer winters have negatively affected the ability to 
travel from the island to the mainland via the ice road, and more frequent strong winds have damaged houses 
and other infrastructure. In response, the First Nation embarked on a community-based project in 2012 that 
collected and used Indigenous Knowledge as the foundation for climate change adaptation planning and 
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Risks and vulnerabilities associated with current and future climate 
change were identified, and recommendations were developed using a multi-step assessment framework.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 73 
An advisory committee comprised of Elders, youth and community members was established to provide 
project oversight and guidance. The committee met several times over the course of the project to learn 
about progress, provide advice on community priorities and review project results. A community adaptation 
liaison, hired from within the First Nation, worked closely with the community and partners throughout the 
project. Through one-on-one interviews with the liaison, community Elders, adults and youth shared their 
knowledge about changes in weather and climate, and how these changes have impacted their community. 
Bingo information sessions, interactive workshops and day-to-day interactions with community members 
provided opportunities to learn and provide feedback about the project and results (see Figure 3.25). Keeping 
the community informed and engaged was a fundamental part of the adaptation planning process. 
Figure 3.25: Interactive risk assessment workshop with Georgina Island First Nation community members. 
Source: Photo courtesy of Kerry Ann Charles.
The project developed 67 recommendations, all of which were vetted by the community, and a plan to 
implement them. One of the first recommendations to be implemented was the restoration of a creek that 
at one time flowed for nine months of the year, but had dried up in recent years. Because this creek was 
seen as a key location to alleviate potential flooding caused by intense precipitation, the community worked 
with property owners, a team of experts and individual community members to restore the creek. Since its 
restoration, the previous flora and fauna have reappeared and function to moderate the high volumes of 
water associated with heavy rainfall. Monitoring of the site by the Waabgon Gaming students, the First Nation 
Environment Department and project partners is ongoing. As monitoring proceeds, adjustments will be made 
to ensure that the creek remains functional and can be enjoyed by future generations.
Following the success of the project in their own community, Georgina Island First Nation reached out to 
neighbours within their Tribal Council and, using the same model, the community adaptation liaison and 
project partners have helped four other First Nation communities to start the climate change adaptation 
planning process (Charles, K.-A. 2019).
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 74 
3.8.2 Adaptation planning
Adaptation planning in Ontario varies in scale and scope. Multi-themed assessments (e.g., Lalonde et al., 
2012; Douglas et al., 2011) identify risks across broad landscapes, while more technical and in-depth analyses 
(e.g., Tu et al., 2017), often employing geographic information systems and climate change information, 
delineate risks at finer scales. 
The institutional arrangement of Conservation Authorities (CAs) in Ontario has proven successful at 
advancing adaptation planning at watershed scales, particularly as it relates to flood risk. As watershed 
and ecological stewards with jurisdictions stretching across many municipal boundaries, CAs participate in 
municipal and regional climate change initiatives in addition to having their own climate change plans (e.g., 
Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority). CAs have undertaken research to advance the climate change 
knowledge base, established best practices for managing climate change risk, and developed tools to assist 
adaptation decision making (e.g., the Risk and Return on Investment Tool (Credit Valley Conservation, 2020) 
and the Source Water Protection Tool (Milner et al., 2018b)). CAs are also key partners in the development 
and implementation of municipal or regional adaptation plans, including those in Kingston (City of Kingston, 
2014), Thunder Bay (City of Thunder Bay, 2015), Windsor (City of Windsor, 2020; 2012) and Durham Region 
(Durham Region, 2016). All of these plans reflect the collective input of many partners contributing expertise 
or experience to mobilize adaptation across multiple themes and sectors.
3.8.3 Implementation, monitoring and evaluation
Despite significant progress with respect to adaptation planning, the level of implementation of adaptation 
actions in Ontario remains low. Climate resilience planning has not kept pace with the rate of climate change, 
and the adaptation deficit in Ontario (Environmental Commissioner of Ontario, 2018a) continues to grow. 
Many provincial government policies have the potential to support adaptation and climate resilience. 
The Provincial Policy Statement (Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing, 2020), environmental 
assessment guidelines (Ontario Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Parks, 2014), asset 
management planning guidelines (Ontario Ministry of Infrastructure and Ministry of Transportation, 2012), 
the Northern Ontario Growth Plan (Ontario Ministry of Infrastructure and Ministry of Northern Development, 
Mines and Forestry, 2011) and other policy instruments signal recognition of climate change impacts and 
the need for adaptation. 
Barriers that impede progress on the planning, implementation and evaluation of adaptation in Ontario 
include financial constraints, lack of expertise and access to data, limited political will, support and mandate 
for action, and uncertainty associated with roles and responsibilities (see Box 3.6; Abdel-Fattah and 
Krantzberg, 2014a; Gregg et al., 2011). Addressing these barriers would help mainstream adaptation into 
policy and planning processes. 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 75 
Box 3.6: Reported barriers to adaptation action
A state-of-play report on climate change adaptation and infrastructure (AMEC Foster Wheeler and Credit 
Valley Conservation, 2017) and engagement sessions conducted in Ontario in 2019 to support development 
of this chapter highlighted several perceived barriers to adaptation action. These include the following: 
•	
Inconsistent guidance or lack of guidance and direction from the provincial and federal levels 
related to climate change;
•	
Need for municipal direction on how to define risk tolerance, particularly within existing urban areas;
•	
Need for municipal direction on how to set design goals for infrastructure to meet the needs of 
future climate within its lifespan;
•	
Lack of defined roles and responsibilities for water infrastructure, which creates confusion and a 
lack of integrated adaptation strategies;
•	
Insufficient collaboration among departments;
•	
Lack of engineering tools to support optimization of adaptation measures or financial tools to 
make an effective business case for adaptation action;
•	
Insufficient funding to implement adaptation initiatives; and 
•	
Lack of streamlined climate change data and resources to accelerate implementation.
The inherent complexity and diversity of climate change impacts, the multiple scales and cross-cutting nature 
of some adaptation actions, and other factors make tracking the success of adaptation challenging (Expert 
Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience Results, 2018). Indicators for province-wide monitoring 
and evaluation of adaptation implementation would help define pockets of inaction, create examples of 
success and inspire further action.
While progress has been made on adaptation planning in Ontario, action is fragmented and has not been 
conducted in a systematic way. This is not necessarily a negative, as a variety of approaches are required 
to determine best practices. Planning to date has primarily been undertaken in larger regions or cities where 
there is greater capacity and resources, disadvantaging smaller communities. Stronger coordination and 
governance among those implementing adaptation planning processes can improve information sharing and 
expedite climate resilience.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 76 
3.9 Moving forward 
Assessing progress on adaptation in Ontario remains challenging. Registries or databases of climate change 
risks in various sectors and regions, such as those that exist elsewhere (e.g., BC Ministry of Environment 
and Climate Change Strategy, 2019; UK Government, 2017), establish a baseline for measuring progress and 
help to prioritize adaptation actions. In Ontario, province-wide inventories of climate change impacts, risks 
and adaptation actions are not yet in place. As adaptation implementation increases, registries would help 
document changing climate risks and provide examples of sector- or region-appropriate adaptation actions. 
In addition to those major gaps, a number of key, and in some cases new, issues would benefit from 
additional research. These include governance, data availability, reducing uncertainties, risk transfer, cultural 
impacts and funding mechanisms. 
3.9.1 Governance
Governance of climate change issues is complex due to the range of authorities, including national, provincial 
and local governments, Indigenous communities, the private sector, civil society and other actors who work in 
this space. Coordination among all these parties on aspects of climate change adaptation can be challenging. 
A centralized information-sharing platform that includes climate science, climate change data, impacts, risk 
levels and adaptation would help facilitate access to information and increase coordination between actors, 
while also defining research opportunities related to cumulative impacts and interdependencies within the 
region (Angel et al., 2018; Milner et al., 2018a).
The issue is compounded in the Great Lakes Basin by the international dimension involving two countries and 
multiple provinces and states. Within the Basin, and under mandate from the Government of Canada and the 
United States Government, the International Joint Commission has engaged with local, state and provincial 
governments to coordinate action on climate change (International Joint Commission Water Quality Board, 
2019; 2017) and will seek to advance elements of a binational climate change adaptation and resilience 
strategy in 2022 (International Joint Commission, 2020).
3.9.2 Access, format and interpretation of climate change data 
While climate data has become more accessible over the last few years, particularly with the launch of the 
Ontario Climate Data Portal (Zhu et al., 2018) and the Canadian Centre for Climate Service’s Climate Data 
platform (Environment and Climate Change Canada et al., 2019), actionable climate information continues 
to be identified as a barrier for communities and others who undertake assessment or adaptation planning 
processes. Even when practitioners have access to local climate information, there is often a lack of 
understanding of the data, including which datasets are most useful for specific decisions (Milner et al., 
2018a). The utility of climate datasets could be improved by including interpretation summaries that highlight 
general data trends (Milner et al., 2018a). The development of climate science communication pathways 
(e.g., data-sharing platforms and forums) would allow for information to be effectively communicated among 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 77 
various sectors and stakeholders, and would contribute to improving the use of climate science information 
for informing adaptation decisions (Milner et al., 2018a; International Joint Commission Great Lakes Water 
Quality Board, 2017). 
3.9.3 Uncertainty of climate change impacts on lake water balance 
Climate change affects the quantity of water in lakes and rivers, primarily through changes in temperature, 
precipitation and evaporation. The balance of these influences is difficult to assess, and this becomes even 
more challenging in the context of climate change. In the case of the Great Lakes, there are divergent views 
on future water-level trends (Bonsal et al., 2019; GLAM Committee, 2018; Angel and Kunkel, 2010). Recent 
experience with both high lake levels (Lake Ontario and Lake Erie in 2017 and 2019) and low lake levels 
(Lake Huron and Lake Michigan in 2013) indicate that extremes in water levels can vary considerably within 
relatively short periods (Gronewold and Rood, 2019), which reveals the need for resilience measures that can 
accommodate both high water and low water scenarios over time. 
3.9.4 Regional risk transfer to the Great Lakes Basin stemming from 
climate change
Climate change impacts elsewhere in North America, and elsewhere in the world, could stimulate migration 
to seemingly water-abundant areas like the Great Lakes Basin (American Society of Adaptation Professionals, 
2021; Great Lakes Now, 2021). Research concerning transboundary climate change impacts and the 
migration of people into the area remains limited. Research into the impacts of climate change on other 
domestic and international regions, and into subsequent effects on the Great Lakes Basin, is warranted. 
3.9.5 Climate change impacts on Indigenous culture and mental health
Long-term climate change can have magnified impacts on Indigenous culture, particularly in northern 
Indigenous communities. As climate change affects all aspects of the biosphere, cultural aspects that are 
intimately tied to the environment are also affected. Knowledge about the impacts of climate change on the 
mental health of Indigenous Peoples in Canada (Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018) continues to evolve, but with few 
examples coming from Ontario. Short-term displacements, like community evacuation in the event of a flood 
or wildfire, can compound levels of stress among displaced people, further increasing vulnerability within 
communities. Given the significant social and economic challenges that exist within northern Indigenous 
communities, programs to monitor and address impacts to mental health are important.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 78 
3.9.6 Innovative financial mechanisms 
The impacts of extreme weather events, combined with infrastructure and adaptation deficits, have led 
to increases in insured and uninsured losses in Ontario. Large asset holders, including investment firms, 
property holding companies and pension funds, have yet to mobilize on climate change adaptation in a 
significant way. These sectors are increasingly reporting on climate risk for their own portfolios, but also 
have a role to play in mobilizing or unlocking financing for adaptation investment (see Climate Disclosure, 
Litigation and Finance chapter of the National Issues Report). There is a need to further mobilize the 
investment community and researchers to use innovative financial mechanisms that promote adaptation 
action and can assist in disaster recovery.
3.10 Conclusion 
The signs of climate change in Ontario are clear, both from the observations of Indigenous peoples and 
other citizens as well as from records of temperature, precipitation and other climate variables. Despite 
strong understanding of ongoing and projected future climate change impacts, proactive, evidence-based 
adaptation remains limited in virtually all sectors and regions of the province. Even where adaptation planning 
is occurring, the lack of broader coordination results in missed opportunities for expanding this work. 
Rapid and widespread population growth and urbanization are expected in the Greater Toronto Area and the 
Greater Hamilton Area, as well as in other pockets of the province; these will further fragment and stress 
ecological habitat. Healthy and intact ecosystems remain fundamental to having healthy communities and 
addressing climate change. Human interventions to assist nature in its capacity to adapt to climate change 
bring significant benefits in the form of ecosystem services. Communities that use incentives and policy tools 
to increase low-impact development and natural infrastructure will see resilience dividends.
Continued population growth and urbanization could also lead to higher and disproportionate levels of climate 
risk for vulnerable populations. Addressing the fundamental determinants of human health, particularly those 
related to equity, and prioritizing the adaptation needs of vulnerable populations will contribute to achieving 
benefits that exceed the findings of traditional economic analyses.
Flooding in heavily urbanized areas remains one of the most significant climate-related impacts because 
it can disrupt numerous critical services. Updated information that helps to delineate high-risk areas can 
inform climate-smart decisions for development, including the location of future critical infrastructure and 
retrofitting of existing stock.
Cooperation and coordination between levels of government to support climate resilience planning and 
decision making makes adaptation more efficient. Continued training in professional planning, engineering, 
health, architecture, conservation and finance will help ensure that climate change is mainstreamed into 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 79 
practice for different professions. This training will help make climate resilience an inherent component of 
economic growth.
The strong business and financial community in Ontario presents an opportunity to assess economic risks 
associated with climate change, mainstream climate change into enterprise risk management systems 
and business decision making, and ensure that financial holdings and investment portfolios are adequately 
disclosing climate risks to shareholders and investors.
Since climate change is a “society-wide” issue, consideration of adaptation is not limited to government or 
private sector decision-makers and professional institutions. Increasing awareness of the need for adaptation 
among homeowners and the general public will expand the scope of adaptation actions and support their 
successful implementation.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 80 
3.11 References 
Abdel-Fattah, S. and Krantzberg, G. (2014a). Commentary: 
Climate change adaptive management in the Great Lakes. 
Journal of Great Lakes Research, 40(3), 578–580. Retrieved 
January, 2022 from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jglr.2014.05.007>
Abdel-Fattah, S. and Krantzberg, G. (2014b). A review: Building 
the resilience of Great Lakes beneficial uses to climate 
change. Sustainability of Water Quality and Ecology, 3/4, 3–13. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
swaqe.2014.11.006>
Adaptation to Climate Change Team (2021). “Low carbon 
resilience.” Simon Fraser University. Retrieved January 2022, 
from <https://act-adapt.org/ projects/low-carbon-resilience/>
AECOM (2012). Toronto Hydro-Electric System Public 
Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Assessment Pilot Case 
Study: Electrical Distribution Infrastructure – Final Report. 
Report No.: 60263582. 61 p. Retrieved February 2022, from 
<https://pievc.ca/2012/09/21/toronto-hydro-electric-system-
public-infrastructure-engineering-vulnerability-assessment-pilot-
case-study/>
AECOM (2015). Toronto Hydro-Electric System Limited Climate 
Change Vulnerability Assessment. Report no. 6031-8907. 92 
p. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pievc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2021/01/electrical>
AECOM (2017). C40 Infrastructure Interdependencies 
and Climate Risks Report. C40 Cities Climate Leadership 
Group, spring 2017, 56 p. Retrieved October 2020, from 
< http://c40-production-images.s3.amazonaws.com/
other_uploads/images/1215_170501_Final_Report_C40_
Interdependencies_%281%29.original.pdf?1495651604>
AECOM, Toronto Regional Conservation Authority (TRCA) Risk 
Sciences International (RSI) (2016). Metrolinx PIEVC Climate 
Change Vulnerability Assessment – Final Report. Report 
prepared for Metrolinx (RQQ-2015-IN-021), 191 p.
AECOM (2019). Climate Change and Extreme Weather 
Vulnerability Assessment of Ports Toronto Assets. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pievc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2021/03/AECOM-Ports-Toronto-May-2019.pdf>
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (2021). Canadian Agriculture 
Partnership. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://agriculture.
canada.ca/en/about-our-department/key-departmental-
initiatives/canadian-agricultural-partnership>
Agronomic Interpretations Working Group (1995). Land 
Suitability Rating System for Agricultural Crops: Spring-Seeded 
Small Grains, (Eds.) W. W. Pettapiece. Techical Bulletin 1995-6E; 
Centre for Land and Biological Resources Research, Agriculture 
and Agri-Food Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. Retrieved June 2022, 
from <https://sis.agr.gc.ca/cansis/publications/manuals/1995-
lsrs/lsrs.pdf>
Albrecht, G., Sartore, G.M., Connor, L., Higginbotham, N., 
Freeman, S., Kelly, B., Stain, H., Tonna, A. and Pollard, G. (2007). 
Solastalgia: the distress caused by environmental change. 
Australasian Psychiatry 15(1), S95–8. Retrieved January 2019, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1080/10398560701701288>
Alofs, K. M., Jackson, D.A., and Lester, N.P. (2014). Ontario 
freshwater fishes demonstrate differing range-boundary shifts 
in a warming climate. Diversity and Distributions, 20(2), 123–
136. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
ddi.12130> 
AMEC (2012). National Engineering Vulnerability Assessment 
of Public Infrastructure to Climate Change: City of Welland 
Stormwater and Wastewater Infrastructure Assessment. 
Report No.: TP111002-001. Report prepared for the City of 
Welland. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pievc.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2021/01/Assessment-of-Town-of-Wellands-
Stormwater-and-Wastewater-Collection-and-Treatment-System-
Final-Report.pdf>
AMEC Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley Conservation (2017). 
Infrastructure and Building Working Group: Adaptation 
State of Play Report. Prepared for the Infrastructure and 
Buildings Working Group, part of Canada’s Climate Change 
Adaptation Platform. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
engineerscanada.ca/sites/default/files/ibwg_sop_2017.pdf>
American Society of Adaptation Professionals (2021). Climate 
and Demographic Change in the Great Lakes Region: a Narrative 
Literature Review of Opportunities and Opportunity Barriers. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://adaptationprofessionals.
org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Literature-Review.pdf> 
Anderson, E.J., Stow, C.A., Gronewold, A.D., Mason, L.A., 
McCormick, M.J., Qian, S.S., Ruberg, S.A., Beadle, K., Constant, 
S.A. and Hawley, N. (2021). Seasonal overturn and stratification 
changes drive deep-water warming in one of Earth’s largest 
lakes. Nature Communications, 12, 1688. Retrieved June 2022, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-21971-1>
Andrew, M. E., Wulder, M.A. and Cardille, J.A. (2014). Protected 
areas in boreal Canada: a baseline and considerations for the 
continued development of a representative and effective reserve 
network. Environmental Reviews, 22(2), 135–160. Retrieved 
March 2019, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2013-0056>
Andrey, J., Kertland, P. and Warren, F.J. (2014). Water and 
Transportation Infrastructure, Chapter 8 in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) 
F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 233–252. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/
assess/2014/pdf/Chapter8-Infrastructure_Eng.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 81 
Angel, J. R. and Kunkel, K.E. (2010). The Response of Great 
Lakes Water Levels to Future Climate Scenarios with an 
Emphasis on Lake Michigan-Huron. Journal of Great Lakes 
Research, 36(2), 51–58. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jglr.2009.09.006>
Angel, J., Swanston, C., Boustead, B.M., Conlon, K.C., Hall, K.R., 
Jorns, J.L., Kunkel, K.E., Lemos, M.C., Lofgren, B., Ontl, T.A., 
Posey, J., Stone, K., Takle, G. and Todey, D. (2018). Midwest, 
in Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth 
National Climate Assessment, Volume II, (Eds.) D.R., Reidmiller, 
C. W. Avery, D. R. Easterling, K. E. Kunkel, K. L. M. Lewis, T. 
K. Maycock and B. C. Stewart. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, DC, USA, 872–940 pp. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/downloads/
NCA4_Ch21_Midwest_Full.pdf>
Arsenault, A.A., Rodgers, A.R. and Whaley, K. (2020). 
Demographic status of moose populations in the boreal plain 
ecozone of Canada. Alces: A Journal Devoted to the Biology 
and Management of Moose, 55, 43–60. Retrieved February 
2022, from <https://alcesjournal.org/index.php/alces/article/
view/243>
Aubin, I., Boisvert-Marsh, L., Kebli, H., McKenney, D., Pedlar, 
J., Lawrence, K., Hogg, E. H., Boulanger, Y., Gauthier, S. and Ste-
Marie, C. (2018). Tree vulnerability to climate change: improving 
exposure-based assessments using traits as indicators of 
sensitivity. Ecosphere 9(2): e02108. Retrieved March 2019, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.2108>
Auditor General of Ontario (2017). Annual Report 2017. 
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://www.auditor.on.ca/en/
content/annualreports/arreports/en17/2017AR_v1_en_web.pdf>
Bai, L., Li, Q., Wang J., Lavigne, E., Gasparrini,A., Copes, R., 
Yagouti, A., Burnett, R.T., Goldberg, M.S., Villeneuve, P.J., 
Cakmak, S. and Chen H. (2016). Hospitalizations from 
Hypertensive Diseases, Diabetes, and Arrhythmia in Relation to 
Low and High Temperatures: Population-Based Study. Scientific 
Reports, 6(30283), 1–9. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://
doi.org/10.1038/srep30283>
Bai, L., Li, Q., Wang, L., Lavigne, E., Gasparrini, A., Copes, 
R., Yagouti, A., Burnett, R.T., Goldberg, M.S., Cakmak S. and 
Chen, H. (2018). Increased coronary heart disease and stroke 
hospitalizations from ambient temperatures in Ontario. Heart, 
104(8), 673–679.  Retrieved January 2019, from <https://heart.
bmj.com/content/104/8/673>
Barbeau, C. D., Oelbermann, M., Karagatzides, J.D. and Tsuji, 
L.J.S. (2015). Sustainable Agriculture and Climate Change: 
Producing Potatoes (Solanum tuberosum L.) and Bush Beans 
(Phaseolus vulgaris L.) for Improved Food Security and 
Resilience in a Canadian Subarctic First Nations Community. 
Sustainability, 7(5), 5664–5681. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/su7055664>
Barr, S. L., Larson, B. M. H., Beechey, T.J. and Scott, 
D.J (2020). Assessing climate change adaptation progress in 
Canada’s protected areas. The Canadian Geographer, 65(2), 
152–165. Retrieved June 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
cag.12635>
Barrette, P.D. (2018). The Canadian winter road infrastructure 
and climate change adaptation: Prospective solutions through 
R&D. Technical Report OCRE-TR-2018-004, Ocean, Coastal 
and River Engineering, National Research Council of Canada. 
Retrieved June 2022, from <https://nrc-publications.canada.ca/
eng/view/ft/?id=46ba2a4c-b74f-4ca0-9562-fd56bb870a46>
Bartolai, A. M., He, L., Hurst, A.E., Mortsch, L., Paehlke, R. and 
Scavia, D. (2015). Climate change as a driver of change in the 
Great Lakes St. Lawrence River Basin. Journal of Great Lakes 
Research, 41(S1), 45–58. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jglr.2014.11.012>
Baute, T. (2020). Impacts of Climate Change on Current and 
Future Crop Pests in Ontario. Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, 
Food and Rural Affairs. Retrieved February 2022, from 
<http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/crops/field/news/
croptalk/2020/ct-0620a4.htm>
BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy 
(2019). Strategic climate risk assessment framework for 
British Columbia. Developed in progress toward a Strategic 
Climate Risk Assessment for British Columbia, July 2019. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/
gov/environment/climate-change/adaptation/climate-risk-
assessment-framework.pdf>
Beef Farmers of Ontario (2014). Beef Farmers of Ontario: 
Research Investment Strategy 2014–2020. Retrieved August 
2020, from <www.livestockresearch.ca/en/wp-content/
uploads/2019/04/BeefResearchStrategyFinal.pdf>
Berry, P., Paterson, J. and Buse, C. (2014a). Assessment of 
Vulnerability to the Health Impacts of Climate Change in 
Middlesex-London. Report Prepared for the Middlesex-London 
Health Unit. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://www.
healthunit.com/uploads/summary-and-recommendations-
assessment-of-vulnerability-health-impacts-of-climate-change-
in-middlesex-london.pdf> 
Berry, P., Clarke, K., Fleury, M.D. and Parker, S. (2014b). Human 
health, Chapter 7 in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector 
Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and 
D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 191–232. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/
www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/
Chapter7-Human-Health_Eng.pdf>
Biodivcanada (2020). 2020 Biodiversity Goals and Targets 
for Canada. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://www.
biodivcanada.ca/national-biodiversity-strategy-and-action-
plan/2020-biodiversity-goals-and-targets-for-canada> 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 82 
Bishop-Williams, K.E., Berke, O., Pearl, D.L., H and K. and Kelton, 
D. (2015). Heat stress related dairy cow mortality during heat 
waves and control periods in rural Southern Ontario from 2010–
2012. BMC Veterinary Research 11, 291. Retrieved February 
2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12917-015-0607-2>
Black, R., Bruce, J. and Egener, M. (2010). Adapting to Climate 
Change: A Risk Management Guide for Ontario Municipalities.  
Retrieved February 2022, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/
doc/Tools/Adapting_to_Climate_Change_a_Risk_Based_Guide_
for_Local_Governments_EN.pdf>
Bondank, E. and Chester. M. (2020). Infrastructure 
Interdependency Failures from Extreme Weather Events as a 
Complex Process. Frontiers in Water 2(21), 6. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3389/frwa.2020.00021>
Bonsal, B. R., Peters, D.L., Seglenieks, F., Rivera, A. and Berg, 
A. (2019). Changes in freshwater availability across Canada, 
Chapter 6 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. 
Bush and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 261–342. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.4095/314625>
Bootsma, A. (2011). Trends in estimated optimum seeding date 
for winter wheat in the Atlantic Provinces. Canadian Journal of 
Plant Science, 91(6), 1101–1103. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.4141/cjps2011-087> 
Bootsma, A. (2012). Decadal Trends in Crop Heat Units for 
Ontario and Quebec from 1951 to 2010. Agriculture and Agri-
Food Canada, Eastern Cereal and Oilseeds Research Centre, 
Ottawa, Ontario, 6 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
www.agrireseau.net/Agroclimatologie/documents/Ontario%20
Quebec%20CHU%20trends%202012.pdf>
Boulanger, Y., Gauthier, S and Burton, P.J. (2014). A refinement 
of models projecting future Canadian fire regimes using 
homogeneous fire regime zones. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research, 44(4), 365–376. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://cdnsciencepub.com/doi/10.1139/cjfr-2013-0372>
Boulanger, Y., Taylor, A.R., Price, D.T., Cyr, D., McGarrigle, 
E., Rammer, W., Sainte-Marie, G., Beaudoin, A., Guindon, L. 
and Mansuy, N. (2017). Climate change impacts on forest 
landscapes along the Canadian southern boreal forest transition 
zone. Landscape Ecology, 32(7), 1415–1431. Retrieved January 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-016-0421-7>
Bourque, F. and Cunsolo Willox, A. (2014). Climate Change: The 
next challenge for public mental health? International Review 
of Psychiatry, 26(4) 415–422.  Retrieved January 2019, from 
<10.3109/09540261.2014.925851>
Boyle, J., Cunningham, M. and Dekens, J. (2013). Climate 
change adaptation and Canadian infrastructure: a review of the 
literature. International Institute for Sustainable Development 
(IISD), 40 p. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.iisd.org/
pdf/2013/adaptation_can_infrastructure.pdf>
Brecka, A.F.J., Shahi, C. and Chen, H.Y.Y. (2018). Climate change 
impacts on boreal forest timber supply. Forest Policy and 
Economics, 92, 11–21. Retrieved January 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2018.03.010> 
Brinker, S. R., Garvey, M. and Jones, D.M. (2018). Climate change 
vulnerability assessment of species in the Ontario Great Lakes 
Basin in Climate Change Research Report CCRR-48. Ontario 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, Science and 
Research Branch, Peterborough, Ontario, 85 p. Retrieved May 
2020, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_Publications/
CCRR-48.pdf> 
Brklacich, M. and Woodrow, M. (2016). Agricultural Adaptation 
to Changing Environments: Lessons Learned from Farmers in 
Eastern Ontario, Canada, Chapter 2 in Agricultural Adaptation 
to Climate Change, (Eds.) C.R. Bryant, M.A. Sarr and K. Délusca.  
Springer, 13–26. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://books.
google.ca/books?id=qyLqDAAAQBAJ&pg=PA12&lpg=PA
12&dq=10.1007/978-3-319-31392-4_2&source=bl&ots=h-
4JWBG1oD&sig=ACfU3U24OuWf0m8_LnMrXNNKvtyKb-T42A&
hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwihwICEnMnlAhUL-6wKHYu4BuIQ6A
EwAHoECAgQAQ#v=onepage&q=10.1007%2F978-3-319-31392-
4_2&f=false> 
Brown, L.J., Lamhonwah, D. and Murphy, B.L. (2015). Projecting 
a spatial shift of Ontario’s sugar maple habitat in response to 
climate change: A GIS approach. Canadian Geographer, 59(3), 
369–381. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
cag.12197>
Brunkard, J., Namulanda, G. and Ratard, R. (2008). Hurricane 
Katrina deaths, Louisiana, 2005. Disaster Medicine and Public 
Health Preparedness, 2(4), 215–223. Retrieved January 2019, 
from <10.1097/DMP.0b013e31818aaf55> 
Buse, C. (2018). Why should public health agencies across 
Canada conduct climate change and health vulnerability 
assessments? Canadian Journal of Public Health 109, 782–785. 
Retrieved January 2019, from <10.17269/s41997-018-0118-6>
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. 
Retrieved January 2019, from <https://doi.org/10.4095/314614>
Byun, K. and Hamlet, A.F. (2018). Projected changes in future 
climate over the Midwest and Great Lakes region using 
downscaled CMIP5 ensembles. International Journal of 
Climatology, 38 (S1), e531–e553. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.5388>
C40 Cities (2018). The Future We Don’t Want. Urban Climate 
Change Research Network Technical Report. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <https://www.c40.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/08/1789_Future_We_Dont_Want_Report_1.4_hi-
res_120618.original.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 83 
Canadian Centre for Climate Services (2019). Changes in 
temperature. Retrieved November 2019, from <https://www.
canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/climate-
change/canadian-centre-climate-services/basics/trends-
projections/changes-temperature.html>
Canadian Climate Institute (2021). UNDER WATER: The costs of 
climate change for Canada’s infrastructure. Retrieved April 2022, 
from <https://climatechoices.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/
Infrastructure-English-FINAL-jan17-2022.pdf>
Canadian Council of Forest Ministers (CCFM) (2014). Adapting 
Sustainable Forest Management to Climate Change: A Review 
of Assisted Tree Migration and its Potential Role in Adapting 
Sustainable Forest Management to Climate Change. Canadian 
Forest Service, Ottawa, Ontario, 28 p. Retrieved January 2022, 
from <http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pubwarehouse/pdfs/35868.pdf>
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME) 
(2015). Implementation Framework for Climate Change 
Adaptation Planning at a Watershed Scale. Prepared by the 
Water Monitoring and Climate Change Project Team of CCME’s 
Water Management Committee, 61 p. Retrieved January 2022, 
from <https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2016/
ccme/En108-4-39-2015-eng.pdf>
Canadian Endangered Species Conservation Council (2016). 
Wild Species 2015: The General Status of Species in Canada. 
National General Status Working Group, 128 p. Retrieved June 
2022, from <https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-
change/services/species-risk-public-registry/publications/wild-
species-2015.html>
Canadian Infrastructure Report Card (2016). Canadian 
Infrastructure Report Card 2016: Informing the Future. 164 p.  
Retrieved January 2022 from <http://canadianinfrastructure.ca/
downloads/Canadian_Infrastructure_Report_2016.pdf>
Canadian Infrastructure Report Card (2019). Canadian 
Infrastructure Report Card 2019: Monitoring the State of 
Canada’s Core Public Infrastructure. 56 p. Retrieved January 
2022 from <http://www.canadianinfrastructure.ca/downloads/
canadian-infrastructure-report-card-2019.pdf>
Canadian Parks Council (2013). Canadian Parks and Protected 
Areas: Helping Canada Weather Climate Change. Report of the 
Canadian Parks Council Climate Change Working Group, 54 p. 
Retrieved May 2021, from <https://parks-parcs.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2020/12/CPC-Climate-Change-Report-FINAL-engLR.pdf>
Canadian Standards Association (2019). CSA PLUS 4013:19 
Technical guide: Development, interpretation and use of rainfall 
intensity-duration-frequency (IDF) information: Guideline for 
Canadian water resource practitioners. Retrieved January 
2022, from <https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/CSA%20
PLUS%204013:19/>
Candau, J-N. and Fleming, R.A. (2011). Forecasting the response 
of spruce budworm defoliation to climate change in Ontario. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 41(10), 1948–1960.  
Retrieved April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/x11-134>
Candau, J.-N., Fleming, R.A. and Wang, X. (2018). Ecoregional 
Patterns of Spruce Budworm – Wildfire Interactions in Central 
Canada’s Forests. Forests, 9(137), 17. Retrieved April 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/f9030137>
Casselman, J. M. (2002). Effects of temperature, global 
extremes, and climate change on year-class production of 
warmwater, coolwater, and coldwater fishes in the Great 
Lakes basin, in Fisheries in a Changing Climate, (Ed.) N.A. 
McGinn. American Fisheries Society Symposium, 39–60. 
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/285714068_Effects_of_temperature_global_
extremes_and_climate_change_on_year-class_production_of_
warmwater_coolwater_and_coldwater_fishes_in_the_Great_
Lakes_Basin>
CBC News (2021). Ontario forest fires burned record area 
of land this summer as they displaced First Nations in 
northwest. Retrieved April 2022, from <https://www.cbc.ca/
news/canada/thunder-bay/record-breaking-ontario-forest-fire-
season-1.6242422>
Chapagain, T. (2017). Farming in Northern Ontario: Untapped 
Potential for the Future. Agronomy, 7(3), 1–14. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy7030059>
Charles, K.-A. (2019). Personal communication with Kelly-Ann 
Charles, Environment Partnership Co-Coordinator at Cambium 
Indigenous Professional Services. August 2019.
Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada (CPA Canada) 
(2015a). Adaptation Case Study # 4: The Co-operators. Sector: 
insurance, Location: Guelph, 12 p. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/energy/
energy-resources/Climate-Change-Adaptation-Case-Study-4-The-
Co-operators-October-2015.pdf>
Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada (CPA 
Canada) (2015b). Adaptation Case Study #5: Horizon Utilities 
Corporation. Sector: electric utility, Location: Southern Ontario, 9 
p. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.cpacanada.ca/-/
media/site/business-and-accounting-resources/docs/climate-
change-adaptation-case-study-5-horizon-utilities-corporation-
october-2015.pdf?la=en&hash=B986DFD2783CF54A7E17
1E04536FDE42355C3E06>
Chen, H., Wang, J., Li, Q., Yagouti, A., Lavigne, E., Foty, R. and 
Copes, R. (2016). Assessment of the effect of cold and hot 
temperatures on mortality in Ontario, Canada: a population-
based study. CMAJ Open, 4(1), E48–E58. Retrieved January 
2019, from <https://doi.org/10.9778/cmajo.20150111>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 84 
Chen, J., Ter-Mikaelian, M.T., Ng, P.Q. and Colombo, S.J. (2018). 
Ontario’s managed forests and harvested wood products 
contribute to greenhouse gas mitigation from 2020 to 2100. The 
Forestry Chronicle, 94(03): 269–282. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <https://doi.org/10.5558/tfc2018-040>
Cheng, C.S., Auld, H., Li, Q. and Li, G. (2012). Possible impacts 
of climate change on extreme weather events at local scale in 
south-central Canada. Climate Change 112, 963–979. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
s10584-011-0252-0> 
Cheng, A., Chen, D., Woodstock, K., Ogden, N.H., Wu, X. and 
Wu, J. (2017). Analyzing the potential risk of climate change 
on Lyme disease in Eastern Ontario, Canada using time 
series remotely sensed temperature data and tick population 
modelling. Remote Sensing, 9(6), 1–13. Retrieved January 2019, 
from <https://doi.org/10.3390/rs9060609>
Cheng, M., McCarl, B. and Fei, C. (2022). Climate Change and 
Livestock Production: A Literature Review. Atmosphere 13(1), 
140. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/
atmos13010140>
Chiotti, Q. and Lavender, B. (2008). Ontario, Chapter 6 in From 
Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, 
(Eds.) D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 227–274. Retrieved 
January 2019, from <https://doi.org/10.4095/226455> 
Chiotti, Q., Chan, K., Gulecoglu, E., Belaieff, A. and Noxon, G. 
(2017). Planning for Resiliency: Toward a Corporate Climate 
Adaptation Plan, September 2017. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <http://www.metrolinx.com/en/aboutus/sustainability/
Planning_for_Resiliency_2017_EN_final.pdf>
Chong, J. (2014). Resource Development in Canada: A Case 
Study of the Ring of Fire. Library of Parliament, Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2014/bdp-lop/bp/2014-17-eng.pdf> 
Chorus, I., and Bartram, J. (Eds.). (1999). Toxic Cyanobacteria in 
Water: A Guide to Their Public Health Consequences, Monitoring 
and Management. World Health Organization, E&FN Spon, 
Routledge, London. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://www.
who.int/publications/m/item/toxic-cyanobacteria-in-water---
second-edition>
Chu, C. and Fischer, F. (2012). Climate Change Vulnerability 
Assessment for Aquatic Ecosystems in the Clay Belt Ecodistrict 
(3E-1) of Northeastern Ontario. Climate Change Research 
Report CCRR-30, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Science 
and Information Resources Division, 26 p. Retrieved February 
2022, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_Publications/
stdprod_100953.pdf>
Chu, C. (2015). Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment for 
Inland Aquatic Ecosystems in the Great Lakes Basin, Ontario. 
Climate Change Research Report CCRR-43, Ontario Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Forestry, Science and Research Branch, 
Peterborough, Ontario, 48 p. Retrieved February 2022, from 
<http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_Publications/CCRR-43.pdf> 
Chu, C., Barker, J., Gutowsky, D. and de Kerckhove, D. (2018a). 
A conceptual management framework for multiple stressor 
interactions in freshwater lakes and rivers. Climate Change 
Research Report CCRR-47, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources 
and Forestry, Science and Research Branch, Peterborough, 
Ontario, 25 p. Retrieved February 2022, from <http://www.
climateontario.ca/MNR_Publications/CCRR-47.pdf> 
Chu, C., Ellis, L. and de Kerckhove, D.T. (2018b). Effectiveness 
of terrestrial protected areas for conservation of lake fish 
communities. Conservation Biology, 32(3), 607–618. Retrieved 
April 2021, from <https://conbio.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1111/cobi.13034>
City of Kingston (2014a). Kingston Climate Action Plan. 
Retrieved October 2019, from <https://www.cityofkingston.ca/
residents/environment-sustainability/climate-change-energy/
climate-action-plan> 
City of Kingston (2014b). Livable City Design Awards: July 
Report, November 2014. Retrieved April 2022, from <https://
www.cityofkingston.ca/documents/10180/4771313/2014+Jury+
Report/8bba402b-fa41-486b-9dad-fd1c9fe8bae1>
City of Thunder Bay (2015). Climate-Ready City: City of Thunder 
Bay Climate Adaptation Strategy. Thunder Bay, Ontario, 116 p. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://climatereadycity.com/
wp-content/uploads/2015/12/Earthcare_Climate_Ready_City_
Web1.pdf>
City of Toronto (2016). Climate Change and Health Strategy: 
2016 Update. Toronto Board of Health Report for Action, HL16.3, 
1–12. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://www.toronto.ca/
legdocs/mmis/2016/hl/bgrd/backgroundfile-98552.pdf>
City of Windsor (2012). City of Windsor Climate Change 
Adaptation Plan. September 2012, 21 p. Retrieved January 2022, 
from <https://www.citywindsor.ca/residents/environment/
Environmental-Master-Plan/Documents/Windsor%20Climate%20
Change%20Adaptation%20Plan.pdf> 
City of Windsor (2020). Degrees of Change. City of Windsor 
Climate Change Adaptation Plan. 21 p. Retrieved January 2022, 
from <https://www.citywindsor.ca/residents/environment/
Documents/Climate%20Change%20Adaptation%20Plan%20-%20
FINAL.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 85 
Clarke, K.-L. (2009). Critical health infrastructures during 
disasters: lessons learned, in Emergency management: Taking 
the health perspective. Health Policy Research Bulletin, Health 
Canada, Issue 15, April 2009, 18–20. Retrieved January 2019, 
from <https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/
science-research/reports-publications/health-policy-research/
emergency-management-taking-health-perspective.html#a8>
Clow, K.M., Ogden, N.H., Lindsay, L.R., Michel, P., Pearl, D.L. and 
Jardine, C.M. (2017). The influence of abiotic and biotic factors 
on the invasion of Ixodes scapularis in Ontario, Canada. Ticks 
and Tick Borne Diseases, 8(4), 554–563. Retrieved January 2019, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ttbdis.2017.03.003>
Cohen, S., Bush, E., Zhang, X., Gillett, N., Bonsal, B., Derksen, 
C., Flato, G., Greenan, B. and Watson, E. (2019). Synthesis of 
Findings for Canada’s Regions, Chapter 8 in Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D. S. Lemmen, Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 424–443. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <https://doi.org/10.4095/327813>
Collingsworth, P.D., Bunnell, D.B., Murray, M.W., Kao, Y-C., Feiner, 
Z.S., Claramunt, R.M., Lofgren, B.M., Höök, T.O. and Ludsin, S.A. 
(2017). Climate change as a long-term stressor for the fisheries 
of the Laurentian Great Lakes of North America. Reviews in Fish 
Biology and Fisheries 2, 363–391. Retrieved April 2022, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11160-017-9480-3>
Colombo, S. J. (2008). Ontario’s Forests and Forestry in a 
Changing Climate. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, 
Applied Research and Development Branch, Climate 
Change Research Report CCRR-12, 31 p. Retrieved April 
2020, from <https://dr6j45jk9xcmk.cloudfront.net/
documents/2691/276928.pdf>
Conservation Ontario. (2018). Climate Change: Conservation 
Authorities are responding to climate change impacts in Ontario.  
Retrieved October 2019, from <https://conservationontario.ca/
policy-priorities/climate-change/> 
Conteh, C. (2017). Economic Zones of Northern Ontario: City-
Regions and Industrial Corridors. Northern Policy Institute. 
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://www.northernpolicy.ca/
upload/documents/publications/reports-new/conteh_economic-
zones-en.pdf>
 Coulibaly P., Burn, D.H., Switzman, H., Henderson, J. and Fausto, 
E. (2016). A comparison of Future IDF Curves for Southern 
Ontario: Addendum – IDF Statistics, Curves and Equations. 
Ontario Climate Consortium, Toronto, Ontario, 244 p. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://climateconnections.ca/app/
uploads/2014/01/IDF-Comparison-Report-and-Addendum.pdf> 
Council of Canadian Academies (2013). Water and agriculture in 
Canada: Towards sustainable management of water resources. 
The expert panel on sustainable management of water in the 
agricultural landscapes of Canada. Retrieved February 2022, 
from < https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/
wag_fullreporten.pdf>
Council of Canadian Academies (2019). Canada’s Top Climate 
Change Risks. The Expert Panel on Climate Change Risks 
and Adaptation Potential, Ottawa, Ontario, 88 p. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/07/Report-Canada-top-climate-change-risks.pdf>
Council of Great Lakes Region (2017). A Vision for the Great 
Lakes Region. Ann Arbor, MI. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://
www.visualcapitalist.com/great-lakes-economy/> 
Credit Valley Conservation, Risk Sciences International, University 
of Waterloo and the Climate Risk Institute (2020). Risk and Return 
on Investment Tool (RROIT) Technical Guide. Version 2.
Cretikos, M. A., Merritt, T.D., Main, K., Eastwood, K., Winn, L., 
Moran, L. and Durrheim, D.N. (2007). Mitigating the health 
impacts of a natural disaster – the June 2007 long-weekend 
storm in the hunter region of New South Wales. Medical Journal 
of Australia, 187(11–12), 670–673. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<10.5694/j.1326-5377.2007.tb01470.x>
Cunsolo Willox, A., Stephenson, E., Allen, J., Bourque, F., Drossos, 
A., Elgarøy, S., Kral, M., Mauro, I., Moses, J., Pearce, T., Petrasek 
MacDonald, J. and Wexler, L. (2014). Examining relationships 
between climate change and mental health in the Circumpolar 
North. Regional Environmental Change, 15(1), 169–182. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://link.springer.com/
article/10.1007/s10113-014-0630-z> 
Cunsolo, A. and Ellis, N.R. (2018). Ecological grief as a mental 
health response to climate change-related loss. Nature Climate 
Change, 8, 275–281. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41558-018-0092-2>
Davies, J.B. (2016). Economic Analysis of the Cost of Flooding. 
Canadian Water Resources 41(1-2), 204–219. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2015.1055804>
Dawe, K. L., and Boutin, S. (2016). Climate change is the 
primary driver of white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) 
range expansion at the northern extent of its range; land 
use is secondary. Ecology and Evolution, 6(18), 6435–6451. 
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/ece3.2316>
Decent, D. and Feltmate, B. (2018). After the Flood: The Impact 
of Climate Change on Mental Health and Lost Time from Work. 
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo, 
Ontario, 32 p. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/
After-The-Flood.pdf>
Derksen, C., Burgess, D., Duguay, C., Howell, S., Mudryk, L., 
Smith, S., Thackeray, C. and Kirchmeier-Young, M. (2019). 
Changes in snow, ice, and permafrost across Canada, Chapter 
5 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D. 
S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 194–260. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.4095/308279>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 86 
Di Liberto, T. (2018). Great Lakes ice cover decreasing over the 
last 40 years. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
Retrieved September 20, 2019 from <https://www.climate.
gov/news-features/featured-images/great-lakes-ice-cover-
decreasing-over-last-40-years>
d’Orgeville, M., Peltier, W.R., Erler, A.R. and Gula, J. (2014). 
Climate change impacts on Great Lakes Basin precipitation 
extremes. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 
119(18), 10,799–10,812. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2014JD021855>
Douglas, A., Lemieux, C., Nielsen, G., Gray, P., Anderson, V. and 
MacRitchie, S. (2011). Adapting to Climate Change: Tools and 
Techniques for an Adaptive Approach to Managing for Climate 
Change: A Case Study. Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts 
and Adaptation Resources, 82 p. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<http://www.climateontario.ca/doc/workshop/2011LakeSimcoe/
Lake%20Simcoe%20Adaptation%20Options%20Final%20
Report%20June%20%202011.pdf>
Douglas, A., Lemieux, C., Nielson, G., Gray, P., Anderson, V. and 
MacRitchie, S. (2014). Responding to the Effects of Climate 
Change in the Lake Simcoe Watershed: A Pilot Study to Inform 
Development of an Adaptation Strategy on a Watershed Basis. 
Climate Change Research Report CCRR-37, Ontario Ministry 
of Natural Resources, Science and Research Branch, 38 p. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/
MNR_Publications/ccrr37.pdf>
Dove-Thompson, D., Lewis, C., Gray, P.A., Chu, C. and Dunlop, 
W. (2011). A summary of the Effects of Climate Change on 
Ontario’s Aquatic Ecosystems. Climate Change Research Report 
CCRR-11, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Science and 
Information Resources Division, 68 p. Retrieved April 2021 from 
<https://files.ontario.ca/environment-and-energy/aquatics-
climate/stdprod_088243.pdf>
Drescher M. and Thomas, S.C. (2012). Snow cover 
manipulations alter survival of early life stages of cold‐
temperate tree species. Oikos, 122(4), 541–554. Retrieved April 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0706.2012.20642.x> 
Durham Region (2016). Towards Resilience. Durham Community 
Climate Adaptation Plan 2016. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://www.durham.ca/en/living-here/resources/Documents/
EnvironmentalStability/DCCAP_Print.pdf>
Easterling, D. R., Kunkel, K.E., Arnold, J.R., Knutson, T., LeGrande, 
A.N., Leung, L.R., Vose, R.S., Waliser, D.E. and Wehner, M.F. 
(2017). Precipitation change in the United States in Climate 
Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, 
Volume I, (Eds.) D.J. Wuebbles, D.W. Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, D. J. 
Dokken, B. C. Stewart and T.K. Maycock. U.S. Global Change 
Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, 207–230. Retrieved 
January 2022 from <https://science2017.globalchange.gov/
chapter/7/>
Ebi, K., Anderson, V., Berry, P., Paterson, J. and Yusa, A. (2016). 
Ontario Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation 
Assessment Guidelines: Technical Document. Queen’s Printer 
for Ontario. Ontario, Canada 
Eckart, K., McPhee, Z. and Bolisetti, T. (2017). Performance and 
implementation of low impact development – A review. Science 
of the Total Environment, 607–608, 413–432. Retrieved October 
2020, from <10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.06.254>
Edwards, J., Pearce, C., Ogden, A., Williamson, T. (2015). 
Climate change and sustainable forest management in Canada: 
A guidebook for assessing vulnerability and mainstreaming 
adaptation into decision making. Climate Change Taskforce, 
Canadian Council of Forest Ministers, Ottawa, Ontario. 
Retrieved June 2022, from <https://www.ccfm.org/wp-content/
uploads/2020/08/Climate-change-and-sustainable-forest-
management-in-Canada-a-guidebook-for-assessing-vulnerability-
and-mainstreaming-adaptation-into-decision-making-Report.pdf>
Edwards, B. A., Southee, F.M. and McDermid, J.L. (2016). Using 
climate and a minimum set of local characteristics to predict the 
future distributions of freshwater fish in Ontario, Canada, at the 
lake-scale. Global Ecology and Conservation, 8, 71–84. Retrieved 
April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2016.08.006>
Engineers Canada (2016). PIEVC Engineering Protocol For 
Infrastructure Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation to a 
Changing Climate: Principles and Guidelines. Engineers Canada, 
54 p. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://pievc.ca/sites/
default/files/pievc-protocol-principles-guidelines-june-2016-
part_1-e.pdf>
Environmental Commissioner of Ontario (ECO) (2016). Urban 
Stormwater Fees: How to Pay for What We Need. Toronto, 
Ontario, 34 p. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.
auditor.on.ca/en/content/reporttopics/envreports/env16/Urban-
Stormwater-Fees.pdf>
Environmental Commissioner of Ontario (ECO) (2017). Good 
Choices, Bad Choices: Environmental Rights and Environmental 
Protection in Ontario. 2017 Environmental Protection Report. 
Toronto, Ontario, 290. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://
www.auditor.on.ca/en/content/reporttopics/envreports/env17/
Good-Choices-Bad-Choices.pdf>
Environmental Commissioner of Ontario (ECO) (2018a). Climate 
Action in Ontario: What’s Next? 2018 Greenhouse Gas Report 
Card. Toronto, Ontario, 254 p. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://www.auditor.on.ca/en/content/reporttopics/envreports/
env18/Climate-Action-in-Ontario.pdf>
Environmental Commissioner of Ontario (ECO) (2018b). Back to 
Basics: 2018 Environmental Protection Report. Toronto, Ontario, 
339 p. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.auditor.
on.ca/en/content/reporttopics/envreports/env18/Back-to-
Basics.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 87 
Environment Canada (2013). How Much Habitat is Enough? 
Third Edition. Toronto, Ontario, 130 p. Retrieved April 2021, 
from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2013/ec/
CW66-164-2013-eng.pdf>
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2018). Quarterly 
Climate Impacts and Outlook – Great Lakes Region – December 
2018. Retrieved January 2020, from <https://publications.gc.ca/
collections/collection_2021/eccc/En162-3-2018-4-eng.pdf>
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2021). Canadian 
Environmental Sustainability Indicators: Canada’s conserved 
areas. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://publications.
gc.ca/site/eng/9.854106/publication.html>
Environment and Climate Change Canada and the Ontario 
Ministry of the Environment and Climate Change (2018). 
Canada-Ontario Lake Erie Action Plan: Partnering on achieving 
phosphorus loading reductions to Lake Erie from Canadian 
sources. ISBN 978-0-660-25269-8. Retrieved May 2020, from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/
services/great-lakes-protection/action-plan-reduce-phosphorus-
lake-erie.html>
Environment and Climate Change Canada, Computer Research 
Institute of Montréal (CRIM), Ouranos, the Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium (PCIC), the Prairie Climate Centre (PCC), 
and HabitatSeven (2019). ClimateData.ca [web portal]. Retrieved 
June 2022, from <Climatedata.ca> 
Ernst and Young (2016). Climate change: The investment 
perspective. Climate Change and Sustainability, 20 p. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://assets.ey.com/content/dam/
ey-sites/ey-com/en_gl/topics/banking-and-capital-markets/ey-
climate-change-and-investment.pdf>
Eskelin, N., Parker, W.C., Colombo, S.J. and Lu, P. (2011). 
Assessing assisted migration as a climate change adaptation 
strategy for Ontario’s forests: Project overview and bibliography. 
Climate Change Research Report CCRR-19. Ontario Ministry of 
Natural Resources, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, 44 p. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_
Publications/stdprd_088019.pdf>
Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience 
Results (EPCCARR) (2018). Measuring progress on adaptation 
and climate resilience: recommendations to the Government 
of Canada. Environment and Climate Change Canada, c2018, 
Gatineau, Québec, 188 p. Retrieved February 2022, from <http://
publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2018/eccc/En4-329-
2018-eng.pdf>
Farghaly, H., Cautillo, C., Xue, H., Kwok Yu Poon, D. and 
Filler, R. (2015). The Resilience of Ontario Highway Drainage 
Infrastructure to Climate Change. Ministry of Transportation 
Report DCSO-01, 138 p. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://
www.library.mto.gov.on.ca/SydneyPLUS/Sydney/Portal/default.
aspx?component=AAAAIY&record=6f913c0a-52ff-4afe-9587-
e118d6325a9e>
Farhad, N., Garg, S., Huxley, R. and Pillay, K. (2019). 
Understanding Infrastructure Interdependencies in Cities. 
C40 Cities, 55 p.  Retrieved October 2020, from <https://c40.
my.salesforce.com/sfc/p/#36000001Enhz/a/1Q000000Mkyj/
mP.Ed3ahJa1lr1B3iuNq4VUfU4eWsBdHurD1lxwmL3k>
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM) (2017). 
Municipalities for Climate Innovation Program: Climate 
Adaptation Maturity Scale. 11 p. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://fcm.ca/sites/default/files/documents/tools/MCIP/
mcip-climate-adaptation-maturity-scale.pdf>
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM) (2020). Municipal 
Asset Management Program: Supporting Sustainable 
Infrastructure Management in Canadian Communities – Year 
3 in Review (2018–2019). 14 p. Retrieved January 2022, 
from <https://data.fcm.ca/documents/reports/MAMP/
supporting-sustainable-infrastructure-management-in-canadian-
communities.pdf>
Félio, G. (2016). Integrating Climate Change Risks in Asset 
Management and Infrastructure Decision-Making. Water 
Environment Association of Ontario, Technical Conference, 
Niagara Falls, Ontario. 
Félio, G. (2017). Climate Change Impacts on Water and 
Wastewater Infrastructure at Akwesasne Final Report. Prepared 
for the Ontario First Nations Technical Services Corporation, 122 
p. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://indigenousclimatehub.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Akwesasne-OFNTSC-.pdf>
Félio, G. and Lickers, E. (2019). A Methodology for Climate 
Risk Assessments for First Nations Communities. International 
Conference for Sustainable Infrastructure 2019, Technical 
Conference, Los Angeles, California. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <https://ascelibrary.org/doi/10.1061/9780784482650.015>
Feltmate, B., Evans, C. and Moudrak, N. (2017). Disaster risk 
reduction applied to Canadian residential housing: Interim report 
on the Home Flood Protection Program. Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, 46 p. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.
intactcentre.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/HFPP-Interim-
Report-Dec-2017-FINAL.pdf>
Flannigan, M.D., Wotton, B.M., Marshall, G.A., de Groot, W.J., 
Johnston, J., Jurko, N. and Cantin, S. (2016). Fuel moisture 
sensitivity to temperature and precipitation: climate change 
implications. Climatic Change, 134(1-2), 59–71. Retrieved April 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-015-1521-0>
Forests Ontario (2016). 50 Million Tree Program. Retrieved 
October 2019, from <https://www.forestsontario.ca/planting/
programs/50-million-tree-program/>
Forests Ontario (2018). Tomorrow’s Forests: Tree Seed 
Management in Ontario. Forest Gene Conservation Association 
and Forests Ontario, 46 p. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://
assets.ctfassets.net/e09p19lzfrfe/4WL1gsIuAccmmWhC
6InHeq/1d303cfe994a59124f277c1944f3e65b/FO_SEED-
REPORT_FA_web.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 88 
Frolking, S. and Roulet, N.T. (2007). Holocene radiative 
forcing impact of northern peatland carbon accumulation and 
methane emissions. Global Change Biology, 13, 1079–1088. 
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-2486.2007.01339.x>
Galway, L., Beery, T., Jones-Casey, K. and K, Tasala. (2019). 
Mapping the solastalgia literature: a scoping review study. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health 16(16), 2662. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph16152662>
Gasmi S, Ogden, N.H., Ripoche, M., Leighton, P.A., Lindsay, R.L., 
Nelder, M.P., Rees, E., Bouchard, C., Vrbova, L., Rusk, R., 
Russell. C., Pelcat, Y., Mechai, S., Kotchi, S.-O. and Koffi. 
(2019). Detection of municipalities at-risk of Lyme disease 
using passive surveillance of Ixodes scapularis as an early 
signal: A province-specific indicator in Canada. PLOS ONE 
14(2): e0212637. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0212637>
Gaudin, A.C.M., Tolhurst, T., Ker, A., Martin, R. and Deen, W. 
(2015). Agroecological Approaches to Mitigate Increasing 
Limitation of Corn Yields by Water Availability. Procedia 
Environmental Sciences, 29: 11–12 p. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proenv.2015.07.129>
Gauthier, S., Bernier, P., Burton, P.J., Edwards, J., Isaac, K., Isabel, 
N., Jayen, K., Le Goff, H. andNelson, E.A. (2014). Climate change 
vulnerability and adaptation in the managed Canadian boreal 
forest. Environmental Reviews, 22(3), 256–285. Retrieved April 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2013-0064>
Gauthier, S., Bernier, P.Y., Boulanger, Y., Guo, J., Guindon, L., 
Beaudoin, A., and Boucher. D. (2015). Vulnerability of timber 
supply to projected changes in fire regime in Canada’s managed 
forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 45(11) 1439–
1447. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-
2015-0079>
GENIVAR Inc. (2010). Flood Control Dam Water Resources 
Infrastructure Assessment. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://pievc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/TRCA_
Combined_Final-Report.pdf>
GENIVAR Inc. (2011a). Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment 
for Culverts. Final Report, 120 p. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://pievc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/City-of-Toronto-
Study-of-Three-Road-Culverts-Final-Report-with-Executive-
Summary.pdf>
GENIVAR Inc. (2011b). National Engineering Vulnerability 
Assessment of Public Infrastructure to Climate Change Climate: 
Change Vulnerability Assessment of the Town of Prescott’s 
Sanitary Sewage System. Final Case Study Report, 133 p. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pievc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2021/03/Genivar-Town-of-Prescott-June-2011.pdf>
GENIVAR Inc. (2013). National Engineering Vulnerability 
Assessment of Public Infrastructure to Climate Change 
Climate: Union Water Supply System Climate Risk Assessment. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pievc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2021/03/Genivar-UWSS-May-2013.pdf>
Giordano, B.V., Kaur, S. and Hunter, F.F. (2017). West Nile virus 
in Ontario, Canada: A twelve-year analysis of human case 
prevalence, mosquito surveillance, and climate data. PLoS 
ONE, 12(8), 1–15. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0183568>
GLAM Committee (2018). Summary of 2017 Great Lakes 
Basin Conditions and Water Level Impacts to Support 
Ongoing Regulation Plan Evaluation. A report to the Great 
Lakes Boards and the International Joint Commission. 198 
p. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://ijc.org/sites/default/
files/2018-11/GLAM_2017_MainReport_FINAL-20181129_2.
pdf?_ga=2.139457073.329057439.1572889961-
796641899.1571327800>
Gleeson, J., Gray, P., Douglas, A., Lemieux, C. and Nielsen, G. 
(2011). A Practitioner’s Guide to Climate Change Adaptation in 
Ontario’s Ecosystems. Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and 
Adaptation Resources, Sudbury, Ontario, 74 p. Retrieved April 
2021, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/doc/Tools/A%20
Practitioners%20Guide%20to%20ClimateChange%20
Adaptation%20in%20Ontario%27s%20Ecosystems%20Ver%20
1%202011.pdf>
Golder Associates Ltd. (2012). Climate Change Vulnerability 
Assessment for Infrastructure Ontario: Case Study 
Report. Report prepared for Infrastructure Ontario, 101 p.  
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pievc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2021/01/infrastructure_ontario-pievc_case_study_of_
three_buildings_final_report-1.pdf>
Gough, W.A. and Rosanov, Y. (2001). Aspects of Toronto’s climate: 
heat island and lake breeze. Canadian Meteorological and 
Oceanographic Society Bulletin, (29), p. 67–71. Retrieved January 
2019, from <http://cmosarchives.ca/Bulletin/b2903.pdf>
Gough, W.A., Anderson, V. and Herod, K. (2016). Ontario Climate 
Change and Health Modelling Study: Report. Queen’s Printer for 
Ontario. Ontario, Canada 
Government of Canada (2020). Forest Change Data Catalogue. 
Updated December 2020. Retrieved May 2022, from <https://scf.
rncan.gc.ca/fc-data-catalogue#wb-auto-4>
Government of Canada (2021). News release: Government of 
Canada and Mushkegowuk Council working together to protect 
western James Bay. Parks Canada. August 9, 2021. Retrieved 
April 2022, from <https://www.canada.ca/en/parks-canada/
news/2021/08/government-of-canada-and-mushkegowuk-
council-working-together-to-protect-western-james-bay.html>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 89 
Government of Canada and Government of the United States 
(2012). Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement. Retrieved October 
2019, from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/
migration/main/grandslacs-greatlakes/a1c62826-72be-40db-
a545-65ad6fceae92/1094_canada-usa-20glwqa-20_e.pdf>
Government of Canada and Government of Ontario (2014). 
Canada-Ontario Agreement on Great Lakes Water Quality 
and Ecosystem Health. Retrieved May 2020, from <http://
publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2014/ec/En164-51-
2014-eng.pdf>
Government of Ontario (2010). Far North Act. Retrieved February 
2022, from <https://www.ontario.ca/laws/statute/10f18>
Government of Ontario (2011a). Climate Ready: Ontario’s 
Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan 2011-2014. Retrieved 
September 15, 2019, from <https://www.ontario.ca/document/
climate-ready-adaptation-strategy-and-action-plan-2011-2014-0>
Government of Ontario (2011b). Places to Grow: Growth Plan for 
Northern Ontario 2011. Ministry of Infrastructure and Ministry 
of Northern Development, Mines and Forestry, 76 p. Retrieved 
January 2022, from <https://www.placestogrow.ca/images/
pdfs/GPNO-final.pdf>
Government of Ontario (2012). Biodiversity: It’s in Our Nature 
– Ontario Government Plan to Conserve Biodiversity 2012-
2020. Queen’s Printer for Ontario, Toronto, Ontario, 42 p. 
Retrieved April 2021, from <https://files.ontario.ca/mnr_biion_
accessibility_en_final.pdf>
Government of Ontario (2015a). Ontario’s Climate Change 
Strategy. Queen’s Printer for Ontario, Toronto, Ontario, 40 p. 
Retrieved April 2020, from <https://dr6j45jk9xcmk.cloudfront.
net/documents/4928/climate-change-strategy-en.pdf>
Government of Ontario (2015b). The Great Lakes Protection 
Act, 2015 S.O. 2015, c. 24. Retrieved September 10, 2019, from 
<https://www.ontario.ca/laws/statute/15g24>
Government of Ontario (2016a). Ontario’s Great Lakes Strategy. 
Retrieved October 2, 2019, from <https://www.ontario.ca/page/
ontarios-great-lakes-strategy>
Government of Ontario (2016b). State of Ontario’s Natural 
Resources – Forests.  Retrieved January 2022, from <https://
www.ontario.ca/page/state-ontarios-natural-resources-
forests-2016>
Government of Ontario (2019a). About Ontario. Retrieved October 
2019 from <https://www.ontario.ca/page/about-ontario>
Government of Ontario (2019b). Spruce Budworm. Retrieved 
October 2019 from <https://www.ontario.ca/page/spruce-
budworm>
Government of Ontario (2020). Sustainable Growth: Ontario’s 
Forest Sector Strategy. Retrieved October 2020 from <https://files.
ontario.ca/mnrf-fid-forest-sector-strategy-en-2020-08-20.pdf>
Government of Ontario (2021a). Ontario Employment Reports. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://www.ontario.ca/
document/ontario-employment-reports/july-september-2021>
Government of Ontario (2021b). State of Ontario’s Natural 
Resources: Forests 2021. Retrieved October 2021 from <https://
files.ontario.ca/ndmnrf-state-of-ontarios-natural-resources-
forest-2021-en-09-16.pdf>
Gray, P. A., Paleczny, D., Beechey, T.J., King, B., Wester, M., 
Davidson R.J. and Davis. R.G. (2009). Ontario’s Natural Heritage 
Areas: Their Description and Relationship to the IUCN Protected 
Areas Classification System (A Provisional Assessment). 
Queen’s Printer for Ontario, Peterborough, Ontario, 356 p. 
Retrieved April 2021, from <http://www.ontla.on.ca/library/
repository/mon/24003/296106.pdf>
Greater Toronto Airport Authority (2014). Climate Change 
Vulnerability Assessment for Selected Stormwater Infrastructure 
at Toronto Pearson International Airport. Retrieved January 
2022, from <https://pievc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/
gtaa_infrastructure_vulnerability_assessment_-_final-1.pdf>
Great Lakes Integrated Sciences and Assessments (GLISA) and 
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2018). 2017 Annual 
Climate Trends and Impacts Summary for the Great Lakes Basin. 
Great Lakes Integrated Sciences + Assessments, Environment 
and Climate Change Canada, 6 p. Retrieved May 2020, from 
<https://binational.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/2017-GL-
Climate-trends-and-impacts-summary.pdf>
Great Lakes Now (2021). Water could make the Great Lakes a 
climate refuge. Are we prepared? Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://www.greatlakesnow.org/2021/02/water-great-lakes-
climate-refuge-prepared/>
 Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Cities Initiative (GLSLCI) (2017). 
Climate Change Adaptation. Retrieved October 2019 from 
<https://glslcities.org/initiatives/municipal-climate-adaptation/>
Gregg, R.M., Hansen, L.J., Feifel, K.M., Hitt, J.L., Kershner, J.M., 
Score, A. and Hoffman, J.R. (2011). The state of marine and 
coastal adaptation in North America: a synthesis of emerging 
ideas. A report for the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, 
EcoAdapt, Bainbridge Island, Washington, USA, 145 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://tamug-ir.tdl.org/bitstream/
handle/1969.3/29004/marine-adaptation-report%5b1%5d.
pdf?sequence=1>
Grey-Bruce Health Unit (2017). Climate Change and Public 
Health in Grey Bruce Health Unit: Current conditions and 
future projections. Owen Sound, Ontario. Grey Bruce Health 
Unit, 63. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://www.
publichealthgreybruce.on.ca/Portals/0/Topics/Healthy_
Environments/Climate%20Change%20in%20GBHU%20-%20
Report%20%282017%29.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 90 
Gronewold, A.D., Fortin, V., Lofgren, B., Clites, A., Stow, C.A. and 
Quinn, F. (2013). Coasts, water levels, and climate change: A Great 
Lakes perspective. Climatic Change, 120(4), 697–711. Retrieved 
May 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-0840-2>
Gronewold, A.D., Bruxer, J., Durnford, D., Smith, J.P., Cites, 
A.H., Seglenieks, F., Qian, S.S., Hunter, T.S. and Fortin V. 
(2016). Hydrological drivers of record-setting water level rise 
on Earth’s largest lake system. Water Resources Research, 
52(5), 4026–4042. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2015WR018209> 
Gronewold, A.D. and Rood, R.B. (2019). Recent water level 
changes across Earth’s largest lake system and implications 
for future variability. Journal of Great Lakes Research, 45(1), 
1–3. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jglr.2018.10.012>
Gross, J. E., Woodley, S., Weiling, L.A. and Watson, J.E. (Eds.) 
(2016). Adapting to Climate Change: Guidance for Protected 
Area Managers and Planners. Best Practice Protected Area 
Guidelines Series No. 24, Gland, Switzerland, IUCN, 152 p. 
Retrieved April 2021, from <https://portals.iucn.org/library/
sites/library/files/documents/PAG-024.pdf>
Guilbault, S., Kovacs, P. and Berry, P. (2016). Cities Adapt 
to Extreme Heat: Celebrating Local Leadership. Institute 
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction and Health Canada, 110 
p. Published by Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. 
Retrieved January 2019, from <https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/
uploads/PDFS/cities-adapt-to-extreme-heat.pdf>
Gula, J. and Peltier, R. (2012). Dynamical Downscaling over the 
Great Lakes Basin of North America Using the WRF Regional 
Climate Model: The Impact of the Great Lakes System on 
Regional Greenhouse Warming. Journal of Climate, 25(21), 
7723–7742. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00388.1>
Gunn, J. M and Snucins, E. (2010). Brook char mortalities 
during extreme temperature events in Sutton River, Hudson Bay 
Lowlands, Canada. Hydrobiologia, 650(1), 79–84. Retrieved April 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10750-010-0201-3>
Guo, Y., Gasparrini, A., Li, S., Sera, F., Vicedo-Cabrera, A.M., de 
Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho, M., Hilario Nascimento Saldiva, 
P., Lavigne, E., Tawatsupa, B., Punnasiri, K., Overcenco, A., Matus 
Correa, P., Valdes Ortega, N., Kan, H., Osorio, S., Jaakkola, J.J.K., 
Ryti, N.R.I., Goodman, P.G., Zeka, A., Michelozzi, P., Scortichini, 
M., Hashizume, M., Honda, Y., Seposo, X., Kim, H., Tobias, A., 
Íñiguez, C., Forsberg, B., Oudin Åström, D., Leon Guo, Y., Chen, 
B.-Y., Zanobetti, A., Schwartz, J., Ngoc Dang, T., Do Van, D., Bell, 
M.L., Armstrong, B., Ebi, K.L. and Tong, S. (2018). Quantifying 
excess deaths related to heatwaves under climate change 
scenarios: A multi-country time series modelling study. PLoS 
Medicine, 15(7), 1–17. Retrieved February 2019, from <https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002629>
Gutowsky, L.F.G. and Chu, C. (2019). Velocity of climate 
change can inform protected areas planning and biodiversity 
conservation in Ontario. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources 
and Forestry, Science and Research Branch, Peterborough, ON. 
Climate Change Research Report CCRR-51. 34 p. + appendix.
Gutowsky, L. F. G., Giacomini, H.C., de Kerckhove, D.T., 
Mackereth, R., McCormick, D. and Chu, C. (2019). Quantifying 
multiple pressure interactions affecting populations of a 
recreationally and commercially important freshwater fish. 
Global change biology, 25(3), 1049–1062. Retrieved April 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14556> 
Guyadeen, D., Thistlethwaite, J. and Henstra, D. (2019). 
Evaluating the quality of municipal climate change plans in 
Canada. Climatic Change, 152(1), 121–143. Retrieved December 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2312-1> 
Guzzo, M. M. and Blanchfield, P.J. (2016). Climate change alters 
the quantity and phenology of habitat for lake trout (Salvelinus 
namaycush) in small Boreal Shield lakes. Canadian Journal of 
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 74(6), 871–884. Retrieved April 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2016-0190>
Harris, L.I., Richardson, K., Bona, K.A., Davidson, S.J., Finkelstein, 
S.A., Garneau, M.,          McLaughlin, J., Nwaishi, F., Olefeldt, D., 
Packalen, M., Roulet, N.T., Southee, F.M., Strack, M., Webster, 
K.L., Wilkinson, S.L. and Ray, J.C. (2021). The essential carbon 
service provided by northern peatlands. Frontiers in Ecology 
and Environment. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/fee.2437>
Hayes, K., Blashki, G., Wiseman, J., Burke, S. and Reifels, L. 
(2018). Climate change and mental health: risks, impacts and 
priority actions. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 
12(28). Retrieved July 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13033-018-0210-6>
Hayes, K., Berry, P. and Ebi, K. (2019). Factors influencing the 
mental health consequences of climate change in Canada. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 16 (1583). Retrieved July 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph16091583>
He, W., Yang, J.Y., Drury, C.E., Smith, W.N., Grant, B.B., He, P., 
Qian, B., Zhou W. and Hoogenboom, G. (2018). Estimating the 
impacts of climate change on crop yields and N2O emissions for 
conventional and no-tillage in Southwestern Ontario, Canada. 
Agricultural Systems, 159, 187–198. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.025>
Henstra, D., Thistlethwaite, L. and Vanhooren, S. (2020). 
The governance of climate change adaptation: stormwater 
management policy and practice. Journal of Environmental 
Planning and Management, 63(6), 1077–1096. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2019.1634015>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 91 
Hewer, M. and Gough, W.A. (2019). Lake Ontario ice coverage: 
Past, present and future. Journal of Great Lakes Research, 
45(6), 1080–1089. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jglr.2019.10.006>
HOK Canada (2008). Climate Change Vulnerability A Case Study 
of Public Buildings. Prepared for Public Works and Government 
Services Canada and Engineers Canada, 83 p. Retrieved January, 
2022, from <https://pievc.ca/sites/default/files/government_of_
canada_buildings_pwgsc_ottawa_ontario_final_report.pdf>
Holland, T. and Smit, B. (2014). Recent climate change in the 
Prince Edward County winegrowing region, Ontario, Canada: 
implications for adaptation in a fledgling wine industry. Regional 
Environmental Change, 14(3), 1109–1121.  Retrieved February 
2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-013-0555-y>
Hori, Y., Gough, W.A., Tam, B. and Tsuji, L.J.S. (2018a). 
Community vulnerability to changes in the winter road viability 
and longevity in the western James Bay region of Ontario’s 
Far North. Regional Environmental Change, 18(6), 1753–1763. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-
018-1310-1>	
Hori, Y., Cheng, V. Y. S., Gough, W.A., Jien, J.Y. and Tsuji, L.J.S. 
(2018b). Implications of projected climate change on winter 
road systems in Ontario’s Far North, Canada. Climatic Change, 
148(1-2), 109–122. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-018-2178-2>
Huff, A. and Thomas. A. (2014). Lake Superior Climate Change 
Impacts and Adaptation. Prepared for the Lake Superior 
Lakewide Action and Management Plan – Superior Work Group, 
139 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.epa.gov/sites/
production/files/2015-11/documents/lake-superior-climate-
change-impacts-report-201401-139pp.pdf>
IBI Group (2016). Working Paper #2: Climate Change Context – 
Northern Ontario Multimodal Transportation Strategy. Prepared 
for the Ontario Ministry of Transportation by IBI Group, Hemson 
Consulting Ltd. and Stantec Inc., 91 p. Retrieved January 
2022,from <https://northernontariommts.files.wordpress.
com/2016/01/draft-nomts-climate-change-context-working-
paper-2016-01-15.pdf>
ICLEI (2016). Making Strides on Community Adaptation 
in Canada: Final Report. ICLEI Local Governments for 
Sustainability, Toronto, Ontario, 45 p. Retrieved April 2021, from 
<https://icleicanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Making-
Strides-on-Community-Adaptation.pdf>
IJC Great Lakes-St Lawrence River Adaptive Management 
Committee (2020). Factsheet – Highlights of the 2019 
GLAM Questionnaire for Shoreline Property Owners on Lake 
Ontario and the St. Lawrence River. Retrieved May 2020, from 
<https://ijc.org/sites/default/files/2020-11/GLAM-Final_
FactSheet_2019Questionnaire_20201013.pdf>
INAC [Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada] (2018). First 
Nations Profiles. Ontario Region. Retrieved October 2019 
from <https://fnp-ppn.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/fnp/Main/index.
aspx?lang=eng>   
Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) and Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities (FCM) (2020). Investing in Canada’s Future: The 
Cost of Climate Adaptation at the Local Level. Prepared for IBC 
and FCM, 60 p. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.
ca/Documents/Disaster/The-Cost-of-Climate-Adaptation-Report-
EN.pdf>
International Joint Commission Great Lakes Water Quality Board 
(2017). Climate Change and Adaptation in the Great Lakes. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://ijc.org/sites/default/files/
WQB_CCAdaptation_ProjectSummary_20170110.pdf>
International Joint Commission Great Lakes Water Quality 
Board (2019). Climate Adaptation and Resilience – Project 
Summary. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://ijc.org/sites/
default/files/2019-11/WQB_ClimateAdaptationandResilience_
Sept2019.pdf>
International Joint Commission (2020). Second Triennial 
Assessment of Progress on Great Lakes Water Quality. 
17 p. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://www.ijc.
org/sites/default/files/2020-12/2020-TAP-Report-
online.pdf?_ga=2.228737813.80074819.1638462654-
1889362222.1623868448#page=17>
International Joint Commission Great Lakes Water Quality 
Board (2017). Climate Change and Adaptation in the Great 
Lakes: Project Summary. Emerging Issues Work Group of the 
Great Lakes Water Quality Board, 11 p. Retrieved May 2020, 
from <https://legacyfiles.ijc.org/tinymce/uploaded/WQB/WQB_
CCAdaptation_ProjectSummary_20170110.pdf>
International Plant Protection Convention Secretariat 
(2021). Scientific review of the impact of climate change on 
plant pests – A global challenge to prevent and mitigate plant 
pest risks in agriculture, forestry and ecosystems. Rome. FAO 
on behalf of the IPCC Secretariat. Retrieved February 2022, from 
<https://www.fao.org/3/cb4777en/cb4777en.pdf>
James, P.M.A., Robert, L.-E., M. Wotton, M., Martell, D.L. and 
Fleming, R.A. (2017). Lagged cumulative spruce budworm 
defoliation affects the risk of fire ignition in Ontario, Canada. 
Ecological Applications, 27(2), 532–544. Retrieved April 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.1463>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 92 
Janowiak, M. K., Iverson, L.R., Mladenoff, D.J., Peters, E., 
Wythers, K.R., Xi, W., Brandt, L.A., Butler, P.R., Handler, S.D., 
Shannon, P.D., Swanston, C., Parker, L.R., Amman, A.J., 
Bogaczyk, B., Handler, C., Lesch, E., Reich, P.B., Matthews, S., 
Peters, M., Prasad, A., Khanal, S., Liu, F., Bal T., Bronson, D., 
Burton, A., Ferris, J., Fosgitt, J., Hagan, S., Johnston, E., Kane, 
E., Matula, C., O’Connor, R., Higgins, D., St. Pierre, M., Daley, J., 
Davenport, M., Emery, M.R., Fehringer, D., Hoving, C.L., Johnson, 
G., Neitzel, D., Notaro, M., Rissman, A., Rittenhouse, C. and 
Ziel R. (2014). Forest ecosystem vulnerability assessment and 
synthesis for northern Wisconsin and western Upper Michigan: 
a report from the Northwoods Climate Change Response 
Framework project. General Technical Report. NRS-136. 
Newtown Square, Pennsylvania, US Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Northern Research Station, 247 p. Retrieved April 
2020, from <https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pubs/46393>
Jing, Q., Huffman, T., Shang, J., Liu, J., Pattey, E., Morrison, 
M., Jego, G. and Qian, B. (2017). Modelling Soybean Yield 
Responses to Seeding Date under Projected Climate Change 
Scenarios. Canadian Journal of Plant Science, 97(6), 1152–1164. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjps-
2017-0065>
Johnston, M. (2009). Vulnerability of Canada’s Tree Species to 
Climate Change and Management Options for Adaptation: An 
overview for policymakers and practitioners. Canadian Council 
of Forest Ministers, 44 p. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://
www.ccfm.org/pdf/TreeSpecies_web_e.pdf>
Johnston, M., Williamson, T., Munson, A., Ogden, A., Moroni, 
M., Parsons, R., Price, D. and Stadt, J. (2010). Climate Change 
and Forest Management in Canada: Impacts, Adaptive 
Capacity and Adaptation options. A State of Knowledge report. 
Sustainable Forest Management Network, Edmonton, Alberta. 
54 p. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/
publications?id=31584>
Joyce, L.A., Blate, G.M., McNulty, S.G., Millar, C.I., Moser, 
S., Neilson, R.P. and Peterson, D.L. (2009). Managing for 
Multiple Resources under Climate Change: National Forests. 
Environmental Management, 44(6), 1022–1032. Retrieved May 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-009-9324-6>
Joyce, D. G. and Rehfeldt, G.E. (2013). Climatic niche, ecological 
genetics, and impact of climate change on eastern white pine 
(Pinus strobus L.): Guidelines for land managers. Forest Ecology 
and Management, 295, 173–192.  Retrieved May 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2012.12.024>
Kelly, N.I., Burness, G., McDermid, J.L. and Wilson, C.C. (2014). 
Ice age fish in a warming world: minimal variation in thermal 
acclimation capacity among lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) 
populations. Conservation Physiology, 2(1), 1–14. Retrieved April 
2021, from <10.1093/conphys/cou025>
Kennedy-Slaney, L., Bowman, J., Walpole, A.A. and Pond, B.A. 
(2018). Northward bound: The distribution of white-tailed deer in 
Ontario under a changing climate. Wildlife Research, 45(3), 220–
228. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1071/
WR1710>
Kenny, S., Dupré, K. and McEvoy, A. (2018). Climate Change 
Considerations within the Asset Management of Core 
Infrastructure for Rural Ontario Municipalities – An Initial 
Assessment. Canadian Society for Civil Engineering Annual 
Conference, Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://carleton.ca/geirg/wp-content/
uploads/2018-Kenny-CSCE-GC126.pdf>
Kenny, S., Dupré, K. and McEvoy, A. (2019). Asset management 
of rural Ontario core infrastructure – Drivers and barriers 
associated with climate change considerations. Canadian 
Society for Civil Engineering Annual Conference, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://carleton.
ca/geirg/wp-content/uploads/2019-Kenny-CSCE-GEN090.pdf>
Keon, J. and Pépin, L. (2009). A Healthy, Productive Canada: 
A Determinant of Health Approach. The Standing Senate 
Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology; Final 
Report of Senate Subcommittee on Population Health. Retrieved 
January 2019, from <https://sencanada.ca/content/sen/
Committee/402/popu/rep/rephealth1jun09-e.pdf>
Kingsley, M. and EcoHealth Ontario (2019). Climate change, 
health and green space co-benefits. Health Promotion and 
Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada, 39(4). Retrieved January 
2019, from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/phac-aspc/
documents/services/reports-publications/health-promotion-
chronic-disease-prevention-canada-research-policy-practice/vol-
39-no-4-2019/4-Kingsley-vol-39-no-4-2019-eng.pdf>
Klaus, S. P. and Lougheed, S.C. (2013). Changes in breeding 
phenology of eastern Ontario frogs over four decades. Ecology 
and Evolution, 3(4), 835–845. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1002/ece3.501>
Kovacs, P., Guilbault, S. and Sandink, D. (2014). Cities Adapt 
to Extreme Rainfall: Celebrating Local Leadership. Institute for 
Catastrophic Loss Reduction, Toronto, Ontario, 104 p.  Retrieved 
January 2019 from <https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/
PDFS/CITIES_ADAPT_DIGITAL_VERSION.compressed.pdf>
Kulshreshtha, S., Wheaton, E. and Amiraslany, A. (2010). A 
literature survey of the potential socio-economic impacts of 
climate change on Canadian crop production. Department 
of Bioresource Policy, Business and Economics University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK.
Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority (LSRCA) (2018). 
Adapting Forestry Programs for Climate Change. Lake Simcoe 
Region Conservation Authority, 91 p. Retrieved April 2020, 
from <https://www.lsrca.on.ca/Shared%20Documents/reports/
Adapting-Forestry-Programs-for-Climate-Change.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 93 
Lalonde, R., Gleeson, J., Gray, P., Douglas, A., Blakemore, C. and 
Ferguson, L. (2012). Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment 
and Adaptation Options for Ontario’s Clay Belt – A Case Study. 
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Science and Information 
Resources Division, Peterborough, Ontario. Climate Change 
Research Report CCRR-24, 64 p. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://files.ontario.ca/environment-and-energy/aquatics-
climate/stdprod_100191.pdf>
Landmark Engineers Inc. (2019). East Riverside Flood Risk 
Assessment. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pievc.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/East-Riverside-Flood-Risk-
Assessment-Sept2019-2.pdf>
Leger, W. and Read, J. (2012). Adaptive management: strategy 
and legacy, Lake Superior regulation: Addressing Uncertainty 
in Upper Great Lakes Water Levels. Report submitted to the 
International Upper Great Lakes Study Board by the Adaptive 
Management Technical Work Group, 167. Retrieved March 
2022, from <https://www.ijc.org/en/lake-superior-regulation-
addressing-uncertainty-upper-great-lakes-water-levels> >
Lemieux, C.J., Beechey, T.J., Scott, D.J. and Gray, P.A. (2010). 
Protected Areas and Climate Change in Canada: Challenges and 
Opportunities for Adaptation. Canadian Council on Ecological 
Areas (CCEA) Occasional Paper No. 19. CCEA Secretariat, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 170 p.  Retrieved April 2021, from 
<https://scholars.wlu.ca/geog_faculty/26/>
Lemieux, C.J. and Scott, D.J. (2011). Changing climate, 
challenging choices: Identifying and evaluating climate change 
adaptation options for protected areas management in Ontario, 
Canada. Environmental Management, 48(4), 675–690. Retrieved 
April 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-011-9700-x>
Lemieux, C.J., Beechey, T.J. and Gray, P.A. (2011). Prospects for 
Canada’s protected areas in an era of rapid climate change. Land 
Use Policy, 28(4), 928–941. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2011.03.008>
Lemieux, C.J., Gray, P.A., Scott, D.J., McKenney, D.W. and 
MacFarlane, S. (2013). Climate Change and the Lake Simcoe 
Watershed: A Vulnerability Assessment of Natural Heritage 
Areas and Nature-based Tourism. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Science and Information Resources Division, Climate 
Change Research Report CCRR-28, 33 p. Retrieved April 2021, 
from <https://files.ontario.ca/environment-and-energy/aquatics-
climate/stdprod_100941.pdf>
Lemieux, C. J., Gray, A. P.A., Douglas, G., Nielsen, G. and Pearson, 
D. (2014). From science to policy: The making of a watershed-
scale climate change adaptation strategy. Environmental Science 
and Policy, 42, 123–137. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envsci.2014.06.004>
Lemmen, D. S., Johnston, M., Ste-Marie, C. and Pearce, T. 
(2014). Natural Resources, Chapter 3 in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) 
F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 65–98.  Retrieved April 2020, from <https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/
assess/2014/pdf/Full-Report_Eng.pdf>
Lenarduzzi, A., Zimmer, C., Waterfield, A., James, P. and 
Schembri, C. (2016). Grey to Green Enhanced Stormwater 
Management Master Planning: Guide to Optimizing Municipal 
Infrastructure Assets and Reducing Risk. Credit Valley 
Conservation, Aquafor Beech Limited, Water Canada, 169 p. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://cvc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2016/01/ORGuide.pdf>
Lenters, J. D., Anderton, J. B., Blanken, P., Spence, C. and Suyker, 
A.E. (2013). Assessing the Impacts of Climate Variability 
and Change on Great Lakes Evaporation, in 2011 Project 
Reports, (Eds.) D. Brown, D. Bidwell and L. Briley. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://glisa.umich.edu/project/great-lakes-
evaporation-implications-decision-making-and-water-resource-
management/>
Levison, M., Whelan, M. and Butler, A. (2017). A Changing 
Climate: Assessing health impacts and vulnerabilities due to 
climate change within Simcoe Muskoka. Simcoe Muskoka 
District Health Unit, 197 p. Retrieved January 2019, from <http://
www.simcoemuskokahealth.org/docs/default-source/topic-
environment/smdhu-vulnerability-assessment-2017-finale1e3e2
5f97be6bc38c2dff0000a8dfd8.pdf?sfvrsn=0>
Li, G., Zhang, X., Cannon, A.J., Murdock, T., Sobie, S., Zwiers, F., 
Anderson, K. and Qian, B. (2018). Indices of Canada’s future 
climate for general and agricultural adaptation applications. 
Climate Change, 148(1-2), 249–263.  Retrieved February 2022, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2199-x>
Ludwig, A., Zheng, H., Vrbova, L., Drebot, MA., Iranpour, M. and 
L.R. Lindsay. (2019). Increased risk of endemic mosquito-
borne diseases in Canada due to climate change. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report 45(4), 91–97. Retrieved January 
2019, from <10.14745/ccdr.v45i04a03>
Luo, Q. (2011). Temperature thresholds and crop production: a 
review. Climatic Change, 109, 583-598. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0028-6>
Lynch, A.J., Myers, B.J.E., Chu, C., Eby, L.A., Falke, J.A., Kovach, 
R.P., Krabbenhoft, T.J., Kwak, T.J., Lyons, J., Paukert, C.P. and 
Whitney. J.E. (2016). Climate Change Effects on North American 
Inland Fish Populations and Assemblages. Fisheries, 41(7), 
346–361. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/0
3632415.2016.1186016>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 94 
MacKay, M. and Seglenieks, F. (2013). On the simulation of 
Laurentian Great Lakes water levels under projections of global 
climate change. Climatic Change, 117(1-2), 55–67. Retrieved 
May 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0560-z>
Man, R., Colombo, S., Kayahara, G.J., Duckett, S., Velasquez, R. and 
Dang, Q.-L. (2013). A case of extensive conifer needle browning in 
northwestern Ontario in 2012: Winter drying or freezing damage? 
The Forestry Chronicle, 89(5), 675–680. Retrieved January 2022, 
from <https://doi.org/10.5558/tfc2013-120>
Manning, C. and Clayton, S. (2018). Chapter 9 – Threats to 
mental health and wellbeing associated with climate change. 
Psychology and Climate Change, Human Perceptions, Impact and 
Responses, 217–244.
Margolis, H. (2013). Heat Waves and Rising Temperatures: 
Human Health Impacts and the Determinants of Vulnerability, 
in  Global Climate Change and Public Health, (Eds.), K. Pinkerton 
and W. Rom.. Respiratory Medicine, Volume 7. Humana Press, 
New York, NY, 85–120. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://
link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4614-8417-2_6>
Marrotte, R.R., Bowman, J., Brown, M.G., Cordes, C., Morris., 
K.Y., Prentice, M.B. and Wilson, P.J. (2017). Multi-species 
genetic connectivity in a terrestrial habitat network. Movement 
Ecology, 5(21). Retrieved April 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1186/s40462-017-0112-2>
Marrotte R.R., Bowman. J. and Wilson, P.J. (2020). Climate 
connectivity of the bobcat in the Great Lakes region. Ecology 
and Evolution, 10(4), 2131–2144. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.6049>
Mason, L., Riseng, C., Gronewold, A., Rutherford, E., Wang, J., 
Clites, A., Smith, S. and McIntyre, P. (2016). Fine-scale spatial 
variation in ice cover and surface temperature trends across the 
surface of the Laurentian Great Lakes. Climatic Change, 138(1-
2), 71–83.  Retrieved May 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-016-1721-2>
Mbow, C., Rosenzweig, C., Barioni, L.G., Benton, T.G., Herrero, 
M., Krishnapillai, M., Liwenga, E., Pradhan, P., Rivera-Ferre, M.G., 
Sapkota, T., Tubiello, F.N. and Xu, Y. (2019). Food Security, 
Chapter 5 in Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report 
on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable 
land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes 
in terrestrial ecosystems, (Eds.) P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo 
Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, P. 
Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, 
S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, 
P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi and J. Malley. 
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/
assets/uploads/sites/4/2019/11/08_Chapter-5.pdf>
McDermid, J., Fera, S. and Hogg, A. (2015a). Climate change 
projections for Ontario: An updated synthesis for policymakers 
and planners. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Forestry, Science and Research Branch, Peterborough, Ontario. 
Climate Change Research Report CCRR-44, 40 p. Retrieved May 
2020, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_Publications/
CCRR-44.pdf>
McDermid, J.L., Dickin, S.K., Winsborough, C.L., Switzman, 
H., Barr, S., Gleeson, J.A. and Gray, P.A. (2015b). State of 
Climate Change Science in the Great Lakes Basin: A Focus on 
Climatological, Hydrological and Ecological Effects. Prepared 
jointly by the Ontario Climate Consortium and Ontario Ministry 
of Natural Resources and Forestry to advise Annex 9 – 
Climate Change Impacts under the Great Lakes Water Quality 
Agreement, October 2015, 133 p.  Retrieved May 2020, from 
<https://climateconnections.ca/app/uploads/2014/07/OCC_
GreatLakes_Report_Full_Final.pdf> 
McDonald, R., Kroeger, T., Boucher, T., Longzhu, W. and Salem, R. 
(2016). Planting healthy air: A global analysis of the role of urban 
trees in addressing particulate matter pollution and extreme 
heat. The Nature Conservancy of Canada in collaboration with 
C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, 136 p. Retrieved January 
2019, from <https://www.nature.org/content/dam/tnc/nature/en/
documents/20160825_PHA_Report_Final.pdf>
McKenney, D.W., Mackey, B.G. and Joyce, D. (1999). SeedWhere: 
A computer tool to support seed transfer and ecological 
restoration decisions. Environmental Modeling and Software, 
1999. 14, 589–595. Accessed January 2022, from <http://cfs.
nrcan.gc.ca/publications?id=29385>
McKenney, D., Pedlar, J. and O’Neill, G. (2009). Climate change 
and forest seed zones: Past trends, future prospects and 
challenges to ponder. The Forestry Chronicle, 85(2), 258–266. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pubs.cif-ifc.org/doi/
pdf/10.5558/tfc85258-2>
McKenny, D.W., Pedlar, J.H., Lawrence, K., Gray, P.A., Colombo, 
S.J. and Crins, W.J. (2010). Current and Projected Future 
Climatic Conditions for Ecoregions and Selected Natural 
Heritage areas in Ontario. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Applied Research and Development Branch, 
Peterborough, Ontario. Climate Change Research Report CCRR-
16, 54 p. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/
publications?id=34353>
McLaughlin, J.W. and Webster, K.L. (2014). Effects of climate 
change on peatlands in the Far North of Ontario, Canada: A 
synthesis. Arctic, Antarctic, Alpine Research, 46(1), 84–102.  
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1657/1938-
4246-46.1.84>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 95 
McLaughlin, J., Packalen, M. and Shrestha, B. (2018). 
Assessment of the vulnerability of peatland carbon in the Albany 
Ecodistrict of the Hudson Bay Lowlands, Ontario, Canada to 
climate change. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Forestry, Science and Research Branch, Peterborough, Ontario. 
Climate Change Research Report CCRR-46, 67. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_
Publications/CCRR-46.pdf>
Mekis, É., Vincent, L.A., Shephard, M.W. and Zhang, X. (2015). 
Observed Trends in Severe Weather Conditions Based on 
Humidex, Wind Chill, and Heavy Rainfall Events in Canada for 
1953–2012. Atmosphere-Ocean, 53(4), 383–397. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/07055900.2015.1
086970>
Metrolinx (2017). Planning for Resiliency: Toward a Corporate 
Climate Action Plan. September 2017, 86 p. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <http://www.metrolinx.com/en/aboutus/
sustainability/Planning_for_Resiliency_2017_EN_final.pdf>
Metrolinx (2018). Metrolinx Climate Adaptation Strategy. 36 
p. Retrieved February 2022, from <http://www.metrolinx.com/
en/aboutus/sustainability/MX%20Climat%20Adapt_Str_May8_
vs4.pdf>
Milner, G., Delaney, F., Baginski, B., Baus, N., Hall, A., Jackson, A. 
and Witt, J. (2018). Prioritizing climate science knowledge gaps 
in the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement. Prepared jointly by 
the Ontario Climate Consortium and the Centre for Environment 
and Sustainability to advise Annex 9 – Climate Change 
Impacts under the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, 44 p. 
Retrieved May 2020, from <https://climateconnections.ca/app/
uploads/2017/03/Prioritizing-Climate-Science-Knowledge-Gaps-
in-the-Great-Lakes-Basin.pdf>
Milner, G., Delaney, F., Lam, S., Bloomfield, D., Allain, J., Jacoub, 
G., Gowda, C., Tucker, C., Bateman, R. and Barnes, P. (2018). 
Incorporating Climate Change Impacts into Drinking Water 
Source Protection Water Quality Risk Assessment: A Best 
Practices Guidance Document.
Minns, C. Moore, J.E., Doka, S.E. and St. John, M.A. (2011). 
Temporal trends and spatial patterns in the temperature 
and oxygen regimes in the Bay of Quinte, Lake Ontario, 
1972–2008. Aquatic Ecosystem Health & Management, 14(1), 
9–20. Retrieved April 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/1463
4988.2011.547327>
Minns, C., Shuter, B. and Fung, S. (2014). Regional Projections 
of Climate Change Effects on Ice Cover and Open-Water 
Duration for Ontario Lakes Using Updated Ice-Date Models. 
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, Science 
and Research Branch, Peterborough, Ontario. Climate Change 
Research Report CCRR-40, 52 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_Publications/ccrr40.pdf> 
Mitchell, R. and Popham, F. (2008). Effect of exposure to natural 
environment on health inequalities: an observational population 
study. The Lancet 372(9650), 1655–60.  Retrieved January 2019, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61689-X>
Moghal, Z. and Peddle, S. (2016). At the Front Lines of Flood: 
How Prepared are Ontario Communities? Partners for Action: 
Advancing Flood Resiliency in Canadian Communities, 50 p. 
Retrieved April 2021, from <https://uwaterloo.ca/partners-for-
action/sites/ca.partners-for-action/files/uploads/files/p4a_
front_lines_of_the_flood_04jul16.pdf>
Mohsin, T. and Gough, W.A. (2012). Characterization and 
estimation of urban heat island at Toronto: Impact of the choice 
of rural sites. Theoretical and Applied Climatology 108(1), 105–
117.  Retrieved January 2019, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00704-011-0516-7>
Morand, A., Douglas, A., Eyzaguirre, J., De La Cueva Bueno, P., 
Robinson, D., Comer, N., Sparling, E., Cheng, V. and Lafrenière, 
C. (2017a). Climate Change Adaptation and Agriculture: 
Addressing Risks and Opportunities for Corn Production in 
Southwestern Ontario. A collaboration between the Ontario 
Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, Risk 
Sciences International, ESSA Technologies Ltd. and Université 
du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue. Funded in part through 
the Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, 14 p. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/
doc/p_OCAAF/OCAAF-AdaptationOptionsForCornInSouthwester
nOntario_FINAL.pdf>
Morand, A., Douglas, A., Eyzaguirre, J., De La Cueva Bueno, P., 
Robinson, D., Comer, N., Sparling, E., Cheng, V. and Lafrenière, C. 
(2017b). Climate Change Adaptation and Agriculture: Addressing 
Risks and Opportunities for Forage-based Beef Production in 
Ontario’s Great Clay Belt. A collaboration between the Ontario 
Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, Risk 
Sciences International, ESSA Technologies Ltd. and Université 
du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue. Funded in part through 
the Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, 14 p. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/
doc/p_OCAAF/OCAAF-AdaptationOptionsForForageInTheClayBe
lt_FINAL.pdf>
Morand, A., Douglas, A., Comer, N., Cheng, V., Sparling,  E., 
Robinson, D., Eyzaguirre, J., De La Cueva Bueno, P. and Lafrenière, 
C. (2017c). The Ontario Climate and Agriculture Assessment 
Framework (OCAAF): Final Report. A collaboration between the 
Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, 
Risk Sciences International, ESSA Technologies Ltd. and 
Université du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue. Funded in part 
through the Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, 
82 p. Retrieved January 2022, from <http://www.climateontario.
ca/doc/p_OCAAF/OCAAF_FinalReport_June2017.pdf>
Moritz, C. and Agudo, R. (2013). The future of species under 
climate change: resilience or decline? Science, 341(6145), 504–
508. Retrieved April 2021, from <10.1126/science.1237190>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 96 
Mortsch, L.D. (2016). Physical Surveillance Report. Report 
prepared for the International Joint Commission, Great Lakes 
– St. Lawrence River Adaptive Management Committee, 59 
p. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/317827324_Physical_Surveillance_Report> 
Motha, R.P. and Baier, W. (2005). Impacts of present and future 
climate change and climate variability on agriculture in the 
temperate regions: North America. Climatic Change 70, 137–
164.  Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-005-5940-1>
Moudrak, N. and Feltmate, B. (2017). Preventing Disaster 
Before it Strikes: Developing a Canadian Standard for New 
Flood-Resilient Residential Communities – 20 Best Practices. 
University of Waterloo, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, 
Standards Council of Canada, Intact Insurance, 60 p. Retrieved 
April 2021, from <https://www.intactcentre.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2017/09/Preventing-Disaster-Before-It-Strikes.pdf>
Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B., Venema, H. and Osman, H. (2018). 
Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural infrastructure 
is an underutilized option. Prepared for Insurance Bureau of 
Canada. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of 
Waterloo, 68 p. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://assets.
ibc.ca/Documents/Resources/IBC-Natural-Infrastructure-
Report-2018.pdf>  
Moudrak, N. and Feltmate, B. (2019). Weathering the Storm: 
Developing a Canadian Standard for Flood-Resilient Existing 
Communities. Prepared for Standards Council of Canada and 
National Research Council of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, University of Waterloo, 52 p. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/Weathering-the-Storm.pdf> 
Mushkegowuk Marine Conservation (n.d.). Protecting the marine 
environment of the Omushkego traditional territories. Retrieved 
April 2022, from <https://mushkegowukmarine.ca/>
Myers, B.J., Lynch, A.J., Bunnell, D.B., Chu, C., Falke, J.A., 
Kovach, R. and Paukert, C.P. (2017). Global synthesis of the 
documented and projected effects of climate change on inland 
fishes. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 27(2), 339–361. 
Retrieved April 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11160-017-
9476-z>
Nantel, P., Pellatt, M.G., Keenleyside, K. and Gray, P.A. (2014). 
Biodiversity and Protected Areas, Chapter 6 in Canada in a 
Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, 
(Eds.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen, Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario, pp. 159–190. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://
www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/
assess/2014/pdf/Chapter6-Biodiversity_Eng.pdf>
Natali, S.M., Watts, J.D., Rogers, B.M., Potter, S., Ludwig, S.M., 
Selbmann, A,-K., Sullivan, P.F., Abbott, B.W., Arndt, K.A., Birch, 
L., Björkman, M.P., Bloom, A.A., Celis, G., Christensen, T.R., 
Commane, R., Cooper, E.J., Crill, P., Czimczik, C., Davydov, S., Du, 
J., Egan, J.E., Elberling, B., Euskirchen, E.S., Friborg, T., Genet, H., 
Göckede, M., Goodrich, J.P., Grogan, P., Helbig, M., Jafarov, E.E., 
Jastrow, J.D., Kalhori, A.A.M., Kim, Y., Kimball, J.S., Kutzbach, L., 
Lara, M.J., Larsen, K.S., Lee, B,-Y., Liu, Z., Loranty, M.M., Lund, M., 
Lupascu, M., Madani, N., Malhotra, A., Matamala, R., McFarland, 
J., McGuire, A.D., Michelsen, A., Minions, C., Oechel, W.C., 
Olefeldt, D., Parmentier, F.W., Pirk, N., Poulter, B., Quinton, W., 
Rezanezhad, F., Risk, D., Sachs, T., Schaefer, K., Schmidt, N.M., 
Schuur, E.A.G., Semenchuk, P.R., Shaver, G., Sonnentag, O., Starr, 
G., Treat, C.C., Waldrop, M.P., Wang, Y., Welker, J., Wille, C., Xu, X., 
Zhang, Z., Zhuang, Q. and Zona, D. (2019). Large loss of CO2 in 
winter observed across the northern permafrost region. Nature 
Climate Change, 9, 852–857. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0592-8>
NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] 
(2021). Great Lakes Dashboard. Great Lakes Environmental 
Research Laboratory. Retrieved April 2022, from <https://www.
glerl.noaa.gov/data/dashboard/GLD_HTML5.html>
Natural Resources Canada (2018). The State of Canada’s 
Forests: Annual Report 2018. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 81 p. Retrieved April 2020, from <http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/
pubwarehouse/pdfs/39336.pdf>
Natural Resources Canada (2019). Emerald Ash Borer. Retrieved 
October 2019, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/our-natural-
resources/forests-forestry/wildland-fires-insects-disturban/top-
forest-insects-diseases-cana/emerald-ash-borer/13377>
Nature Conservancy of Canada (2019). Southern Norfolk Sand 
Plain Natural Area. Retrieved October 9, 2019, from <http://www.
natureconservancy.ca/en/where-we-work/ontario/our-work/
natural-areas/southern-norfolk-sand-plain-natural-area.html> 
Nelder, M.P., Wijayasri, S., Russell, C.B., Johnson, K.O., 
Marchand-Austin, A., Cronin, K., Johnson, S., Badiani, T., Patel, 
S.N. and Sider, D. (2018). The continued rise of Lyme disease in 
Ontario, Canada: 2017. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 
44 (10), 231–6. Retrieved January 2019, from <10.14745/ccdr.
v44i10a01>
Ng, V., Fazil, A., Gachon, P., Deuymes, G., Radojević, M., 
Mascarenhas, M., Garasia, S., Johansson M.A. and Ogden, 
N. 2017. Assessment of the Probability of Autochthonous 
Transmission of Chikungunya Virus in Canada under Recent and 
Projected Climate Change. Environmental Health Perspectives 
125(6), 067001.  Retrieved January 2019, from <10.1289/
EHP669>
Nituch, L.A. and Bowman, J. (2013). Community-level effects 
of climate change on Ontario’s terrestrial biodiversity. Ontario 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, Science and 
Research Branch, Peterborough, Ontario. Climate Change 
Research Report CCRR-36, 57 p. Retrieved April 2021, from 
<http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_Publications/CCRR-36.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 97 
NOAA - Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory (2019). 
Great Lakes Ice Cover.  Retrieved May 2020, from <https://www.
glerl.noaa.gov/data/ice/>
Office of the Auditor General of Ontario (2020). Value-for-
money Audit: Conserving the Natural Environment with 
Protected Areas. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://
auditor.on.ca/en/content/annualreports/arreports/en20/ENV_
conservingthenaturalenvironment_en20.pdf>
Office of the Prime Minister (2019). Minister of Environment 
and Climate Change Mandate Letter. Retrieved May 2021, from 
<https://pm.gc.ca/en/mandate-letters/2019/12/13/minister-
environment-and-climate-change-mandate-letter>
Ogden, N.H., Lindsay, L.R., Hanincová, K., Barker, I.K., 
Bigras-Poulin, M., Charron, D.F., Heagy, A., Francis, C.M., 
O’Callaghan, C.J., Schwartz, I. and Thompson, R.A. (2008). 
Role of migratory birds in introduction and range expansion 
of Ixodes scapularis ticks and of Borrelia burgdorferi and 
Anaplasma phagocytophilum in Canada. Applied Environmental 
Microbiology, 74(6), 1780–1790. Retrieved February 2022, from 
<10.1128/AEM.01982-07>
Ogden, N.H., Lindsay, L.R., Ludwig, A., Morse, A.P., Zheng, H. and 
Zhu, H. (2019) Weather-based forecasting of mosquito-borne 
disease outbreaks in Canada. Canada Communicable Disease 
Report, 45(5), 127–32. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://
doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v45i05a03>
Oleson, K. W., Monaghan, A., Wilhelmi, O., Barlage, M., Brunsell, 
N., Feddema, J. and Steinhoff, D.F. (2015). Interactions between 
urbanization, heat stress, and climate change. Climatic Change, 
129(3-4), 525–541. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-013-0936-8>
Ontario Apple Growers (2018). Apples, farmers and tech: A look 
at technologies used in apple growing. Retrieved October 2019, 
from <http://onapples.com/blog/apples-farmers-and-tech-a-
look-at-technologies-used-in-apple-growing.php>
Ontario Biodiversity Council (2011). Ontario’s Biodiversity 
Strategy, 2011: Renewing Our Commitment to Protecting 
What Sustains Us. Ontario Biodiversity Council, Peterborough, 
Ontario, 77 p. Retrieved January 2022, from <http://
ontariobiodiversitycouncil.ca/wp-content/uploads/Ontarios-
Biodiversity-Strategy-2011-accessible.pdf>
Ontario Biodiversity Council (2015). State of Ontario’s 
Biodiversity 2015: Indicators. Ontario Biodiversity Council, 
Peterborough, Ontario. Retrieved January 2022, from <http://
ontariobiodiversitycouncil.ca/wp-content/uploads/Ontarios-
Biodiversity-Strategy-2011-accessible.pdf>
Ontario Biodiversity Council (2021). State of Ontario’s 
Biodiversity 2020: Summary. Ontario Biodiversity Council, 
Peterborough, Ontario. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://
sobr.ca/_biosite/wp-content/uploads/state-of-biodiversity-
report-2020-Final-2.pdf>
 Ontario Chamber of Commerce (2017). Building Better: Setting 
up the Next Ontario Long-Term Infrastructure Plan for Success. 
Ontario Chamber of Commerce, 40 p. Retrieved October 2020, 
from <https://www.ontario.ca/document/building-better-lives-
ontarios-long-term-infrastructure-plan-2017>
Ontario Chamber of Commerce (2020). Ontario Economic Report 
Ontario 2020. Ontario Chamber of Commerce, 44 p.
Ontario Cover Crops Steering Committee (2017). Ontario Cover 
Crops Strategy. Ontario Soil and Crop Association. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <https://www.ontariosoilcrop.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/06/Ontario-Cover-Crop-Strategy_May-
3_Final-v3compressed.pdf>
Ontario e-Laws (2018). O. Reg. 588/17 Asset Management 
Planning for Municipal Infrastructure. Retrieved October 23, 
2019, from <https://www.ontario.ca/laws/regulation/170588>.
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs (2016). 
Agronomy guide for field crops. Publication 811. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/
crops/pub811/p811toc.html>
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs (2021a).  
Best management practices series. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/environment/bmp/
series.htm >
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs (2021b). 
Canada-Ontario Environmental Farm Plan. Retrieved February 
2022, from <http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/environment/
efp/efp.htm>
Ontario Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Parks (2014). 
Code of Practice: Preparing and Reviewing Environmental 
Assessments in Ontario. Environmental Assessment Act, RSO 
1990. Government of Ontario. Retrieved February 2022, from 
<https://dr6j45jk9xcmk.cloudfront.net/documents/1809/3-8a-
11-preparing-and-reviewing-eas-en.pdf>
Ontario Ministry of Finance (2021a). Ontario Population 
Projections. Updated March 2022. Retrieved March 2022, 
from <https://www.ontario.ca/page/ontario-population-
projections#:~:text=Ontario’s%20population%20is%20
projected%20to,million%20by%20July%201%2C%202046>
Ontario Ministry of Finance (2021b). Ontario Demographic 
Quarterly. Retrieved January 2022 from <https://www.
ontario.ca/page/ontario-demographic-quarterly-highlights-
third-quarter?_ga=2.255973067.1317467585.1642853285-
347122013.1602004339> 
Ontario Ministry of Finance (2021c). Ontario Population 
Projections. August 2021. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
www.fin.gov.on.ca/en/economy/demographics/projections/>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 98 
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care (2016). A 
harmonized heat warning and information system for Ontario 
(HWIS). Retrieved October 2019, from <http://www.health.gov.
on.ca/en/common/ministry/publications/reports/heat_warning_
information_system/heat_warning_information_system.aspx>
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care (2018a). Healthy 
Environments and Climate Change Guideline, 2018. Population 
and Public Health Division, Ministry of Health and Long-Term 
Care, 10 p. Retrieved January 2019, from <http://www.health.
gov.on.ca/en/pro/programs/publichealth/oph_standards/docs/
protocols_guidelines/Healthy_Environments_and_Climate_
Change_Guideline_2018_en.pdf> 
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care (2018b). 
Protecting and Promoting the Health of Ontarians – Ontario 
Public Health Standards: Requirements for Programs, Services, 
and Accountability. Effective January 1, 2018, 75 p. Retrieved 
January 2019, from <http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/pro/
programs/publichealth/oph_standards/docs/protocols_
guidelines/Ontario_Public_Health_Standards_2018_en.pdf>
Ontario Ministry of Indigenous Relations and Reconciliation 
(2017). 10 Year Anniversary Report. Retrieved January 22, 2022, 
from <https://www.ontario.ca/document/spirit-reconciliation-
ministry-indigenous-relations-and-reconciliation-first-10-years/
indigenous-peoples-ontario>
Ontario Ministry of Infrastructure and Ministry of Northern 
Development, Mines and Forestry (2011). Growth Plan for 
Northern Ontario. Government of Ontario. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://www.ontario.ca/document/growth-plan-
northern-ontario>
Ontario Ministry of Infrastructure and Ministry of Transportation 
(2012). Building together – Guide for municipal asset 
management plans. Government of Ontario. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://www.ontario.ca/page/building-together-
guide-municipal-asset-management-plans>
Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing (2020). 
Provincial policy Statement. Government of Ontario. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <https://www.ontario.ca/page/provincial-
policy-statement-2020>
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry (2012). 
Ontario Parks: Park Statistics 2011. Queen’s Printer for Ontario, 
Peterborough, Ontario, 87 p. Retrieved April 2021 from <http://
www.ontla.on.ca/library/repository/ser/10950/2011.pdf>
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry (2017a). 
Forest Operations and Silviculture Manual. Toronto, Queen’s 
Printer for Ontario, 48 p. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://files.
ontario.ca/forest-operations-silviculture-manual.pdf>
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry (2017b). 
Naturally Resilient: MNRF’s Natural Resource Climate Adaptation 
Strategy (2017–2021). Toronto, Queen’s Printer for Ontario, 32. 
Retrieved April 2020, from <https://apps.mnr.gov.on.ca/public/
files/er/mnrf-17-313-climate-change.pdf> 
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry (2017c). A 
Wetland Conservation Strategy for Ontario 2017–2030. Queen’s 
Printer for Ontario. Toronto, ON. 52 p. 
Ontario Ministry of Northern Development, Mines, Natural 
Resources and Forestry (2019). Northern Ontario Winter Roads 
Map. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://www.mndm.gov.
on.ca/sites/default/files/en_-_northern_ontario_winter_roads_
map_2019.pdf>
Ontario Ministry of Transportation (MTO) (2016). IDF Curve 
Lookup. Retrieved October 2019, from <http://www.mto.gov.
on.ca/IDF_Curves/terms.shtml>
Ontario National Assessment Engagement Sessions 
(2018‒2019). Personal communication with multiple 
participants. Ontario.
Ontl, T.A., Janowiak, M., Swanston, C., Daley, J., Handler, S., 
Cornett, M., Hagenbuch, S., Handrick, C., Mccarthy, L. and 
Patch, N. (2020). Forest Management for Carbon Sequestration 
and Climate Adaptation, Journal of Forestry, 118(1), 86–
101. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/
jofore/fvz062>
Pagnucco, K., Maynard, G., Fera, S., Yan, N., Nalepaand, T. and 
Ricciardi, A. (2015). The future of species invasions in the 
Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River basin. Journal of Great Lakes 
Research. 41, 96–107. Retrieved May 2020, from 10.1016/j.
jglr.2015.02.002
Paixao, E., Auld, H., Monirul Qader Mirza, M., Klaassen, J. and 
Shephard, M.W. (2011). Regionalization of heavy rainfall to 
improve climatic design values for infrastructure: case study in 
Southern Ontario, Canada. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 56(7), 
1067–1089. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1
080/02626667.2011.608069>
Park, A., Puettmann, K., Wilson, E., Messier, C., Kames, S. and 
Dhar, A. (2014). Can Boreal and Temperate Forest Management 
be Adapted to the Uncertainties of 21st Century Climate 
Change? Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences, 33(4), 251–285. 
Retrieved April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/07352689.2
014.858956>
Parker, S. (2017). Let’s Talk about Climate Change: Great Lakes 
Region. Parks Canada, Office of the Chief Ecosystem Scientist, 
41 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://parkscanadahistory.
com/publications/lets-talk-about-climate-change/3-great-
lakes-e.pdf>
Parker, S. (2018). Supplemental Climate Information for Bruce 
Peninsula National Park and Fathom Five National Marine 
Park. Technical report, 39.  Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/331383025_Supplemental_
Climate_Information_for_Bruce_Peninsula_National_Park_and_
Fathom_Five_National_Marine_Park>
Parks Canada (2021). National Marine Conservation Areas. 
Retrieved April 2022, from <https://www.pc.gc.ca/en/amnc-nmca>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 99 
Paterson, J. A., Ford, J.D., Ford, L.B., Lesnikowski, A, Berry, P., 
Henderson, J. and Heymann, J. (2012). Adaptation to climate 
change in the Ontario public health sector. BMC Public Health, 
12(452), 1–12. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-452>
Paterson, J., Yusa, A., Anderson, V. and Berry, P. (2016). Ontario 
Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation 
Assessment Guidelines: Workbook. Queen’s Printer for Ontario. 
Ontario, Canada
Payant, C., Jégo, G., Ouellet, V., Grenier, P., Tremblay, 
G.F., Bélanger, G. and Charbonneau, É. (2021). Modeled 
performance of forage mixtures and annual crops grown in 
eastern Canada under climate change. Agronomy Journal, 
(113), 4945–4964. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/agj2.20894>
Pedlar, J. H. and McKenney, D.W. (2017). Assessing the 
anticipated growth response of northern conifer populations to 
a warming climate. Scientific Reports, 7(43881), 10.  Retrieved 
April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/srep43881>
Perdeaux, S., Nunn, J. and Delaney, F. (2018). Approaches for 
Conducting Vulnerability Assessments in the Great Lakes Basin: 
A Review of the Literature. Report submitted to Annex 9 (Climate 
Change Impacts) of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, 
78. Retrieved May 2021, from <https://binational.net/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/VAReport-Final.pdf>
Podur, J. and Wotton, N. (2010). Will climate change overwhelm 
fire management capacity?  Ecological Modelling, 221(9), 1301–
1309. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolmodel.2010.01.013>
Popp, J.N., Priadka, P. and Kozmik, C. (2018). The rise of 
moose co-management and integration of Indigenous 
knowledge. Human Dimensions of Wildlife, 24(2), 159–167. 
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/full/10.1080/10871209.2019.1545953>
Prasher, S. (2015). Evaluation of Alternative Best Management 
Practices in Critical Contributing Areas in Agricultural 
Landscapes of Ontario under Changing Climate. McGill 
University. 2015-06-01 – 2018-12-31.
Priadka, P., Brown, G.S., DeWitt, P.D. and Mallory, F. (2022) 
Habitat quality mediates demographic response to climate in a 
declining large herbivore. Basic and Applied Ecology, (58), 50–
63. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
baae.2021.11.005>
Price, D. T., Alfaro, R.I., Brown, K.J, Flannigan, M.D., Fleming, R.A., 
Hogg, E.H., Girardin, M.P, Lakusta, T., Johnston, M., McKenney, 
D.W., Pedlar, J.H., Stratton, T., Sturrock, R.N., Thompson, 
I.D., Trofymow, J.A. and Venier, L.A. (2013). Anticipating the 
consequences of climate change for Canada’s boreal forest 
ecosystems. Environmental Reviews, 21(4), 322–365. Retrieved 
January 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2013-0042>
Public Health Ontario 2019. Ontario Lyme Disease Map: 
Estimated Risk Areas. Public Health Ontario, p. 5. Retrieved 
January 2022, from <https://www.publichealthontario.ca/-/
media/documents/lyme-disease-risk-area-map-2019.pdf?la=en>
Pureswaran, D.S., De Grandpre, L., Pare, D., Taylor, A., Barrette, 
M., Morin, H., Reginiere, J., and Kneeshaw, D.D. (2015). Climate-
induced changes in host tree–insect phenology may drive 
ecological state-shift in boreal forests. Ecology, 96(6), 1480–
1491. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1890/13-
2366.1>
Qian, B., Gameda, S., Zhang, X. and De Jong, R. (2012). 
Changing growing season observed in Canada. Climatic Change, 
112(2), 339–353. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-011-0220-8>
Qian, B. Jing, Q., Bélanger, G., Shang, J., Huffman, T., Liu, J. and 
Hoogenboom, G. (2018). Simulated Canola Yield Responses to 
Climate Change and Adaptation in Canada. Biometry, Modeling 
& Statistics, 110(1), 133–146.  Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://acsess.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.2134/
agronj2017.02.0076> 
Qian, B., Zhang, X., Smith, W., Grant, B., Jing, Q., Cannon, A.J., 
Nielsen, D., McConkey, B., Li, G., Bonsal, B., Wan, H., Xue, L. and 
Zhao, J. (2019). Climate Change Impacts on Canadian Yields 
of Spring Wheat, Canola and Maize for Global Warming Levels 
of 1.5°C, 2°C, 2.5°C and 3 °C. Environmental Research Letters 
14(2019). Retrieved February 2022, from <https://iopscience.iop.
org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ab17fb>
Qian, B., Jing, Q, Smith, W., Grant, B., Cannon, A.J. and Zhang, 
X. (2020). Quantifying the Uncertainty Introduced by Internal 
Climate Variability in Projections of Canadian Crop Production. 
Environmental Research Letters 15(7). Retrieved February 2022, 
from <doi:10.1088/1748-9326/ab88fc>
Quintero, I. and Wiens, J.J. (2013). Rates of projected 
climate change dramatically exceed past rates of climatic 
niche evolution among vertebrate species. Ecology letters, 
16(8), 1095–1103. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/ele.12144>
Rajaram, N., Hohenadel, K., Gattoni, L., Khan, Y., Birk-Urovitz, 
E., Li, L. and Schwartz, B. (2016). Assessing health impacts of 
the December 2013 Ice storm in Ontario, Canada. BMC Public 
Health, 16(544), 1–9. Retrieved January 2019, from <https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12889-016-3214-7>
Region of Peel (2012). Report on Health Vulnerability to Climate 
Change: Assessing Exposure, Sensitivity, and Adaptive Capacity 
in the Region of Peel. Region of Peel, Ontario. Retrieved 
January 2019, from <http://www.peelregion.ca/planning/
climatechange/>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 100 
Regniere, J., Nealis, V. and Porter, K. (2009). Climate suitability 
and management of the gypsy moth invasion into Canada. 
Ecological Impacts of Non-Native Invertebrates and Fungi on 
Terrestrial Ecosystems, 135–148. Retrieved January, 2022, from 
<10.1007/978-1-4020-9680-8_10>
Reid, C. (2015). Weathering Winter Roads – What is the Best 
Route? Prepared for Northern Policy Institute. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://www.northernpolicy.ca/article/weathering-
winter-roads-%E2%80%93-what-is-the-best-route-1354.asp>
Richardson, B. (2003). Cold stress on trucked cattle. Ontario 
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/
livestock/beef/facts/01-079.htm>
Richardson, K. (2015). Sugar Bush Management in Ontario: 
Identification of Resilient Adaptation Strategies for a Changing 
Climate. MRP submitted to the Faculty of Geography, Wilfrid Laurier 
University, 88 p. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://scholars.wlu.
ca/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1002&context=ges_mrp>
Ridgway, M., Middel, T. and Bell, A. (2017). Aquatic ecology, 
history and diversity of Algonquin Provincial Park. Ontario 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry Science and 
Research Information Report IR-10. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <https://www.algonquinpark.on.ca/pdf/harkness_IR10.pdf>
Risk Sciences International (2018). PIEVC Assessment of Three 
City Parks. Prepared for the City of Mississauga, 60p. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <https://pievc.ca/2018/07/24/pievc-
assessment-of-three-city-parks-city-of-mississauga-2/>
Robillard, M. M. and Fox, M.G. (2006). Historical changes in 
abundance and community structure of warmwater piscivore 
communities associated with changes in water clarity, nutrients, 
and temperature. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Sciences, 63(4), 798–809. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1139/f05-259>
Robinson, B., and Sandink, D. (2021). Guideline to Developing an 
Efficient and Cost-Effective Inflow and Infiltration (I/I) Reduction 
Program: A Foundational Document for the Development of a 
National Standard of Canada. Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction and  Standards Council of Canada.
Robinson, D., Caldwell, W. and Epp, S. (2020). Exploring 
Agricultural Opportunities in the Clay Belt of Ontario, Canada. 
WIT Transactions on Ecology and the Environment, 245, 
145–156.  Retrieved January 2022, from <https://www.
witpress.com/elibrary/wit-transactions-on-ecology-and-the-
environment/245/37600>
Rojas-Downing, M.M., Nejadhashemi, A.P., Harrigan, T. and 
Woznicki, S.A. (2017). Climate change and livestock: Impacts, 
adaptation, and mitigation. Climate Risk Management, 16, 145–
163. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
crm.2017.02.001>
Rossi, S. (2015). Local adaptations and climate change: 
converging sensitivity of bud break in black spruce provenances. 
International Journal of Biometeorology, 59(7), 827–835. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-
014-0900-y>
R.V. Anderson Associates Limited (2008). First National 
Engineering Vulnerability Assessment Report Roads and 
Associated Infrastructure. Report prepared for The City of 
Greater Sudbury, 68. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://
pievc.ca/sites/default/files/pievc_case_study_city_of_greater_
sudbury_ontario_roads_final_report.pdf>
R.V. Anderson Associates Limited (2017). Graham Creek 
Stormwater Infrastructure PIEVC Study: Summary Report - Final. 
Report prepared for the City of Ottawa, 176. Retrieved January 
2022, from <https://pievc.ca/sites/default/files/graham_creek_
stormwater_infrastructure-summary-report-wapp2.pdf>
Sagurova, I., Ludwig, A., Ogden, N.H., Pelcat, Y., Dueymes, G. 
and Gachon, P. (2019). Predicted northward expansion of the 
geographic range of the tick vector Amblyomma americanum in 
North America under future climate conditions. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 127(10), 1–14. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP5668>
Salas, R., Knappenberger, P. and Hess, J. (2019). The Lancet 
Countdown on Health and Climate Change: Policy Brief for the 
United States of America. Lancet Countdown: London, United 
Kingdom, 11 p. Retrieved February 2019, from <https://storage.
googleapis.com/lancet-countdown/2019/11/ANJ-USA-Lancet-
Countdown-2019-Policy-brief_13Nov_without-back-page.pdf>
Sang, Z., Sebastian-Azcona, J., Hamann, A., Menzel, A., 
and Hacke, U. (2019). Adaptive limitations of white spruce 
populations to drought imply vulnerability to climate change in 
its western range. Evolutionary applications, 12(9), 1850–1860. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
eva.12845>
Schardong, A., Simonovic, S.P., Gaur, A. and Sandink, D. 
(2020). Web-based Tool for the Development of Intensity 
Duration Frequency Curves under Changing Climate at Gauged 
and Ungauged Locations, Water, Special Issue Extreme 
Value Analysis of Short-Duration Rainfall and Intensity–
Duration–Frequency Models, 12, 1243.  Retrieved February 
2022, from <https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/12/5/1243/
pdf?version=1588933440>
Scheffer, M. (2009). Critical Transitions in Nature and Society. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Schultz, R. and Lishman, P. (2018). 2017 Wildfires–Opportunities 
to Minimize Rural Impacts. Retrieved February 2022, from 
<https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/public-safety-and-
emergency-services/emergency-preparedness-response-
recovery/embc/2017-wildfires-opportunities-to-minimize-rural-
impacts.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 101 
Seglenieks, F. and Caldwell, R. (2019). Great Lakes–St. 
Lawrence River Water Levels. Environment and Climate Change 
Canada. LEVELnews, 27(8), 1–4. Retrieved May 2020, from 
<https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/levelnews/2019/
LEVELnews_08_2019_e.pdf>
Sehgal, K. (2016). A Unified Ontario Flood Method (UOFM) 
Regional Flood Frequency Analysis of Ontario Streams Using 
Multiple Regression. Thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, 
University of Toronto, 156 p. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/handle/1807/76843>
Sharma, S., Jackson, D.A., Minns, C.K. and Shuter, B.J. (2007). 
Will northern fish populations be in hot water because of 
climate change? Global Change Biology, 13(10), 2052–
2064. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-2486.2007.01426.x>
Sharma, S., Jackson, D.A. and Minns, C.K. (2009). Quantifying 
the potential effects of climate change and the invasion of 
smallmouth bass on native lake trout populations across 
Canadian lakes. Ecography, 32(3), 517–525. Retrieved April 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0587.2008.05544.x>
Shaw, T. (2017). Climate change and the evolution of the Ontario 
cool climate wine regions in Canada. Journal of Wine Research, 
28(1), 13–45. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1
080/09571264.2016.1238349>
Shephard, M.W., Mekis, E., Morris, R.J., Feng, Y., Zhang, X., 
Kilcup, K. and Fleetwood R. (2014). Trends in Canadian Short‐
Duration Extreme Rainfall: Including an Intensity–Duration–
Frequency Perspective. Atmosphere-Ocean, 52(5), 398–417. 
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/070559
00.2014.969677>
Shlozberg, R., Dorling, R. and Spiro, P. (2014). Low water blues: 
An economic impact assessment of future low water levels in 
the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence River. Mowat Centre Research 
No. 89. ISBN 978-1-927350-77-5
Simonovic, S.P., Schardong, A. and Sandink, D. (2017). Mapping 
Extreme Rainfall Statistics for Canada under Climate Change 
Using Updated Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves. Journal of 
Water Resources Planning and Management, 143(3). Retrieved 
January 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)WR.1943-
5452.0000725>
Sioux Lookout First Nations Health Authority (2019). SLFNHA 
Community Garden Implementation Guide.  Retrieved April 
2022, from <https://slfnha.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/
SLFNHA_CommunityGarden-for_web.pdf>
Smith, R. (2020). Enhancing Canada’s Climate Change Ambitions 
with Natural Climate Solutions. Vedalia Biological Inc. Galiano, 
Canada ISBN 978-1-7773950-0-1
Smith, J. and Eastwood, L. (2017). Avoiding production losses 
in swine due to heat stress. Ontario Ministry of Agriculture Food 
and Rural Affairs. Retrieved February 2022, from <http://www.
omafra.gov.on.ca/english/livestock/swine/facts/17-039.htm>
Solaiman T.A. and Simonovic, S.P. (2011). Development of 
Probability Based Intensity Duration Frequency Curves under 
Climate Change. Water Resources Research Report no. 072, 
Facility for Intelligent Decision Support, Department of Civil 
and Environmental Engineering, London, Ontario, Canada, 94. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/wrrr/34/>
 Soulis, E.D., Princz, D. and Wong, J. (2015). Renewal 
and Update of MTO IDF Curves: Defining the Uncertainty. 
Journal of Water Management Modeling, 23(C386), 8. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.researchgate.
net/profile/Eric-Soulis/publication/276392702_Renewal_
and_Update_of_MTO_IDF_Curves_Defining_the_Uncertainty/
links/568aab0d08ae1e63f1fbe219/Renewal-and-Update-of-
MTO-IDF-Curves-Defining-the-Uncertainty.pdf>
Soulis, E., Sarhadi, A., Tinel, M. and Suthar, M. (2016). Extreme 
precipitation time trends in Ontario, 1960-2010. Hydrological 
Processes, 30(22), 4090–4100. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.10969>
Stantec (2017). Climate change imapcts on water and 
wastewater at Akwesasne.  Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://pievc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/climate-change-
impacts-water-wastewater-akwesasne-05-18-e-1.pdf>
Stantec (2018a). Climate Change Impacts on Water and 
Wastewater Infrastructure at Moose Factory. Developed in 
partnership with Ontario First Nations Technical Services 
Corporation. Retrieved April, 2022, from <https://pievc.
ca/2018/07/24/climate-change-impacts-on-water-and-
wastewater-infrastructure-at-moose-factory/>
Stantec (2018b). Climate Change Impacts on the Housing 
Infrastructure at Oneida Nation of the Thames. Prepared in 
partnership with Ontario First Nations Technical Services 
Corporation. Retrieved April, 2022, from <https://pievc.
ca/2018/07/24/climate-change-impacts-on-the-housing-
infrastructure-at-oneida-nation-of-the-thames/>
Stantec (2019). Distribution System Climate Risk and 
Vulnerability Assessment. Prepared for Ottawa Hydro. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pievc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2021/03/Stantec-Hydro-Ottawa-Sept-2019.pdf>
Stantec (2020). Climate Change Risk Assessment Kasabonika 
Lake First Nation Infrastructure. Prepared for Kasabonika 
Lake First Nation. Retrieved April, 2022, from <https://pievc.
ca/2020/03/02/climate-change-risk-assessment-kasabonika-
lake-first-nation-infrastructure/>
Statistics Canada (2017). Focus on Geography Series, 2016 
Census. Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 98-404-X2016001. 
Ottawa, Ontario. Data products, 2016 Census.
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 102 
Statistics Canada (2018). Canada at a Glance 2018. Retrieved 
September 2019, from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
pub/12-581-x/2018000/pop-eng.htm>
Staudinger, M., Lynch, A., Gaichas, S., Fox, M., Gibson-Reinemer, 
D., Langan, J., Teffer, A., Thackeray, S. and Winfield, I. (2021). 
How Does Climate Change Affect Emergent Properties of 
Aquatic Ecosystems? Fisheries, 46(9). Retrieved April 2022, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/fsh.10606>
Ste-Marie, C., Nelson, E.A., Dabros, A. and Bonneau, E.A. (2011). 
Assisted migration: introduction to a multifaceted concept. The 
Forestry Chronicle, 87(6), 724–730. Retrieved April 2020, from 
<https://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/publications?id=32975>
Stitt, B. C., Burness, G., Burgomaster, K.A., Currie, S., McDermid, 
J.L. and Wilson, C.C. (2014). Intraspecific variation in thermal 
tolerance and acclimation capacity in brook trout (Salvelinus 
fontinalis): physiological implications for climate change. 
Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, 87(1), 15–29. Retrieved 
April 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1086/675259>
Stralberg, D., Carroll, C. and Nielsen, S.E. (2020). Toward 
a climate-informed North American protected areas 
network: Incorporating climate-change refugia and corridors 
in conservation planning. Conservation Letters, 13(4), 
e12712. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
conl.12712>
Swanston, C., Janowiak, M., Butler, P., Parker, L., St. Pierre, 
M. and Brandt, L. (2012). Forest Adaptation Resources: 
Climate Change Tools and Approaches for Land Managers. 
General Technical Report. NRS-87. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research 
Station. 121 p. Retrieved February 2022, from, <https://doi.
org/10.2737/NRS-GTR-87>
Swanston, C.W., Janowiak, M.K., Brandt, L.A., Butler, P.R., 
Handler, S.D., Shannon, P.D., Derby Lewis, A., Hall, K., Fahey, R.T., 
Scott, L., Kerber, A., Miesbauer, J.W., Darling, L., Parker, L. and St. 
Pierre, M. (2016). Forest Adaptation Resources: climate change 
tools and approaches for land managers, 2nd edition. General 
Technical Report. NRS-GTR-87-2. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research 
Station. 161 p. Retrieved January 2022, from, <https://doi.
org/10.2737/NRS-GTR-87-2>
Switzman, H. T., Razavi, S., Traore, P., Coulibaly, D., 
Bum, J., Henderson, E., Fausto, E. and Ness, R. (2017). 
Variability of Future Extreme Rainfall Statistics: 
Comparison of Multiple IDF Projections. Journal of 
Hydrologic Engineering, 22(10), 4017046-1 – 4017046-20. 
Retrieved October 2020, from, <https://ascelibrary.org/
doi/10.1061/%28ASCE%29HE.1943-5584.000156>
Tarr, B. (2015). Cold stress in cows. Ontario Ministry of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/livestock/beef/
facts/07-001.htm>
Taylor, R.A.J., Herms, D.A., Cardina, J. and Moore, R.H. 
(2018). Climate change and pest management: Unanticipated 
consequences of trophic dislocation. Agronomy, 8(1), 7. 
Retrieved February 2022, from <https://www.mdpi.com/2073-
4395/8/1/7>
Ter-Mikaelian, M.T., Gonsamo, A., Jing M., Chen, J.M., Mo, G. and 
Chen, J. (2021). Historical and future carbon stocks in forests 
of northern Ontario, Canada. Carbon Balance Management, 
16(21). Retrieved February 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13021-021-00184-5>
The Indigenous Circle of Experts (2018). We Rise Together: 
Achieving Pathway to Canada Target 1 through the creation 
of Indigenous Protected and Conserved Areas in the spirit of 
practice and reconciliation. ISBN 978-0-660-25571-2. Retrieved 
January 2022, from <https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/57e007452e69cf9a7af0a033/t/5ab94aca6d2a7338ecb1d0
5e/1522092766605/PA234-ICE_Report_2018_Mar_22_web.pdf>
Thivierge, M.N., Jégo, G., Bélanger, G., Chantigny, M.H., Rotz, 
C.A., Charbonneau, É., Baron, V.S. and Qian, B. (2017). Projected 
impact of future climate conditions on the agronomic and 
environmental performance of Canadian dairy farms. Agricultural 
Systems, 157, 241–257, Retrieved February 2022, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2017.07.003> 
Thom, D. and Seidl, R. (2016). Natural disturbance impacts on 
ecosystem services and biodiversity in temperate and boreal 
forests. Biological reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical 
Society, 91, 760–781. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/brv.12193>
Thomson, A.M., Crowe, K.A. and Parker, W.H. (2010). Optimal 
white spruce breeding zones for Ontario under current and 
future climates. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 40(8), 
1576–1587. Retrieved April 202o from <https://doi.org/10.1139/
X10-112>
Toronto Medical Officer of Health (2018). Climate Change 
Vulnerability Assessment of the Food System in Toronto. 
Report for Action, HL28.03, 7 p. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2018/hl/bgrd/
backgroundfile-118075.pdf>
Toronto Public Health (2008). The Unequal City: Income and 
Health Inequalities in Toronto. October, 2008, 49 p. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/
mmis/2008/hl/bgrd/backgroundfile-16293.pdf>
Toronto Public Health (2015). The Unequal City 2015: Income 
and Health Inequities in Toronto. April, 2015, 36 p. Retrieved 
January 2019, from <https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/
mmis/2015/hl/bgrd/backgroundfile-79096.pdf>
Toronto Region Conservation Authority (2015). Climate Change 
Vulnerability Assessment of Ontario’s Electrical Transmission 
Sector. Retrieved January 2022, from <https://pievc.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2021/01/electrical-tranmission_pievc_final-
report_public.pdf>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 103 
Tu, C., Milner, G., Lawrie, D., Shrestha, N. and Hazen, S. (2017). 
Vulnerability Assessment: Natural Systems in Peel Region. 
Technical Report, Toronto and Region Conservation Authority 
and Ontario Climate Consortium Secretariat, Toronto, Ontario, 
282 p. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://climateconnections.
ca/app/uploads/2012/03/Final-Natural-Systems-VA.pdf>
Turetsky, M.R., Benscoter, B.W., Page, S., Rein, G., van der Werf, 
G. and Watts, A. (2014). Global vulnerability of peatlands to 
fire and carbon loss. Nature Geoscience, 8, 11–14. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2325>
Turetsky, M.R., Abbott, B.W., Jones, M.C., Anthony, K.W., Olefeldt, 
D., Schuur, E.A.G., Grosse, G., Kuhry, P., Hugelius, G., Koven, C., 
Lawrence, D.M., Gibson, C., Sannel, A.B.K. and McGuire, A.D. 
(2020). Carbon release through abrupt permafrost thaw. Nature 
Geoscience 13(2), 138–43. Retrieved February 2022, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-019-0526-0>
UK Government (2017). UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 
2017. Presented to Parliament pursuant to Section 56 of the 
Climate Change Act 2008, 24 p. Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/584281/uk-climate-
change-risk-assess-2017.pdf>
United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (1992). 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://treaties.un.org/doc/
Treaties/1992/06/19920605%2008-44%20PM/Ch_XXVII_08p.pdf>
United States Environmental Protection Agency and Environment 
and Climate Change Canada (2021). State of the Great Lakes 
2019 Technical Report. Cat No. En161- 3/1E-PDF. EPA 905-
R-20-044. Retrieved April 2022, from <https://binational.net/
wp-content/uploads/2021/02/SOGL-19-Technical-Reports-
compiled-2021_02_10.pdf>
Van Bogaert, R. and Lorente, M. (2017). Latest Canadian Forest 
Service Research Supporting Forest Sector Climate Change 
Adaptation. Presentation given to the Canadian Institute 
of Forestry National Electronic Series on October 18, 2017. 
Retrieved April 2020, from <https://www.cif-ifc.org/wp-content/
uploads/2017/10/CIF-webinar_Van-Bogaert-Lorente_Oct-18.pdf>
Van Zuiden, T.M., Chen, M.M., Stefanoff, S., Lopez, L. and 
Sharma, S. (2016). Projected impacts of climate change on three 
freshwater fishes and potential novel competitive interactions. 
Diversity and Distributions, 22(5), 603–614. Retrieved May 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12422>
Varrin, R., Bowman, J. and Gray, P. (2007). The Known and 
Potential Effects of Climate Change on Biodiversity in Ontario’s 
Terrestrial Ecosystems: Case Studies and Recommendations 
for Adaptation. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Applied 
Research and Development Branch, Peterborough, Ontario. 
Climate Change Research Report CCRR-09, 58 p. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://cvc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/
the-known-and-potential-effects-of-climate-change-on-
biodiversity-in-ontarios-terrestrial-ecosystems-case-studiesrand-
recommendations-for-adaptation.pdf>
Wagner, G., Reuling, M., Khumalo, L., Paul, K. and Cross, M. 
(2018). Blackfeet Climate Change Adaptation Plan. Blackfeet 
Nation, 129 p. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://bcapwebsite.
files.wordpress.com/2018/04/bcap_final_4-11.pdf>
Wall, E., Smit, B. and Wandel, J. (2007). Farming in a Changing 
Climate: Agricultural Adaptation in Canada. UBC Press, 
Vancouver, BC.
Walsh, J., Wuebbles, D., Hayhoe, K., Kossin, J., Kunkel, K., 
Stephens, G., Thorne, P., Vose, R., Wehner, M., Willis, J., 
Anderson, D., Doney, S., Feely, R., Hennon, P., Kharin, V., Knutson, 
T., Landerer, F., Lenton, T., Kennedy, J. and Somerville, R. (2014). 
Our Changing Climate, Chapter 2 in Climate Change Impacts 
in the United States: The Third National Climate Assessment. 
(Eds.) J. M. Melillo, T. C. Richmond and G. W. Yohe, U.S. Global 
Change Research Program, 19–67.  Retrieved May 2020, 
from <http://s3.amazonaws.com/nca2014/high/NCA3_Full_
Report_02_Our_Changing_Climate_HighRes.pdf?download=1>
Walton, M. (2003). Agriculture in the Central Ontario Zone. 
Neptis Foundation. Retrieved February 2022, from <https://
neptis.org/sites/default/files/smart_growth_issue_papers_
agriculture/agriculture_nip1.pdf>
Wang, J., Ogden, N. and Huaiping, Z. (2011). The impact of 
weather conditions on Culex pipiens and Culex restuans 
(Diptera: Culicidae) abundance: a case study in Peel Region. 
Journal of Medical Entomology, 48(2), 468–475. Retrieved 
February 2022, from <10.1603/me10117>
Wang, J., Bai, X., Hu, H., Clites, A., Colton, M. and Lofgren, B. 
(2012). Temporal and spatial variability of Great Lakes ice cover, 
1973–2010. Journal of Climate, 25(4), 1318–1329.  Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1175/2011JCLI4066.1>
Wang, X., Lavigne, E., Ouellette-kuntz, H. and Chen, B. (2014). 
Acute impacts of extreme temperature exposure on emergency 
room admissions related to mental and behavior disorders in 
Toronto, Canada. Journal of Affective Disorders, 155, 154–161. 
Retrieved April 2022, from <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/24332428/
Watts, N., Amann, M., Ayeb-Karlsson, S., Belesova, K., Bouley, T., 
Boykoff, M., Byass, P., Cai, W., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Chambers, 
J., Cox, P.M., Daly, M., Dasandi, N., Davies, M., Depledge, M., 
Depoux, A., Dominguez-Salas, P., Drummond, P., Ekins, P., 
Flahault, A., Frumkin, H., Georgeson, L., Ghanei, M., Grace, D., 
Graham, H., Grojsman, R., Haines, A., Hamilton, I., Hartinger, S., 
Johnson, A., Kelman, I., Kiesewetter, G., Kniveton, D., Liang, L., 
Lott, M., Lowe, R., Mace, G., Sewe, M.O., Maslin, M., Mikhaylov, S., 
Milner, J., Latifi, A.M., Moradi-Lakeh, M., Morrissey, K., Murray, 
K., Neville, T., Nilsson, M., Oreszczyn, T., Owfi, F., Pencheon, D., 
Pye, S., Rabbaniha, M., Robinson, E., Rocklöv, J., Schütte, S., 
Shumake-Guillemot, J., Steinbach, R., Tabatabaei, M., Wheeler, 
N., Wilkinson, P., Gong, P., Montgomery, H. and Costello, A. 
(2018). The Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: 
from 25 years of inaction to a global transformation for public 
health. The Lancet, 391(10120), 581–630. Retrieved January 
2019, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32464-9>
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 104 
Weng, Y.H., Charrette, P. and Lu, P. (2019). Re-examining 
breeding zones of white spruce in northwestern Ontario, 
Canada. New Forests. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://www.
researchgate.net/profile/Yh-Weng/publication/329018933_Re-
examining_breeding_zones_of_white_spruce_in_northwestern_
Ontario_Canada/links/5d10e22c92851cf44046eb3d/
Re-examining-breeding-zones-of-white-spruce-in-northwestern-
Ontario-Canada.pdf>
Werden, L., Barker, I.K., Bowman, J., Gonzales, E.K., Leighton, 
P.A., Lindsay, L.R. and Jardine, C.M. (2014). Geography, Deer, 
and Host Biodiversity Shape the Pattern of Lyme Disease 
Emergence in the Thousand Islands Archipelago of Ontario, 
Canada. PLoS ONE, 9(1), e8564.  Retrieved January 2022, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0085640>
Williamson, T.B., Colombo, S.J., Duinker, P.N., Gray, P.A., 
Hennessey, R.J., Houle, D., Johnston, M., Ogden, A. and 
Spittlehouse, D. (2009). Climate change and Canada’s forests: 
From impacts to adaptation. Natural Resources Canada, 
Canadian Forest Service, Northern Forestry Centre, Sustainable 
Forest Management Network, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
Alberta, 112. Retrieved April 2020, from <http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/
pubwarehouse/pdfs/29616.pdf>
Winsor-Essex County Health Unit (2019). Community Needs 
Assessment 2019 Update. Windsor, Ontario. Retrieved January 
2019, from <https://www.wechu.org/sites/default/files/edit-
resource/em-community-needs-assessments-report-2019/
cnareport2019.pdf>
Wotton, B. M., Flannigan, M.D. and Marshall, G.A. (2017). 
Potential climate change impacts on fire intensity and key 
wildfire suppression thresholds in Canada. Environmental 
Research Letters, 12(9), 095003. Retrieved April 2020, from 
<https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aa7e6e>
Woudsma, C. and Towns, W. (2017). Ontario, Chapter 6 in Climate 
risks and adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation 
sector 2016, (Eds.) K. Palko and D.S. Lemmen. Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 139–179. Retrieved February 2022, 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Chapter-6e.pdf>
Wu, W. and Ma, B.-L. (2018). Assessment of canola crop 
lodging under elevated temperatures for adaptation to climate 
change. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 248(15), 329–338. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
agrformet.2017.09.017>
Wuebbles, D., Cardinale, B., Cherkauer, K., Davidson-Arnott, R., 
Hellmann, J., Infante, D., Johnson, L., de Loë, R., Lofgren, B., 
Packman, A., Seglenieks, F., Sharma, A., Sohngen, B., Tiboris, 
M., Vimont, D., Wilson, R., Kunkel, K. and Ballinger, A. (2019). 
An Assessment of the Impacts of Climate Change on the 
Great Lakes by Scientists and Experts from Universities and 
Institutions in the Great Lakes Region. Environmental Law and 
Policy Center, 74. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://elpc.org/
wp-content/uploads/2020/04/2019-ELPCPublication-Great-
Lakes-Climate-Change-Report.pdf>
Xiao, C., Lofgren, B.M., Wang, J. and Chu, P.Y. (2018). A 
Dynamical Downscaling Projection of Future Climate Change 
in the Laurentian Great Lakes Region Using a Coupled Air-Lake 
Model. Preprints, 2018070468. Retrieved April 2022, from 
<10.20944/preprints201807.0468.v1>
Yeung, A.C.Y., Paltsev, A., Daigle, A., Duinker, P.N. and Creed, I.F. 
(2019). Atmospheric change as a driver of change in the Canadian 
boreal zone. Environmental Reviews, 27(3), 346–376. Retrieved 
April 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2018-0055>
Young, B.E., and Hammerson, G. (2015). Guidelines for Using 
the NatureServe Climate Change Vulnerability Index, release 
3.0-Canada. NatureServe, Arlington, VA. Retrieved January 
2022, from <https://www.natureserve.org/sites/default/files/
guidelines_natureserveclimatechangevulnerabilityindex_r3.0_15_
apr2015.pdf>
Zamuda, C., Bilello, D.E., Conzelmann, G., Mecray, E., Satsangi, 
A., Tidwell, V. and Walker, B.J. (2018). Energy Supply, Delivery, 
and Demand, in Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United 
States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II. U.S. 
Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, 
174–201.  Retrieved October 2020, from <https://nca2018.
globalchange.gov/chapter/4/> 
Zaytseva, A. (2016). Spatio-temporal patterns of extreme 
weather events and their impacts on corn (Zea mays) and 
soybeans (Glycine max) in eastern Ontario. A thesis submitted 
to the Faculty of Graduate and Postdoctoral Affairs in partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of 
Science in Physical Geography, Carlton University, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 240 p.  Retrieved August 2020, from <https://curve.
carleton.ca/1b2c826c-1648-4174-8fa1-b0c22a7c15b4>
Zeuli, K., Nijhuis, A. and Gerson-Nieder, Z. (2018). Resilient Food 
Systems, Resilient Cities: A High-Level Vulnerability Assessment 
of Toronto’s Food System. Developed by the Initiative for 
a Competitive Inner City for Toronto Public Health, 107 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/
mmis/2018/hl/bgrd/backgroundfile-118076.pdf>
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, 
H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G. and Kharin, V.V. (2019). 
Temperature and Precipitation across Canada, Chapter 4 in 
Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush, and D. S. 
Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 112–193. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.4095/327811>
Zhong, Y., Notaro, M., Vavrus, S. and Foster, M. (2016). Recent 
accelerated warming of the Laurentian Great Lakes: Physical 
drivers. Limnology and Oceanography, 61(5), 1762–1786. 
Retrieved April 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/lno.10331>
Zhu, H., Deng, Z., Liu, J., Qiu, X., Chen, X. and Zhou, X. (2018). 
A Look at Ontario’s Climate of the Future with the Ontario 
Climate Data Portal (OCDP). Canadian Meteorological and 
Oceanographic Society (CMOS) Bulletin, 46(6), 10–11. 
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES REPORT
 105 
Zuzek, P.J. (2019). Adapting to the Future Storm and Ice Regime 
in the Great Lakes Stream 1 Report. Zuzek Inc.Retrieved January 
2022, from <https://zuzekinc.ca/waves/_Reports/AP659_
Stream1Report_20190430.pdf>
Zuzek, P.J. (2020). Chatham-Kent Lake Erie Shoreline Study. 
Zuzek Inc. Prepared for the Municipality of Chattem-Kent. 
Retrieved January 2022, from <https://www.lowerthames-
conservation.on.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Chatham-
Kent-Lake-Erie-Shoreline-Study-2020.05.25.-reduced-size.pdf>
