Pathways to Decarbonization
A report to the Minister of Energy to evaluate a moratorium on new 
natural gas generation in Ontario and to develop a pathway to zero 
emissions in the electricity sector. 
DECEMBER 15, 2022
PUBLIC
Contents
Executive Summary	
1
Introduction	
6
Modelling Approach	
9
Scenario and Assumption Development	
10
Demand Forecasting	
13
Capacity Expansion and Resource Adequacy Assessments	
14
Operability Screening	
15
Transmission Analysis	
16
Cost and Emissions Analysis	
17
A Moratorium on New Gas Generation	
18
Demand Forecast	
18
Resource Build-out	
20
Transmission	
23
Moratorium: Conclusion and Outcomes	
24
Assessing a Pathway to a Decarbonized Future	
25
Demand Forecast	
25
Resource Build-out	
29
Transmission	
31
Pathways: Conclusion and Outcomes	
32
Natural Gas as a Transitional Resource to Ensure Operability	
33
Implementation Dependencies and Risks	
34
Conclusion	
37
This report is provided for informational purposes only. The IESO has prepared this report based on currently available information and 
on assumptions about the future availability of electricity supply and demand growth. The information, statements and conclusions in 
this report are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results or circumstances to differ materially from 
the report’s findings. The IESO provides no guarantee, representation, or warranty, express or implied, with respect to any statement or 
information in this report and disclaims any liability in connection with it.
Independent Electricity System Operator
Pathways to Decarbonization
Executive Summary
While Ontario benefits from one of the cleanest electricity systems in North America 
(which contributes only three per cent of the province’s total greenhouse gas emissions), 
the process of eliminating all emissions from the grid is a significant and complex 
undertaking that will require an extensive and collaborative effort to achieve. 
The Pathways to Decarbonization report explores this effort, responding to the Minister of Energy’s 
request to evaluate a moratorium on new natural gas generating stations in Ontario and to develop 
an achievable pathway to decarbonization in the electricity system. 
Two scenarios – Moratorium and Pathways – are presented to address the Minister’s request. These 
scenarios are not integrated power system plans. Rather, they are analyses that identify potential 
opportunities and challenges to consider, particularly as demand for electricity grows and Ontario’s 
resource mix evolves. The Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO) brings the expertise and 
experience of the system operator to this study, and as such, the results contribute future-looking 
insights that can inform policy and strategy development. They make it clear that a carefully governed 
and orderly approach to the energy transition will be necessary to maintain reliability and manage costs. 
One key insight of this analysis is that phasing gas generation out of the system will require ingenuity 
and the implementation of new technologies to reorient our current system, which is grounded in the 
flexibility that natural gas generators provide. This is in part because Ontario's natural gas fleet is 
capable of providing continuous, flexible energy year round and under all weather conditions, and 
there is currently no like-for-like replacement. This means natural gas will be needed until reliable 
replacements have been identified, put into service and have demonstrated their capability. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
1
Pathways to Decarbonization
Another key takeaway is that in an environment of rapid economic growth and electrification, where 
demand for electricity will increase at unprecedented rates, a significant investment in new electricity 
system infrastructure in a relatively short period will be essential to meeting emissions reductions targets. 
Understanding these issues provides a foundation for action and contributes to the ongoing conversation 
about the energy transition. As such, this report will inform the work of the Ontario government’s 
Electrification and Energy Transition Panel (EETP) and the Cost-Effective Energy Pathways Study1.
Moratorium on Natural Gas Generation
On the question of when a moratorium on new natural gas generation facilities can begin, the IESO 
looked at what resources would be needed to ensure reliability mid-decade and then after 2027. 
Against a backdrop of growing demand and increasing pressure on supply, we assessed the potential 
for capacity, energy and transmission expansion without additional natural gas generation after the 
IESO’s current long-term procurement for new supply. 
This assessment showed that a moratorium would be feasible beginning in 2027. At that point, the 
system would not require additional emitting generation to ensure reliability, provided that other 
forms of non-emitting supply can be added to the system in time to keep pace with demand growth. 
The results of this scenario would require investments of approximately $26 billion in new infrastructure.
The Moratorium scenario also shows that once the current slate of nuclear refurbishments is 
completed and new non-emitting supply enters the system, emissions could begin to decrease 
significantly. In this scenario, 4,000 megawatts (MW) of natural gas generation is retired and 
emissions drop by 60 per cent. Natural gas generation would, however, be needed to continue to 
provide flexibility to the broader system and meet local needs in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA) – 
an issue that the IESO is actively evaluating further. 
A Pathway to Decarbonization 
In the development of a pathway to a decarbonized grid, the IESO adopted a more aggressive 
electrification demand forecast. The Pathways scenario illustrates a system designed to meet winter 
peaks that are almost three times higher than those we experience today. As a result, the system 
would likely require an additional 69,000 MW of non-emitting supply and 5,000 MW in demand 
reductions from conservation. 
We therefore contemplated a decarbonized supply mix by 2050 with contributions from new 
nuclear, conservation, demand response, renewables and storage. The mix also includes low-carbon 
generation such as hydrogen and renewable natural gas – currently emerging technologies – at scale. 
The need for a significant increase in transmission capability was also identified. 
1 To inform the work of the EETP, the Ministry of Energy is undertaking a study to understand pathways for economy-wide 
decarbonization. The work will begin in December 2022.
Independent Electricity System Operator
2
Pathways to Decarbonization
Bridging the work of today with the needs of a 
decarbonized world will be challenging and complex. 
Ontario's electricity system is well positioned to 
make the transition, but will need to address a series 
of challenges in order to achieve decarbonization.
Decarbonizing 
Ontario’s 
Electricity System
Pathways to Decarbonization
2050 Scenario
88,000
MW
Nuclear
Hydro
Wind
Solar
Bioenergy
Hydrogen
Demand
Response
Imports
Storage
MANAGE COSTS
$400 billion over 2.5 decades
PREPARE FOR SITING AND 
LAND USE
Siting requirements 14 times the size 
of Toronto
FOCUS ON INDIGENOUS 
PARTNERSHIPS 
Increased role beyond current 20% 
participation rate in electricity projects
DEVELOP CAPITAL/LABOUR 
RESOURCES 
A potential six-fold increase in existing 
workforce to build projects
FOCUS ON INNOVATION 
New technologies to drive new supply such 
as 15,000 MW of hydrogen capacity
INCREASE POLICY CERTAINTY
Near and long-term certainty to drive private 
sector investment in infrastructure 
and technology
STREAMLINE REGULATORY 
PROCESSES
Streamlined siting and regulatory processes 
keeping the local perspective at the core
System Capacity Today
42,000
MW
Natural
Gas
Independent Electricity System Operator
3
Pathways to Decarbonization
In all, the bulk system expansion needed to enable decarbonization in this scenario would require an 
investment in the range of $375 to $425 billion. 
Both the Moratorium and Pathway scenarios demonstrate that it is possible to reliably manage 
the energy transition with the necessary investments, and they highlight the time, cost and risks 
involved. How Ontario’s new supply mix actually evolves will depend on future research, analysis, 
consumer preferences and, ultimately, policy and investment decisions. More research and planning 
work will be needed to turn these scenarios into an actionable plan to move Ontario’s current clean 
supply mix and system toward a fully decarbonized target.
Addressing Risks
Bridging the work of today with the needs of a decarbonized world will be challenging and complex. 
While Ontario has a very clean electricity grid today, it must still be prepared to address dependencies 
that are key to meeting broader decarbonization goals: 
•	 Large infrastructure such as hydroelectric, nuclear facilities and transmission can take 10 to 15 years 
to build. Preliminary work should begin now so that options are available in the 2030s and beyond.
•	 Significant investments in capital, materials and labour will be required to build out a fully 
decarbonized system. One study2 estimates that the 14,000-strong labour force currently working 
on electricity infrastructure projects could need to increase six-fold for decades. 
•	 Communities and First Nations across the province have a growing voice in how and where new 
infrastructure is located, so meaningful and transparent discussions about siting and land use will 
be required.
•	 While many of the technologies needed to decarbonize are already known and commercialized, many 
others, including low-carbon fuels and small modular reactors (SMRs), are still in development. It will 
be important for Ontario and Canada to continue to invest in these, and other, innovations.
•	 Energy plans need to be approved and new infrastructure needs to be planned, permitted and 
sited. Regulatory and approval processes, such as environmental and impact assessments, need to 
be resourced appropriately and streamlined to enable this. 
•	 Costs must be carefully managed to ensure the actual impact on total energy costs is affordable 
and that they do not diverge significantly from those of our neighbours. Rapidly rising electricity 
costs could discourage electrification, stifle economic growth or hurt consumers with low incomes. 
2 See Appendix B, section 6
Independent Electricity System Operator
4
Pathways to Decarbonization
Conclusions 
This report demonstrates the sheer scope and magnitude of the effort needed should Ontario 
decide to decarbonize its electricity system while achieving a net-zero economy by 2050. The IESO 
has identified a number of “no regret” actions that can be taken to help meet growing demand, 
address retirements of existing generation and ensure a state of readiness to manage any future 
decarbonization policy. These actions will lay the groundwork that both builds on Ontario’s already 
clean system and allows for progress in a shifting environment. These no regrets actions include:
•	 Accelerating current efforts to acquire new non-emitting supply, including the implementation of 
recent conservation and demand management directives. 
•	 Beginning the planning, siting and environmental assessment work needed for new nuclear, long-
duration storage and hydroelectric facilities, as well as transmission infrastructure, to allow for 
faster implementation. 
•	 Investing in emerging technologies like low-carbon fuels. Further work is needed to determine if 
they can replace at scale some of the flexibility that natural gas currently provides the system.
•	 Galvanizing collaboration amongst stakeholders and Indigenous communities.
•	 Ensuring that regulatory, approval and permitting processes are ready to manage future 
investment at scale.
•	 Establishing an open, transparent and traceable process to measure progress and demonstrate the 
results of decisions and actions taken along the way.
For its part, the IESO will incorporate the many learnings from this report into its core work, including 
more explicitly addressing the risks of climate change and the ongoing energy transition in its planning 
and procurement processes. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
5
Pathways to Decarbonization
Introduction
In Canada, as in many countries around the world, governments are developing policies 
aimed at achieving their own net-zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions economies by 
2050, supported by clean electricity systems. In Ontario, the government is taking action 
by establishing the upcoming Cost-Effective Energy Pathways Study, as well as launching 
a climate change impact assessment, investing in innovative SMRs, and implementing 
one of the largest battery storage procurements ever undertaken. At the federal level, the 
government recently proposed the Clean Electricity Regulations (CER) and complementary 
policies to decarbonize Canada’s electricity system by 2035. 
At the local level, customers are also driving this transition. A movement toward environmental, 
social and corporate governance goals is encouraging the growth and development of non-emitting 
electricity resources. Businesses and homeowners are exploring how to shift away from fossil fuel-
based energy for building heating, transportation, and industrial processes, among others, and they 
are expecting a clean electricity supply to power the transformation.
Today Ontario’s electricity system is already more than 90 per cent emissions-free and the sector 
contributes only three per cent to the province’s total greenhouse gas emissions. However, as the 
broader economy decarbonizes, there will be increased pressure on the grid to meet significant 
growth in demand for electricity. 
In recognition of these trends and in response to the IESO’s 2021 technical study on the phase-out 
of natural gas, the Minister of Energy directed the IESO to explore the feasibility of a moratorium on 
new gas-fired electricity generation and a pathway to a decarbonized electricity system. The Minister 
asked the IESO to consider reliability and cost in the analysis, and to explore low-carbon fuels and 
carbon capture and storage. He also asked that the report examine the role of technologies such as 
pumped storage and battery storage combined with non-emitting resources, as well as hydroelectric, 
nuclear and demand response.
In response to the Minister’s request, the IESO undertook a scenario assessment exercise informed by 
stakeholder engagement and outreach. While not an integrated electricity system planning process, 
these scenarios were developed using the same tools and methodologies, and provide valuable insights 
into the work required to achieve this goal. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
6
Pathways to Decarbonization
Given our mandate, this assessment focuses only on the bulk power system – i.e., high-voltage 
transmission lines, generation and interconnections with neighbouring jurisdictions – and does not 
consider the impact on local distribution systems. We expect, however, that some of the resources 
identified in this study will be distributed energy resources (DERs) connected within the distribution 
system. In developing a zero-carbon, reliable scenario and as requested by the Minister, we have used 
cost as a key determining factor. Our assessments, therefore result in cost-optimized supply mixes.
Consistent with many other recent studies, this report shows that achieving a net-zero economy 
powered by an emissions-free electricity system will involve a massive investment in new infrastructure 
and increased cost. It also notes that significant risks and dependencies will have to be addressed to 
enable implementation. It will be vital that this transition is managed prudently so that costs do not 
discourage electrification, negatively affect the economy, or place an undue burden on people with 
low incomes.
The characteristics of the scenarios presented in this report are based on current information – many 
other factors can, and likely will, influence what mix is ultimately put in place. These include: competition; 
the availability of resources, capital and labour; the impact of changing weather; the adoption rate of 
distribution-level resources; the level of community approval of new electricity projects; the pace of 
regulatory approvals; and the evolution and commercialization of certain markets and technologies, 
such as hydrogen, renewable natural gas and nuclear.

Climate Risk
The International Panel on Climate Change has called on nations around the world to reduce 
emissions by 2050 to limit temperature increases to 1.5 degrees Celsius thereby limiting the 
risks to natural and human systems. 
Because of the accelerating effects of climate change, weather scientists forecast that Ontario’s 
weather patterns will change significantly over the coming decades. These changes, which 
are well documented in the Climate Atlas of Canada, will have a major impact on how demand 
increases and decreases throughout the day, affecting the performance of the electricity 
system and the integrity of our infrastructure. If these issues are left unaddressed, there is 
a deepening concern that costs to the Canadian economy from weather and climate impacts 
will be significant, as reflected in a recent report from the Canadian Climate Institute.
It is clear that we will need to continually assess, understand, mitigate and adapt to 
changing weather.
Independent Electricity System Operator
7
Pathways to Decarbonization
Electricity System Reliability and the IESO’s Role
Much of the activity of our daily lives depends on an electricity system that is reliable, meaning power 
is there when we need it to be. Ontario’s electricity grid is one of the most reliable in the world, safely 
and steadily meeting the needs of the province every minute of every day. And because it works so 
seamlessly, its complex mechanisms are hidden – so much so that most of us only notice our electricity 
supply when it’s not there.
In fact, our provincial grid is an extensive, dynamic and interconnected system that is both stable 
and nimble, with a foundation of reliable infrastructure that can respond to large and small changes 
whenever needed.
For the operators of this system to manage events as they occur in real time, in both normal and 
unexpected circumstances, many things are required: the system must meet the physical requirements 
of moving power along transmission and distribution lines, for example, as well as operating standards 
for reliability and security. It must also be able to respond to sudden changes quickly, and meet demand 
every hour of every day.
These responsibilities are top of mind today as a growing global momentum is driving the 
decarbonization of electricity systems in the pursuit of a net-zero economy. Thoughtful and detailed 
work has been undertaken recently in many jurisdictions, including in Canada, to explore the possibilities 
and timelines for moving electricity systems to non-emitting technologies. 
All of these studies identify electrification as a viable option to mitigate the risk of climate change, 
and predict a massive build-out of electricity infrastructure. Appendix A, Tab 7 provides a high-level 
comparison of the IESO’s results with similar studies produced by government, research institutes, 
regulators, and environmental organizations.
From the IESO’s perspective, all of these efforts are a welcome contribution and add valuable insight 
to the collective understanding of what will be needed in the near and longer term. Most, however, 
use a relatively high-level lens, building potential supply mixes to meet only forecasted capacity and 
energy needs. 
As the system operator and planner, we examined capacity and energy, but also factored in the 
requirements of the transmission system and began to consider the complexities of operating the 
electricity system as a whole on a day-to-day basis; this makes our contribution distinctive.
What we learned is that decarbonizing the electricity system is a complex task that must be carefully 
managed so as to not disrupt daily lives and the province’s economy. In the modelling approach section 
that follows, the steps taken to develop reliable and cost-effective scenarios are described in detail. 

“Scenarios are not intended to represent a full description of the future. They highlight 
central elements of a possible future and draw attention to the key factors that will drive 
future developments. Scenarios are hypothetical constructs, not forecasts, predictions or 
sensitivity analysis.”
Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosure
 
Independent Electricity System Operator
8
Pathways to Decarbonization
Modelling Approach
The Pathways to Decarbonization report complements the IESO’s Annual Planning 
Outlook (APO), which accounts for demand and supply forecasts based on existing policy 
and project commitments, customer behaviour and available technologies. This report 
explores the possibilities for different patterns of consumption, broad electrification and 
the emergence of new technologies, as well as the expansion of the current supply mix 
over different time frames. 
The two scenarios outlined in this report – Moratorium and Pathways – use software modelling 
tools, professional judgment and the set of detailed assumptions described below to simulate an 
energy-adequate expanded resource mix over a given time frame. The IESO created a mix based 
on the feasibility of new resources which accounted for build time and annual build limits, cost and 
performance. Only low-emissions resources that are considered technically feasible today, or that 
could be available within the time frame of the study, were included as potential new candidates for 
the future mixes.
It should be noted that reliability assessments were only performed for the final year of each 
scenario: 2035 for Moratorium and 2050 for Pathways. A thorough and detailed planning process 
would be required to identify reliable options for reaching these end-points. These plans typically 
take a number of years and incorporate many interdependent factors, such as facility commissioning 
and retirements, project planning, outages and much more. 
Although this report is not a plan, it relies on the same data and expertise that the IESO uses in 
annual demand, resource and adequacy assessments. Technical standards that underpin the safe 
operation of electricity systems across the continent have been employed to highlight what 
a hypothetical future could look like if certain conditions were met.
The supply mix modelling and analysis process comprises a number of steps (see Figure 1), which 
are described in this section. The goal of this process is to develop a mix that is adequate, flexible, 
sustainable and diverse to ensure that the system is reliable in changing conditions. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
9
Pathways to Decarbonization
Figure 1 | Supply mix modelling and analysis process steps
INPUTS
ANALYSIS
OUTCOMES
Data Collection 
and Input Development
Stakeholder Engagement
and Community Outreach
Demand
Forecast
Capacity
Expansion
Resource Adequacy
Assessment
Operability
Assessment
Transmission
Assessment
Emissions and
Cost Outcomes
Pathways to
Decarbonization Report
Scenario and Assumption Development
This report examines two questions: First, is a moratorium on natural gas generation possible in 
Ontario’s electricity sector? Second, when and how can the sector be decarbonized? In response 
to these questions, two approaches were taken:
1.	 The Moratorium scenario, which focuses on 2035, examines whether a moratorium on the 
acquisition of new natural gas generation is feasible after the IESO’s 2022/2023 resource 
procurements. (A moratorium on new gas within current resource procurements was found 
to be not feasible, as set out in the Resource Eligibility Interim Report.)
2.	 The Pathways scenario, which focuses on 2050, explores the time frame within which Ontario’s 
electricity system could be decarbonized. In keeping with the assumptions of many other 
studies and to create an instructive “bookend” case to consider, this scenario assumes the 
decarbonization of the broader economy, which results in a significantly higher projection for 
demand based on substantial electrification within other sectors. 
Beginning with its own information, including records for historical capacity and weather data, 
IESO planners compiled a list of technical assumptions for existing and emerging resources and 
government policy direction. They built on these assumptions using data and projections from the 
U.S. National Renewable Energy Lab Annual Technology Baseline – the most comprehensive and 
reliable information publicly available for a number of elements – as well as other sources. Policy 
and demand assumptions were compiled from internal research.
Stakeholders and communities also played a valuable role in shaping the assumptions used in the 
analysis. A formal IESO engagement with extensive outreach to sector participants was undertaken on 
the Pathways to Decarbonization effort between February and May to build awareness and seek input 
to inform the development of achievable pathways to decarbonization in Ontario’s electricity sector. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
10
Pathways to Decarbonization
Two webinars were held as part of the formal engagement initiative to provide an overview of the 
study approach, transparency around the modelling and analysis, and to seek technical feedback. 
Approximately 320 attendees participated in these sessions and more than 50 feedback submissions 
were received on preliminary assumptions posted for input. All meeting materials, assumptions, 
feedback received and IESO responses are posted on the engagement web page.
In addition, the IESO conducted extensive outreach with key communities and stakeholders to discuss 
this work and solicit input at a more granular level on technical assumptions, data sources, and data 
gaps. Over 30 meetings were held that encompassed more than 70 organizations and representatives 
of municipalities, generators, commercial and industrial customers, local distribution companies, 
environmental/sustainability organizations, Indigenous communities, sector associations, research 
and academia and energy consultants. This work has also been significantly informed by the 
expertise and advice received from the IESO's Stakeholder Advisory Committee members.
The IESO incorporated evidence-based feedback and input received in a number of areas, including 
in the assumptions related to policy, electricity demand, resource and technology.
The final assumptions can be found in Appendix A, Tab 1-3. A summary of key assumptions is 
included in Table 1. In order to be feasible, all modelling exercises involve a measure of simplification; 
Table 2 outlines some of these simplifications and considerations. 
TABLE 1: OVERVIEW OF SCENARIO ASSUMPTIONS
Assumption Category
Moratorium
Pathways
Modelling Year
2035
2050
Carbon price (CO2e; 
carbon dioxide 
equivalents)
$50/tonne in 2022, rising annually 
by $15/tonne and reaching $170/
tonne by 2030. 
Continues rising by $15/tonne 
from 2030-2035, and thereafter 
increases with the rate of inflation.
Emissions 
performance standard
As in the 2021 APO
370 tonnes (t) CO2e/GW 
(gigawatt-hour) until and including 
2030, dropping 74 tCO2e/GWh per 
year to reach zero in 2035
Demand forecast (see 
Appendix A, Tab 2)
As in the 2021 APO
High-electrification forecast 
Energy efficiency
Both scenarios assume the maximum level of demand reduction based on the 
cost-effective conservation and demand management (CDM) potential that 
was identified in the 2019 Achievable Potential Study
Non-emitting 
resources (see 
Appendix A, Tab 3)
Wind3, solar, hydroelectric, nuclear 
(includes large facilities and 
SMRs), demand response, storage, 
bioenergy and firm imports from 
clean jurisdictions
Same as Moratorium scenario, and 
low-carbon fuel was assumed to be 
available after 2035
Existing natural gas
Available for re-contracting after 
contract end if less than 25 years old
Before 2035, same as Moratorium. 
After 2035, retired at end of 
contract, but considered available 
for reliability until 25 years of age. 
3 Offshore wind was assumed to be available for development in the Pathways scenario, even though the IESO acknowledges 
the current moratorium on the technology.
Independent Electricity System Operator
11
Pathways to Decarbonization
TABLE 2: MODELLING CONSIDERATIONS
Factor
How Incorporated in the Report
Weather patterns
Historical normal weather patterns were used for this report. The IESO 
did not perform sensitivities to assess the impact of changing weather 
on normal demand.
Low-carbon hydrogen 
manufacture
In this report the IESO has assumed that hydrogen is produced outside 
of Ontario and therefore has no impact on demand. Producing hydrogen 
at scale within the province is expected to increase demand and the 
need for resources (see Enbridge’s Pathways to Net-Zero Emissions 
In Ontario), although further work is needed to better understand the 
impacts of hydrogen production and deployment on the electricity 
system. The IESO will consider these impacts in future scenarios.
Carbon capture, utilization 
and storage (CCUS)
Based on feedback from stakeholders, CCUS was determined to be 
ill-suited to peaking applications, which is the forecasted role for the 
continued use of emitting supply, and was therefore not available as a 
resources option. 
Distribution system
This study focused solely on the transmission-connected grid, and no 
analysis was conducted on the impact to distributions systems.
Emissions removal, 
including direct air capture
Emissions removal, including direct air capture, was not considered, as 
the Minister’s request was for a zero-emissions grid.
Wind
Onshore wind was capped at 15,800 MW, limited by site quality, 
regulatory requirements and distance to transmission infrastructure. 
Low-carbon fuels
Imported blue hydrogen combusted in a new single-cycle turbine was 
used as a proxy for low-carbon fuels and was assumed to be available 
after 2035. Low-carbon fuels include pink, green and blue hydrogen, 
synthetic methane, renewable natural gas and biofuels, which can all be 
combusted in a turbine or used in a fuel cell. (For a discussion of some 
of the challenges facing low-carbon fuels see Appendix A, Tab 9.)
Storage
Batteries and pumped hydroelectric storage were used as proxies for 
storage more generally. The IESO recognizes that other types of storage 
could play a role in a decarbonized future. (See Appendix B, section 4 
for a description of various different types of storage.)
Firm imports 
External research (see Appendix C) was performed to assess the clean-
energy transitions of each of Ontario’s connected neighbours, as well as 
their future ability to export clean energy. To guarantee the cleanliness of 
firm-imported electricity, firm imports were only permitted from Québec. 
Manitoba was not considered due to the distance to major Ontario load 
centres and insufficient transmission capability to enable imports.
Independent Electricity System Operator
12
Pathways to Decarbonization

Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) 
DERs are distribution-connected facilities for local electricity generation, control and storage, 
and today represent at least 10,000 MW across the province. While the scenarios in this report 
did not distinguish between the province-wide transmission system and local distribution 
networks, DERs are included within the build-out of new resources. 
DERs can help meet regional needs where there are existing constraints on supply, avoiding or 
deferring the need to build transmission infrastructure. Local electricity market pilots in York 
Region and Essex are exploring ways to coordinate local supply to meet local needs. 
Recent research commissioned by the IESO shows that DERs have the potential to help meet 
Ontario’s future electricity demand, and they are gaining momentum in Ontario. Infrastructure, 
capability and knowledge building across the province are creating a solid foundation for 
growth, and the IESO is working to integrate DERs into the electricity markets by 2026 to 
further support their expansion across the province. 
Conservation and Demand Management and Mid-Term Review
The IESO’s Mid-Term Review of the 2021-2024 CDM Framework includes findings and 
recommendations on how cost-effective CDM can best contribute to meeting evolving system 
and customer needs during the current framework and beyond. This includes analysis done 
earlier this year on how new and enhanced programs could be used to meet near-term 
capacity needs.
In response to these findings, the Minister issued a directive in October 2022 enhancing 
Ontario’s CDM targets and budgets, optimizing the full potential of energy efficiency and 
bringing targets in line with the achievable potential estimates of the Mid-Term Review in 
the near-term. Current Save on Energy programs are on track to achieve all feasible energy-
efficiency within the 2021-2024 framework.
Both the Mid-Term Review and this report highlight the potential for the IESO to expand the 
scope of its future CDM programs post-2024. They also highlight the importance of supporting 
efficient electrification to minimize the impacts of consumers switching from carbon-emitting 
fuels for space heating, transportation and other end uses. This will take focused effort, and the 
Mid-Term Review includes recommendations to move the sector in these directions.
Demand Forecasting
Demand forecasting is an attempt to predict future electricity demand so that the system can be effectively 
planned and managed, as electricity demand and supply need to be almost perfectly matched in real time. 
It aims to assess the causes of future changes in demand by looking at end uses and sector trends.
All sectors of the economy – residential, commercial, institutional, industrial, agricultural, transportation 
and others – contribute to province-wide energy demand, and the inherent uncertainty involved in 
predicting the future of all these elements makes forecasting demand challenging. It is clear, however, 
that as interest in decarbonization policies grow and economic activity increases, Ontario will see growth 
in electricity demand for the foreseeable future.
Independent Electricity System Operator
13
Pathways to Decarbonization
Capacity Expansion and Resource Adequacy Assessments
To build an adequate supply mix, the IESO undertakes a number of steps using tools, data and 
professional judgement. The starting point is a capacity expansion model (CapEx), which is used to 
assist in the design of an expanded resource mix. (More details can be found in Appendix B, section 1). 
This mix is run through a number of assessments to determine that it is capacity and energy adequate. 
At a high level, the approach is as follows:
1.	 Determine the least-cost supply mix based on the demand forecast, resource inputs and 
constraints using the CapEx tool. 
2.	 Assess the supply mix to ensure that resource capacity adequacy is met. This determines 
if the least-cost supply mix satisfies Northeast Power Coordinating Council (NPCC) resource 
adequacy requirements. 
3.	 Assess the supply mix in a production cost model to ensure that resource energy adequacy is met. 
4.	Conduct a screening of the supply mix for operability to understand the ability of the mix to 
manage a variety of conditions as they occur in real-time on durability, diversity and flexibility 
(further described below and in Appendix B, section 3). 
5.	 Assess the supply mix to understand the ability of the system to maintain supply within established 
transmission planning standards (further described below and in Appendix B, section 2). 
6.	 If the supply mix is deemed insufficient, restart the process at Step 1. 
7.	 When a supply mix is deemed sufficient, it is then post-processed for reporting on metrics such 
as cost and emissions. 
This approach to resource adequacy assessments is consistent with IESO system planning processes. 
(Further information can be found in the IESO’s Annual Planning Outlook Resource Adequacy and 
Energy Assessment Methodology.) The resource adequacy assessment is an iterative process, along 
with the operability screening and transmission assessments, which are described in the next section. 

What is Capacity?
Capacity, or installed capacity, generally refers to the maximum output of a power station. 
Effective capacity, refers to the contribution a power station can reliably make to meet peak 
demand, taking into account factors such as fuel availability, ambient conditions and outages. 
For example, a station with an installed capacity of 150 MW could contribute only 30 per cent 
of that amount, and thus have an effective capacity of 45 MW.
Independent Electricity System Operator
14
Pathways to Decarbonization
Operability Screening
Operability refers to the ability to manage a variety of conditions on the power system as they occur 
in real time. It is achieved by having a resource mix that is flexible and diverse, with sufficient energy 
duration. By coupling resources with tools and software that improve manageability, the IESO can 
observe, monitor and direct the majority of resources across the system (see Figure 2).
Figure 2 | Components of Operability
FLEXIBILITY
A flexible resource mix has 
characteristics that allow 
the system to respond to 
altered circumstances or 
changing conditions.
DIVERSITY
Ensures the system has 
a balance of energy sources 
and capabilities, so the 
limitations of each 
technology and fuel type 
are mitigated.
DURABILITY
Enables the system to 
continuously supply 
energy over a period of 
sustained high demand, 
including through extreme 
events such as a 
heat wave.
COMPONENTS
OF OPERABILITY
For this report, the IESO conducted a limited operability screen on the resource mix for the 
Moratorium scenario, examining the durability, diversity and flexibility of the resource mix. For 
the modelled 2050 supply mix, the challenges identified in the Moratorium scenario are likely to 
grow, and with limited information on the operational behaviour of new technologies, the Pathways 
scenario could not undergo an operability screen. 
The IESO plans to undertake further work in 2023 to understand the implications of increased 
penetration of variable resources on flexibility. A number of other future considerations were also 
identified that will require further study to assess the operability of the mixes. (Further information 
on future considerations can be found in Appendix B, section 3.) 
 
Independent Electricity System Operator
15
Pathways to Decarbonization

Reliability Standards
The North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) is a not-for-profit international 
regulatory authority whose mission is to ensure the effective and efficient reduction of risks to 
the reliability and security of the grid. NERC has begun to highlight the challenges of managing 
reliability with energy-constrained resources. 
Resource adequacy assessments have mostly focused on generation and transmission 
capacity available to serve peak demand. With the previous resource mix, real-time 
energy adequacy was assumed under that capacity umbrella and transmission was not 
highlighted as a requirement; however, recent extreme temperature events have shown 
energy adequacy to be a new dimension of risk given the changing resource mix and actual 
performance of the grid versus assumptions used in previous resource mix studies. 
Energy Adequacy White Paper (nerc.com), December 2020
New reliability standards are under development by NERC to address these challenges.
Transmission Analysis
The assessments in this report weighed existing and planned transmission capabilities against the 
two demand forecasts, evaluating the ability of the system to maintain supply within established 
planning standards and with the selected resource mixes. The assessments then looked at what 
system enhancements would likely be needed in the coming decades.
Although the capacity expansion model does not specify a location for any of the resources in the 
supply mixes, the options for siting certain generation types, such as pumped storage or SMRs, will 
be limited to a single or small number of areas. In addition, previous assessments of the feasibility 
of large installations of wind and solar provide guidance on the most likely locations for these types 
of facilities. These locational considerations informed the transmission analysis, helping to identify 
where new or upgraded transmission would be needed to enable the supply mix and ensure that 
demand can be supplied by the bulk transmission system. 
If potential transmission solutions could not be implemented, (e.g., due to lead-time considerations), 
the assessment looked at opportunities to retain existing generation, as well as the potential to locate 
new supply that does not have limitations on potential siting in those areas of need.
Independent Electricity System Operator
16
Pathways to Decarbonization
Cost and Emissions Analysis
This report looks at costs from two perspectives: (1) cumulative capital investment in new 
infrastructure up to the applicable scenario study year and (2) annual system cost in the applicable 
scenario study year; with all costs in this report and the appendix in 2022 Canadian Dollars. 
Under both scenarios, capital investment is represented as the overnight cost of “new steel in the 
ground” ­– i.e., there are no capital investments associated with resources such as demand response 
and conservation programs. “Overnight cost” is a common industry term, meaning the cost to build a 
project without consideration of financing, or the cost to complete a project if it were built “overnight”.
An annual system cost includes the revenue requirements4 for supply, transmission and distribution 
infrastructure; standby costs for demand response; conservation program costs; firm import 
agreement costs; and resource dispatch costs for a particular year.
In the Moratorium scenario, the focus is on the change in annual system costs in 2035 compared with 
a reference scenario with the same base supply mix, but instead of meeting reliability requirements 
with non-emitting resources, requirements in this reference scenario are met by extending all existing 
resources to the end of the study period, with incremental needs met by additional simple-cycle 
natural gas (a scenario approach similar to past APOs). With this comparison there is also a change 
in emissions and an implied cost of carbon can be calculated – i.e., the increase in annual system cost 
divided by the decrease in emissions.
In the Pathways scenario, the focus is on the total annual system cost in 2050, with the unit cost 
of demand – total annual system cost divided by total demand in the same year – calculated and 
compared with today’s unit cost of demand. As there is no comparable emitting reference scenario 
for Pathways, an implied cost of carbon is not calculated.
Note that the final totals for both capital investment and annual system cost include a 25 per cent 
contingency. Adding a contingency is a consideration for unknown or unexpected factors, and is 
commonly used for a study of this nature. In addition to capturing general cost uncertainty, which 
varies by resource type and technology readiness, it is also meant to capture out-of-scope costs (e.g., 
the build-out of distribution infrastructure, which will be considerable under the Pathways scenario) 
and the potential for adherence to more stringent reliability criteria, requiring incremental resources.

Moratorium for the 2025-2027 Period
Addressing capacity needs arising in the 2025-2027 period, the Minister of Energy asked for an 
interim report, to be delivered in October 2022, that would inform immediate policy decisions 
for upcoming electricity sector procurements. 
The IESO responded, in its Resource Eligibility Interim Report, and recommended that a diverse 
set of resources be included in these procurements. This included a significant investment in 
battery storage, balanced by natural gas capacity and other forms of non-emitting generation, 
to ensure reliability and affordability in the context of tight market conditions and supply 
chain disruptions. 
The report concluded that a maximum target of 1,500 MW of new natural gas capacity will 
sufficiently complement other procurement streams, addressing short-term capacity needs 
and contributing to the province’s longer-term energy transition.
4 Revenue requirements can be contract costs or a cost of service. Both consider capital costs spread over the contract term 
or the life of the project, inclusive of financing, returns, taxes and accounting treatments, as well as annual fixed costs.
Independent Electricity System Operator
17
Pathways to Decarbonization
A Moratorium on New Gas Generation
To understand the feasibility of a moratorium on new natural gas generation, the IESO 
looked first at what resources would be needed to secure necessary supply for 2025-2027. 
The results are described in the Moratorium for the 2025-2027 Period section 
directly above.  
It then examined the province’s needs after 2027 and analyzed a scenario up to 2035 that addressed 
projected demand by adding only non-emitting resources to the current supply mix. The 2021 APO’s 
planning and demand forecast was used as the basis for the scenario, as it was the most recent 
available data at the time the project began. As discussed below, adjustments were made to the 
forecast and supply mix to make the assessment more meaningful. In this scenario, the IESO only 
performed adequacy assessments for 2035, and therefore this report only shows capacity and energy 
results for that year.
Demand Forecast
The APO long-term demand forecast used in the Moratorium scenario covers the period from 
2023-2042 (see Figures 3 and 4). It projects strong growth in the early to mid-2020s as a result of 
anticipated industrial mining projects, strong residential-sector growth and a robust commercial-
sector recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. 
From the mid-2020s to the early 2030s, the forecast projects significant agricultural-sector growth 
and, in the early to late 2030s, expected increases in the number of electric vehicles in Ontario. 
(More information is available in the 2021 APO.)
Conservation and Demand Management
The APO demand forecast was updated to reflect the important role that managing demand should 
play in meeting future needs. Conservation, or energy efficiency, is a cost-effective non-emitting 
resource. Homeowners, businesses and communities can all play a larger role in saving energy and 
managing costs, and investments in energy-efficiency and demand management programs will be 
essential for maintaining reliability in the coming years. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
18
Pathways to Decarbonization
As a result, an additional 2,200 MW5 of demand reduction and 11.7 terawatt-hours (TWh) of energy 
savings, ramping up over the study time frame, was assumed along with existing efforts, together 
reaching a total of 3,100 MW of demand and 22 TWh of energy reduction by 2035. The amount 
is premised on best-in-class program delivery and incenting up to the full cost difference between 
baseline and efficient equipment, where it would be cost-effective from a system perspective. 
Successfully delivering the maximum potential savings would require increased, sustained investment 
in CDM programs, capability-building initiatives, and supporting marketing. It would also entail 
spending approximately $6.25 billion over the 2023-2035 period. 
Figure 3 | Moratorium Scenario versus APO Peak Demand
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
Net Seasonal Peak Demand (GW)
2023
2025
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
26
32
31
30
29
28
27
25
24
23
22
21
20
2021 APO Reference Scenario – Summer
2022 Moratorium Scenario – Summer
2021 APO Reference Scenario – Winter
2022 Moratorium Scenario – Winter
Figure 4 | Moratorium Scenario versus APO Annual Energy Demand
145
150
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
205
Net Annual Energy Demand (TWh)
2023
2025
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
175
205
200
195
190
185
180
170
165
160
155
150
145
2021 APO Reference Scenario
2022 Moratorium Scenario
5 As informed by the IESO and Ontario Energy Board’s 2019 Electricity and Natural Gas Conservation and Demand 
Management Achievable Potential Study, Scenario B, maximum cost effective savings scenario. The IESO’s Mid-Term 
Review undertook a 2022 refresh exercise of this study and confirmed the availability of significant cost-effective 
achievable CDM potential, with deeper savings over the longer term. Timing considerations did not allow for the 2022 
refresh results to be incorporated in this report’s modelling.
Independent Electricity System Operator
19
Pathways to Decarbonization
Resource Build-out
The next step in the process was to identify the base supply mix that would operate throughout 
the time frame of the study. The base supply mix identified in Figures 5 and 6 as “Today’s Capacity 
Remaining in 2035” is made up of all facilities that exist in 2024 that are expected to still be in 
operation in 2035. It was assumed that this would include all existing non-emitting resources. Based 
on our assumptions, natural gas facilities began to retire over the study time frame, but were allowed 
to continue operating if they were needed for reliability purposes or if they were economically 
feasible to run. Natural gas is therefore reduced to about 8,000 MW in 2035 from the current fleet 
of about 10,000 MW. This reduction in gas was enabled by nuclear refurbishments, new SMRs, 
additional supply and significant conservation savings.
In addition, to ensure the exercise was as timely and relevant as possible, the actual or expected 
results from 2022 resource procurements and announced government policy were also added. 
These included: 
•	 More than 700 MW of capacity from the IESO’s first Medium-Term Request for Proposals, 
completed in June 2022;
•	 A 300 MW SMR, assumed to be in service in 2029; and
•	 4,000 MW of supply (2,500 MW of battery storage and up to 1,500 MW of natural gas) from 
the Long-Term 1 procurements, assumed to be in service by 2027. 
By 2035, the base supply mix had approximately 39,700 MW of installed capacity, including 
refurbished nuclear resources (see Figure 5, “Today’s Capacity Remaining in 2035”).
To meet projected demand in 2035, new supply was added throughout the study time frame 
according to need, cost, build time and other factors. Options available to “compete” included all 
developed non-emitting technologies except low-carbon fuels. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
20
Pathways to Decarbonization
Figure 5 | Moratorium Scenario – Installed Capacity in 2035
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
Installed Capacity (MW)
Today’s Capacity Remaining in 2035
(Existing and Committed)
New Capacity Online by 2035
Total Capacity in 2035
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000
50,000
55,000
60,000
Storage
2,507 
0 
2,507 
Imports
331 
0 
331 
Demand Response
808 
2,885 
3,693 
Natural Gas
7,840 
0 
7,840 
Bioenergy
415 
0 
415 
Solar
2,668 
3,400 
6,068 
Wind
5,533 
900 
6,433 
Hydroelectric
9,348 
0 
9,348 
Nuclear
10,248 
1,000 
11,248 
Total MW
39,697 
8,185 
47,882 
Figure 6 | Moratorium Scenario – Energy in 2035
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
120
135
150
165
180
Energy (TWh)
Energy from Today's Capacity 
Remaining in 2035
Energy from New Capacity 
Online by 2035
Energy from Total Capacity 
in 2035
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
120
135
150
165
180
Storage
0 
0 
0 
Imports
0 
0 
0 
Demand Response
0 
0 
0 
Natural Gas
13 
0 
13 
Bioenergy
1 
0 
1 
Solar
3 
6 
10 
Wind
16 
4 
20 
Hydroelectric
40 
0 
40 
Nuclear
80 
3 
83 
Total TWh
153 
13 
166 
Independent Electricity System Operator
21
Pathways to Decarbonization
By 2035, about 5,300 MW of new solar, wind and nuclear capacity has been added. In the capacity 
expansion tool, new solar was first added in 2029 and then consistently throughout the study period 
to support summer peak demand. Wind came online in 2030, and SMRs in 2031, to meet energy 
requirements. About 3,000 MW of demand response was also added to the fleet.
New large hydroelectric and nuclear facilities were not selected due to lead times that extended 
beyond the horizon of this scenario. As firm imports from Québec would require resource 
development in that province,6 they proved to be costly and were also not selected. Finally, with 
2,500 MW of battery energy-storage systems included in the base supply mix, the value of 
additional storage diminished, hindering its selection. 
As shown in Figure 6, nuclear, hydroelectric and other renewables continue to provide baseload 
energy, while storage and demand response are used as peaking resources with minimal output. 
Of the 8,000 MW of natural gas remaining by 2035, about 5,000 MW was selected for energy 
adequacy. The 3,000 MW balance was determined to be needed for reliability services, including 
flexibility – i.e., the ability to provide energy quickly to respond to unexpected changes on the system 
– and emergency back-up. Energy produced from this amount is expected to be limited, along with its 
impact on emissions.
By 2035, total capacity reaches about 47,900 MW, compared with about 38,000 MW today. (For 
effective capacity data see Appendix A, Tab 10 and 11.)
This mix was assessed and found to be capacity and energy adequate.
6 Hydro-Québec’s recent strategic plan notes that “After several years of record energy sales across all our markets, tightened 
balances will prompt us to focus on maximizing the value derived from our clean energy.” Québec’s submission for NERC’s 
Long-Term Reliability Assessment identifies the need to import/build more generation beginning in the late 2020s.
Independent Electricity System Operator
22
Pathways to Decarbonization
Transmission
Planning for a future that will require extensive amounts of new generation and the transmission 
to deliver it involves the careful consideration of many factors, including the cost and timing 
of development. For example, transmissions assessments indicated that in Toronto and York 
Region, existing gas will be needed in the Moratorium scenario because the new and/or expanded 
transmission infrastructure to replace it cannot be completed by 2035. 
Overall, the new generation in the Moratorium scenario would require additional bulk transmission 
system infrastructure in the City of Toronto, York Region, east of the Greater Toronto Area, west 
of Barrie (Essa) and in both northwestern and northeastern Ontario. The IESO will ensure that 
future bulk and regional planning activities in these areas further assess the identified needs and 
reinforcement options and make recommendations for next steps, including development work. 
In particular, upcoming regional planning activities for both Toronto and York Region will need to 
examine options for the eventual replacement of the local reliability benefits provided by existing gas.
TABLE 3: TRANSMISSION FACILITIES NEEDED 
Facility Needed
# of Facilities/Kms of Line
Location
New autotransformers
2
Essa, Toronto (Leaside)
New static volt-ampere reactive 
compensators
4-5
Northwest and Northeast
Refurbished 230 kV (kilovolt) lines
55 km
East (GTA East)
New 230 kV lines
5-20 km
Essa/Toronto (York Region)
New 500 kV lines
550 km
Northeast (Pinard to Hanmer)
This build-out is estimated to have a capital cost of up to $2.1 billion by 2035, over and above what is 
currently planned or underway. (Further details on the scope and drivers of each reinforcement are 
included in Appendix B, section 2.)
These findings relied on the implementation of existing transmission plans that are currently in 
various stages of development. This would allow the projected additional generation in the northeast 
and northwest to contribute to meeting provincial needs and to ensuring that sufficient supply is 
available in various areas across the province under the Moratorium scenario. Since these plans are 
already committed to meet existing needs, they form part of the 2021 APO base case.
Independent Electricity System Operator
23
Pathways to Decarbonization
Moratorium: Conclusion and Outcomes
The conclusion from this assessment is that a moratorium on the acquisition of new gas can be 
feasible after current resource procurements, but that it requires action: building on the CDM 
momentum; acquiring new, non-emitting resources to meet new demand and replace retiring 
resources; and developing the needed transmission. It also requires focused research and analysis 
to develop a mix of resources that can reliably replace the operability services provided by existing 
natural gas plants as they retire. 
While Ontario’s gas fleet will increase to meet mid-decade needs, the Moratorium identified 
the potential opportunity to reduce the overall amount of natural gas in the system from up to 
approximately 12,000 MW in 2027 to 8,000 MW in 2035. Of this amount, about 5,000 MW would 
be needed for capacity and energy, representing a 60 per cent reduction from 2027 levels. As 
noted above, the remaining 3,000 MW would be needed on standby for operability reasons, as the 
important characteristics of gas must remain available to Ontario’s power system and no like-for-like 
replacement is yet available. Energy contributions from this amount, however, are expected to be 
marginal in this scenario. 
In terms of emissions, the change in the resource mix and energy contributions results in an eight 
mega-tonne (Mt) per year decrease in forecasted CO2e emissions in 2035, a nearly 60 per cent 
reduction from the APO 2021 forecasts.
The revenue requirement for this new infrastructure, combined with costs for incremental CDM 
programs­7 and changes to system operation, would result in a $1.9 billion net increase in annual 
total system costs by 2035, approximately an eight per cent increase over today’s costs. This will 
undoubtedly lead to increased electricity costs for consumers. However, some studies8 suggest that 
by 2050 these increases could be offset by savings from more efficient equipment like heat pumps 
and electric vehicles, as well as reductions in fossil fuel costs for transportation and heating. 
With an eight Mt CO2e decrease in emissions by 2035, the implied cost of carbon (the net increase 
in annual total system costs divided by emissions saved) would be $240/tCO2e. (For further 
information on system costs, see Appendix A, Tab 8.)
7 CDM is considered through decreased demand and associated program costs.
8 See Electric Federalism: Policy for Aligning Canadian Electricity Systems with Net Zero, The Canadian Climate Institute, 
May 2022, p. 47, and “Electricity Affordability and Equity in Canada’s Energy Transition, Dolter, Brett and Winter, Jennifer, 
the Canadian Climate Institute, August 2022.
Independent Electricity System Operator
24
Pathways to Decarbonization
Assessing a Pathway to a Decarbonized Future
The Pathways scenario looks at the time frame for decarbonizing Ontario’s electricity 
system in the context of high electricity demand based on substantial electrification 
in other sectors. 
Using the same supply base case as the Moratorium scenario, Pathways focused on 2050, assuming 
non-emitting resources would be available for 25 years for solar and 30 years for biomass and 
wind from their commissioning dates. Hydroelectric facilities were assumed to be available for the 
duration of the study time frame. In this scenario, up to the year 2035, gas plants were allowed to 
operate until they reached 25 years of age. After 2035, they were retired at the end of their contract, 
but kept available for reliability. This approach to the life of gas plants was informed by the draft 
framework for the Clean Electricity Regulation released in 2022.
Adequacy assessments were performed only for 2050, and as a result the scenario only shows 
capacity and energy results for that year. An operability screen was not performed, but further work 
will be undertaken.
Demand Forecast
The Pathways scenario, which looks out to 2050, assumes high levels of electrification in the economy. 
The scenario was created based on theoretical, aggressive, policy-driven electrification in three major 
sectors: transportation, building heat and industrial process. To develop this scenario, we did not 
undertake a cost-optimization exercise comparing different decarbonization options on the demand-
side. The upcoming work performed by Ontario’s Cost-Effective Energy Pathways Study, commissioned 
by the Ministry of Energy, will provide more insight on the possible evolution of demand in Ontario.
Major scenario assumptions include: 
•	 Buildings: A nine-year transition from predominantly fossil-fuelled space and water heating 
to electric heat pumps, by 2030 for new residential and commercial buildings in Toronto, and 
by 2035 for the rest of the province. Technological improvement in cold-weather heat pump 
technology was assumed.
•	 Transportation: Electrification of passenger vehicles aligned with federal regulations; incremental 
electrification of medium and heavy-duty vehicles, including municipal transit buses, rail transit, 
and other mobility; and freight vehicles assumed to be fuel cell powered with hydrogen fuel.
•	 Industry: Broad substitution of natural gas fuel to electricity, roughly 20 per cent of current levels 
by 2050. If the low-carbon hydrogen is manufactured in Ontario, this new industry will represent 
a significant new load that is not currently included.
•	 Conservation: Assumes savings consistent with the maximum achievable potential from the 2019 
IESO Conservation Achievable Potential study.
Independent Electricity System Operator
25
Pathways to Decarbonization
The demand scenario is based on an assumption of normal weather patterns and does not consider 
extreme weather events or the projected increase in overall temperature. These changes could have 
a significant impact on future demand, but are beyond the scope of this project. 
As a result of the assumed electrification, the scenario has an average annual growth rate for 2023-
2050 of 2.7 per cent for energy reaching an annual energy consumption of approximately 300 TWh 
by 2050, as shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7 | Energy Demand 
120
135
150
165
180
195
210
225
240
255
270
285
300
Net Annual Energy Demand (TWh)
2023
2025
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2039
2037
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
120
135
150
165
180
195
210
225
240
255
270
285
300
2022 APO
2022 Pathway Scenario
Capacity increases by 1.5 per cent per year for summer (Figure 8) and 3.8 per cent for winter, 
resulting in a winter peak of approximately 60 GW by 2050 (Figure 9). 
Figure 8 | Annual Summer Peak Demand 
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
52
56
60
Net Summer Peak Demand (GW)
2023
2025
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2039
2037
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
52
56
60
2022 APO
2022 Pathway Scenario
Independent Electricity System Operator
26
Pathways to Decarbonization
Figure 9 | Annual Winter Peak Demand 
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
52
56
60
Net Winter Peak Demand (GW)
2023
2025
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2039
2037
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
52
56
60
2022 APO
2022 Pathway Scenario
The system becomes winter peaking by 2030, largely as result of increased electrification of 
transportation – i.e., evening or overnight charging – and of heating requirements in buildings. This 
electrification also changes the shape of system demand during winter, resulting in spring and fall 
peaks that are higher than summer peaks. 
The new profile has up to three ramps per day of 6,000-10,000 MW (see Figure 11), compared with 
ramps of 2,000-5,000 MW today, attributed to the forecasted new overnight coincident demand 
from the charging of electric vehicles after business hours and the adoption of electrically powered 
space heating in the winter season. Managing these ramping requirements would represent a 
significant operability challenge.
There would likely be an opportunity to manage winter demand through thermal storage and 
demand response, but there is still considerable uncertainty around the impact on daily demand 
of future heat pump and electric vehicle requirements. Summer demand profiles do not show 
significant changes (see Figure 10).
Independent Electricity System Operator
27
Pathways to Decarbonization
Figure 10 | Summer Daily Load Shape Hourly Profile
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Net Hourly Demand (GW)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
9
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
17
16
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Hour Ending
2050 Range
2024 Range
2050 Median
2024 Median
Figure 11 | Winter Daily Load Shape Hourly Profile
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Net Hourly Demand (GW)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
9
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
17
16
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Hour Ending
2050 Range
2024 Range
2050 Median
2024 Median
As with the Moratorium scenario, this forecast reflects a ramping up of CDM savings, reaching 
4,650 MW of demand reduction in 20509 at a cost of $11.5 billion over the 2023-2050 period.
9 These amounts are in line with the maximum potential scenario of the IESO’s 2019 Conservation Achievable Potential Study.
Independent Electricity System Operator
28
Pathways to Decarbonization
Resource Build-out
By 2050, about 20,000 MW of today’s supply is still in operation, made up primarily of large nuclear 
reactors and hydroelectric. Most existing renewable generation is assumed to have reached its end 
of life, while natural gas is phased out consistent with the zero-emissions goal. 
In order to reliably meet the new winter peak demand of 60,000 MW, an additional 69,000 MW of 
installed capacity is added, in addition to nearly 5,000 MW of CDM that is already included in the 
demand forecast (see Figure 12). 
This scenario includes an additional 17,800 MW of nuclear supply. By 2050, as most of Ontario’s 
existing wind facilities will have reached their end of life, this scenario also includes an additional 
17,600 MW of wind and 650 MW of new hydroelectric. 
Solar resources provide value during summer peaks in the early years of the scenario. As the system 
transitions from summer to winter peaks, the value of these resources diminishes and incremental 
capacity levels off at 6,000 MW in 2036. In addition, as under the Moratorium scenario, the 
existing 2,500 MW of batteries limited the value of further short-term storage through to 2035. An 
additional 2,000 MW of long-duration storage is added in the late 2030s to meet adequacy needs. 
Assuming its availability in 2036, the analysis suggests that hydrogen becomes a cost-effective10 
resource for reducing peak demand.
Figure 12 | Pathway Scenario – Installed Capacity in 2050
0
7500
15000
22500
30000
37500
45000
52500
60000
67500
75000
82500
90000
Installed Capacity (MW)
Today’s Capacity Remaining in 2050
(Existing and Committed)
New Capacity Online by 2050
Total Capacity in 2050
0
7,500
15,000
22,500
30,000
37,500
45,000
52,500
60,000
67,500
75,000
82,500
90,000
Storage
0 
2,000 
2,000 
Imports
331 
3,800 
4,131 
Demand Response
808 
5,936 
6,744 
Hydrogen
0 
15,000 
15,000 
Bioenergy
41 
0 
41 
Solar
259 
6,000 
6,259 
Wind
160 
17,600 
17,760 
Hydroelectric
9,348 
657 
10,005 
Nuclear
8,653 
17,800 
26,453 
Total MW
19,600 
68,793 
88,393 
10 Although estimates are based on the most reliable information available at the time of writing, considerable uncertainty 
remains around cost assumptions for various fuels over the study time period.
Independent Electricity System Operator
29
Pathways to Decarbonization
Figure 13 | Pathway Scenario – Energy in 2050
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
Energy (TWh)
Energy from Today's Capacity 
Remaining in 2050
Energy from New Capacity 
Online by 2050
Energy from Total Capacity 
in 2050
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
Storage
0 
0 
0 
Imports
0 
30 
30 
Demand Response
0 
0 
0 
Hydrogen
0 
12 
12 
Bioenergy
0 
0 
0 
Solar
1 
11 
12 
Wind
2 
62 
63 
Hydroelectric
41 
3 
44 
Nuclear
70 
63 
133 
Total TWh
113 
181 
294 
Using Ontario’s existing interties with Hydro-Québec, as well as incremental new infrastructure in 
both Ontario and Québec,11 this scenario includes 4,000 MW of imports. Given Hydro-Québec’s 
current winter capacity constraints, which are outlined above, we assumed that the firm imports 
would be from new hydroelectric and new wind facilities built in Québec.
By 2050, the total installed capacity reaches about 88,400 MW. In contrast, current installed 
capacity is about 40,000 MW.
This mix was found to be capacity and energy adequate.
Operability and the future electricity grid
As discussed throughout this report, ensuring reliability is of paramount importance. For a system to 
be reliable, it must have the flexibility to respond to sudden changes as well as extreme conditions. 
Future supply mixes will not have some of the traditional resources that currently provide these 
services, and ensuring reliability without them contains many unknowns. It will require detailed 
planning studies that incorporate novel approaches, tools and a thorough understanding of the 
location and technological features of individual resources as they are integrated into the electricity 
grid. As a result, the IESO has not performed an operability assessment on this scenario. The IESO 
will work with peers and industry experts over the coming years to address this challenge.
11 Incremental new infrastructure would include a new intertie between the two provinces and additional reinforcements 
in Ontario to deliver the capacity to the load centre in the GTA. It would also include necessary reinforcements on the 
Québec side.
Independent Electricity System Operator
30
Pathways to Decarbonization
Transmission
The transmission requirements for the Pathways scenario are extensive. In order to achieve a starting 
point for a system that is capable of incorporating the resources identified and reliably supplying the 
forecast demand, a significant build-out of Ontario’s existing 500 kV network would be required, 
focusing on paralleling the existing network where possible. Beyond reviewing the impact of different 
levels of reinforcement to the 500 kV network, the need for an additional 230 kV of bulk reinforcements 
was also identified to enable the supply mix. (Full details are available in Appendix B, section 2.)

Meeting Forecasted Demand
The challenge of connecting the forecasted demand can be illustrated by considering some 
high-level assumptions around how many new load supply stations (i.e., transformer stations 
supplying distribution customers) would be required throughout the province: 
•	 Taking into account existing load supply stations, and assuming that a new station would 
supply approximately 250 MW of winter load, it would require anywhere from 150 to more 
than 280 new stations to meet forecasted demand, depending on whether if those stations 
are fully utilized. 
•	 Costs range between $5 billion and $10 billion based on recent figures for a standard load 
supply station in a non-urban environment, assuming no work is required on the upstream 
transmission system and not accounting for downstream distribution costs. 
•	 This would mean that between five and 10 new stations a year, on average, would be needed 
to meet forecast winter demand in 2050, with a yearly pace potentially outstripping the 
number of new stations that have been developed across the province in the last decade.
Overall, the cost of building out the bulk 500 kV and 230 kV system to meet the Pathways scenario 
is estimated to be between $20 billion and $50 billion. This estimate includes new 500 kV and 230 kV 
network lines and terminations, and new 500/230 kV and 230/115 kV auto-transformation. If 500 kV 
reinforcement through northwestern Ontario to Manitoba were also needed due to load growth 
or constraints on resource siting, this could result in an additional $7 billion to $16 billion in costs. 
The costs for 500 kV lines and terminations are directly informed by the 500 kV reinforcements 
modelled. The range of cost for 230 kV lines, terminations and for all auto-transformation was 
informed both by the reinforcements modelled and the unit costs per MW of load growth, assuming 
typical equipment capabilities. 
Many of the needed investments will be challenging to implement given their location within 
major load centres and populations, which makes land more challenging to acquire, permitting 
more contested and construction more expensive if undergrounding is necessary. Aside from the 
bulk reinforcements needed to support growth in the load centres, the Pathways scenario also 
necessitates major investments in the local distribution system, including step down stations 
required between the transmission and distribution network, and distribution infrastructure for final 
connection to the customer. The cost and siting challenge for the required stations and distribution 
infrastructure will also be substantial.
Independent Electricity System Operator
31
Pathways to Decarbonization
Pathways: Conclusion and Outcomes
This scenario illustrates the magnitude of the effort required for Ontario to decarbonize its electricity 
system while responding to economic development and electrification. Focusing on 2050 to align with 
international targets, this study highlights the goals we are attempting to achieve. It demonstrates 
an immense build-out of the province’s transmission, distribution systems and resources that could 
more than double Ontario’s installed capacity, and that would need every known or potential resource 
available today. It also requires replacing the necessary services provided by gas, which no resource 
alone today can do. 
We can garner many insights from this scenario, but it is also important to acknowledge its 
limits. This resource mix was assessed for energy and capacity adequacy in 2050; an operability 
assessment was not performed. In addition, we did not perform adequacy assessments for the years 
before 2050. Further planning work is necessary to understand how to manage the transition in a 
reliable way from now to 2050. 
This scenario relies heavily on low-carbon fuels for intermediate, peaking and flexibility needs. 
Currently there is no like-for-like replacement for the operating characteristics of natural gas. Low-
carbon fuels might be able to fill this gap and would be a valuable addition to the supply mix, but they 
do not yet exist at scale and there are many barriers to commercialization. (See Appendix A, Tab 
9.) If low-carbon fuels do not materialize, replacing natural gas will be an even more complex task, 
requiring more research and analysis into understanding how generation, demand, transmission and 
storage can be combined to replace gas. It may be possible to overcome all of these barriers, but it 
will require concerted effort by government and innovators. 
In terms of both transmission and supply, the Pathways scenario would need $375 billion to $425 billion 
in new infrastructure investment, and result in an annual total system cost of approximately $60 billion 
by 2050. Alternatively, annual system costs can be considered per unit of demand at $200 to 
$215/MWh, an increase of between 20 per cent and 30 per cent from current unit rates. 
Regarding consumer bills, it is difficult to determine a potential rate impact given the changing nature 
of energy consumption. However, an increased reliance on electricity will significantly increase the 
volume of consumption on bills compared to today's patterns. (Further information on system costs 
is available in Appendix A, Tab 8.) However, as noted above, some studies suggest that actual impact 
on total energy costs could be modest due to offsets and increased efficiency.12
12 Canadian Climate Institute op. cit., p. 26 
Independent Electricity System Operator
32
Pathways to Decarbonization
Natural Gas as a Transitional Resource 
to Ensure Operability
Natural gas generation currently plays a vital role in supporting grid reliability: it can 
generally provide continuous energy throughout the year, under all weather conditions; 
it can be ramped up or down within minutes to follow sudden or unexpected changes in 
demand or in the availability of other generators; and it provides reliability services that 
help stabilize voltages and frequencies on the transmission grid. 
These important characteristics must remain available to Ontario’s power system, which means that 
natural gas facilities are needed past 2035, or until reliable replacements have been identified, put 
into service and demonstrated their capability. 
Developing a strategy to replace natural gas facilities requires a number of thorough, detailed 
assessments. As learned during Ontario’s coal phase-out initiative, shutting down large facilities 
while maintaining reliability can take many years to achieve. Some of the learnings from Ontario’s 
previous experiences include the following:
•	 Replacement resources should be procured, built, commissioned and operated at a satisfactory 
level of performance prior to the shutdown of facilities. Careful scheduling and demonstration of 
operation are critically important to ensuring that reliability can be maintained during transition years.
•	 Replacement resources are unlikely to have the same attributes as natural gas facilities. Low-
carbon fuels such as renewable natural gas, for example, may be suitable replacements, but 
significant work must be done to ensure that they have both the right technical characteristics 
and that they are market ready in sufficient quantities by 2035. In the end it may be necessary 
to procure additional resources to ensure that all reliability attributes are replaced. 
•	 Shutting down larger facilities can impact the transmission system. Studies should be conducted as 
each facility shuts down to understand the broader effects on the transmission system and to develop 
adequate infrastructure to maintain the security of the grid.
Coordinating outages is critical during the years where new replacement facilities and supporting 
infrastructure are under construction and commissioning. A staged approach allows facilities to shut 
down while broader impacts to the grid are managed effectively.
Replacing these facilities will be complex and will require detailed assessments and studies that 
will be a priority for the IESO going forward. In addition, it may require the development of new 
reliability standards. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
33
Pathways to Decarbonization
Implementation Dependencies and Risks
While the energy transition will bring growth opportunities, the results of both scenarios 
demonstrate the complexities of achieving it. The electricity system will be relied upon 
to do more than ever while learning how to build and manage resources at a scale 
never before attempted. 
Today, there is considerable activity underway in planning for Ontario’s future reliability. The IESO’s 
current resource procurements, along with CDM program development and efforts to enable 
emerging non-emitting resources, are all moving the province steadily forward toward meeting its 
coming needs. 
Bridging the work of today with the needs of a decarbonized world will be challenging and complex, 
but Ontario has the experience to build on. 
•	 After becoming the first jurisdiction in North America to completely phase out coal-fired 
generation in 2014, our electrical grid is now more than 90 per cent emissions-free – one of the 
cleanest electricity systems on the continent. On average, the system accounts for just under three 
per cent of the province’s emissions;
•	 We have a mature sector, with established, knowledgeable electricity market participants, 
an experienced system operator and a respected energy regulator;
•	 We are part of the largest, most reliable grid in the world, and adhere to the requirements of 
North American standards authorities (NERC/NPCC) to ensure the reliability and security 
of Ontario’s system;
•	 We have extensive experience with demand-side management programs; and
•	 We have a skilled, well-trained workforce and well-developed infrastructure to attract 
economic development.
That said, there are many dependencies and risks involved in making the transition to a decarbonized 
electricity system; these were brought to the IESO’s attention during the stakeholder and community 
engagement process that has informed this body of work. Some of the more significant dependencies 
and risks are outlined below.
Policy certainty is a must: Provincial and federal policy in Canada must set mandatory goals for 
GHG emissions reductions, which, in turn, govern the direction of industry, business and consumer 
behaviour. Policy certainty – both in the near and long term – is vital to enabling investment in 
infrastructure, CDM, next-generation technology and decarbonization. Uncertainty around the future 
cost of carbon and emissions targets contributes to a challenging environment for investors and 
others interested in contributing to meeting reliability needs. Stakeholders emphasized that policy 
certainty is a prerequisite for decarbonization at scale. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
34
Pathways to Decarbonization
Governance and oversight need to evolve with the challenge: The pace of electrification will 
depend on millions of individual choices by households and businesses regarding transportation, 
heating and cooling solutions and appliances. Those choices will be influenced by factors such as 
the relative cost of various options, the presence of supporting infrastructure and even geopolitical 
developments. This makes electricity system planning and investment challenging and may require 
an evolution in how the sector is governed to ensure an orderly energy transition. 
Public support for decision-making is vital: Public support will be necessary to enable the 
transition. A recent report, Net Zero: An International Review of Energy Delivery System Policy and 
Regulation for Canadian Energy Decision Makers, concludes that “Durable public support for energy 
system transformation will need to rest on open, inclusive, transparent policy, planning and approval 
processes, engaging communities and citizens from beginning to end” (p. 5). This will involve 
acknowledging the costs and risks of the transition, as well as addressing how we pay for it.
Managing costs is a precondition to success: Stakeholders and experts are concerned about the 
effect of this energy transition on affordability, including the impact on industrial competitiveness 
and of rising costs on people with low incomes. This is a significant issue and highlights the need to 
adopt a cost optimized pathway.  Recent analysis published by the Canadian Climate Institute shows 
that if the pathway is cost optimized, while electricity rates would increase, overall energy costs 
would decline as equipment becomes more efficient and the share of spending on natural gas and 
gasoline decreases.13 
A partnership role for Indigenous communities is a prerequisite: Simply consulting Indigenous 
communities on planned system developments has never been a sufficient approach to electricity 
system planning: these communities expect to be full partners in the transition to a decarbonized 
future. Indeed, Indigenous communities, governments and organizations across Canada have been 
actively developing renewable-energy and transmission projects over the past two decades. Today, 
First Nations, Métis and Inuit entities are partners in, or beneficiaries of, almost 20 per cent of 
Canada’s electricity-generating infrastructure, most of which is producing renewable energy. These 
communities are also seeking efficiency improvements in their buildings and want to see job creation 
in their communities. The electricity sector has already created a solid foundation of engagement 
with many Indigenous communities and is well positioned to build on this base.
Permitting and approvals must be streamlined: In Canada, it can take many years to build new 
energy infrastructure; the IESO’s experience is that it can take four to five years for new wind and 
solar generation, 10 years for transmission networks and even longer for large, capital-intensive 
infrastructure. Stakeholders, communities, experts and infrastructure developers have made it clear 
that processes need to be enhanced and streamlined if Canada wants to build energy infrastructure 
at the scale needed to reliably decarbonize. It is imperative for all levels of government to review their 
processes, including the Impact Assessment Act, the Environmental Assessment Act, and siting 
approval and permitting processes.
13 Canadian Climate Institute op. cit., p. 26
Independent Electricity System Operator
35
Pathways to Decarbonization
Siting grid-scale energy infrastructure will require the support of communities: All new 
infrastructure has to be placed somewhere and taking community concerns, needs and plans 
into consideration is critical to the expansion of the system. An estimate of land use required for 
incremental resources in the Pathways study would be almost 14 times the size of Toronto (see 
Appendix B, section 6). Some municipal representatives want to participate in the energy transition, 
but have noted that it is critical that they have some control over the type of infrastructure that will 
be built in their community. Thus, an important part of the system’s planning process is looking 
at siting from a local perspective, as well as helping communities understand the challenges and 
opportunities of siting new infrastructure. The IESO is already working with government to preserve 
transmission corridors to enable future growth.
The impacts of decarbonization on the distribution system need to be considered: Decarbonizing 
Ontario will necessitate a considerable increase in the demand for electricity, which, in turn, will 
have a significant impact on the distribution system, local distribution companies and on the cost 
to the government and citizens. Toronto Hydro, for example, recently estimated that it will cost the 
distributor $10 billion by 2050 to build a grid that’s capable of supporting the city’s net-zero strategy. 
Coordination between the bulk and distribution systems is needed to ensure that this transition is 
reliable and efficient, and to maximize the value of DERs.
Access to capital, resources and labour may be challenging: The path to decarbonization is not 
only being considered in Ontario; jurisdictions around the world are planning or actively working 
on decarbonizing their energy systems over the next 25 years. As a result, competition for scarce 
resources is already becoming an issue, while volatile geopolitical realities and the COVID-19 
pandemic continue to weaken supply chains. Many stakeholders have told us that finding skilled 
labour, capital and sources of supply are serious challenges to achieving decarbonization goals, 
and one study (see Appendix B, section 6) estimates that the 14,000-strong labour force currently 
working on electricity infrastructure projects in Ontario could need to increase six-fold for decades. 
The electricity sector and governments need to work together to develop a strategy to collectively 
face these uncertainties and sourcing challenges.
Innovation is important, but uncertain: While many of the technologies needed to decarbonize 
are already known and commercialized, many others, including low-carbon fuels and SMRs, are 
still in development. It will be important for Ontario and Canada to continue to invest in these, and 
other, innovations. As the system planner, however, we must consider scenarios in which these 
technologies become available, as well as scenarios in which they do not.
Independent Electricity System Operator
36
Pathways to Decarbonization
Conclusion
This report is the IESO’s response to the Minister of Energy’s request to evaluate a 
moratorium on the procurement of new natural gas generating stations in Ontario and 
to develop an achievable pathway to decarbonization in the electricity system. 
The Moratorium and Pathways scenarios are not integrated power system plans, but analyses that 
identify potential opportunities and challenges to consider as Ontario electricity demand and its 
resource mix evolves. As well, although this scenario analysis is just the beginning of a discussion 
about how to decarbonize our system while maintaining reliability and managing cost, it provides 
a solid understanding of the scale of the work and clearly demonstrates the need to collaborate to 
address risks and dependencies. 
This study found that a moratorium on new natural gas is possible after the province’s current round 
of electricity resource procurements is complete – as long as development begins now. Informed by 
robust planning, Ontario must begin to acquire new non-emitting resources to meet the province’s 
growing needs and must invest in pre-development work to better manage future uncertainty. 
In response to the Minister’s second question, we were able to develop an energy-adequate, 
decarbonized supply mix for 2050. Within the Pathways scenario, Ontario’s system became zero-carbon 
in 2045 when the last natural gas plant retired after 25 years of operation, but further assessment is 
needed to determine the feasibility of this target as well as a cost-effective way to get to 2050. 
In addition, the Pathways scenario points to a step change in how we grow and manage our 
electricity system. In order to meet a projected 60,000 MW of customer demand, Ontario will need 
all of the resources available to it to simultaneously expand and decarbonize. While many options are 
already available and understood (wind, solar, hydroelectric and large nuclear), others options such 
as SMRs and low-carbon fuels will require support, and their availability is not guaranteed. 
Another key area of uncertainty identified in the development of this report relates to the proposed 
federal CER. It will be important that these regulations are informed by system planners and 
operators. For example, our assessment of the Moratorium scenario has led us to conclude that 
we will require 8,000 MW of natural gas on the system in 2035, particularly in the GTA, to ensure 
reliability. We will continue to work with the federal government to share our insights and perspective. 
In this report, we have identified decarbonized scenarios for Ontario. Scenarios, however, are not 
enough. If Ontario wishes to make decarbonization a reality, a number of risks and dependencies 
must be addressed, including policy certainty, governance framework and regulatory barriers, siting 
and permitting, Indigenous and municipal partnerships and the management of costs. More broadly, 
this report underscores the need to galvanize collaboration with a wide range of stakeholders and 
communities as we explore ways to develop non-emitting resources to meet Ontario’s energy needs. 
For its part, the IESO will incorporate the learnings from this report into our core work, more 
explicitly integrating the risks of climate change and the ongoing energy transition into our planning 
and procurements. This includes ensuring that regional planning processes for Toronto and York 
Region address the unique challenges for local reliability of phasing out natural gas. We will also 
study options to replace the operability services currently provided by natural gas, and will continue 
to use our procurement framework to re-acquire existing resources. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
37
Pathways to Decarbonization
Recognizing that Ontario’s demand is growing, that existing resources are retiring, and that 
government may direct system decarbonization, the IESO has identified “no regrets” actions that 
are necessary to ensure that the electricity sector is ready to manage future uncertainty and risk. 
These actions are intended to keep options open while maintaining the flexibility to take advantage of 
opportunities as they emerge.
1. Advance Acquisition of Non-Emitting Resources to Meet Load Growth
The IESO is forecasting increased supply needs out to the end of the decade, with the possibility that 
electrification and economic development outpace projections. Ontario should continue to move 
swiftly to acquire new non-emitting resources and incentivize energy efficiency to meet emerging 
needs. Using its competitive and technology-diverse approach to resource acquisition, the Minister is 
requested to advance the efforts by directing the IESO to: 
•	 Acquire new non-emitting resources this decade through future procurements. This includes continuing 
to issue a regular schedule of procurements into the next decade to create investor certainty.
•	 While current Save on Energy programs are on track to achieve all feasible energy efficiency within 
the current framework, expanded targets post-2024 need to be established. Offerings should be 
expanded to include efficient electrification and move away from time-bound CDM Frameworks 
to an enduring model that adapt funding and targets to Ontario’s achievable potential. Discussions 
regarding appropriate targets and models should begin now to better leverage CDM as a resource 
to respond to evolving system, market, and customer needs.
2. Invest in Future Infrastructure and Innovation
There is an urgent need to begin investing in early development work to ensure that the grid is 
ready to support transformation into the next decade. A relatively small investment today ensures 
that the projects and technologies can deploy more readily to meet decarbonization targets. 
Recommendations to prepare for future infrastructure and innovation include the following: 
•	 Sector partners should begin planning and siting work to identify potential new projects, including 
hydroelectric and nuclear. To enable this work, the Ministry should work with the Ontario Energy 
Board (OEB) and the IESO to develop a process to recover pre-development costs for OEB-regulated 
and IESO-contracted projects respectively, as applicable.
•	 The IESO should work with government and system transmitters to identify new, and protect 
existing, corridors of land as well as rights of way that will likely be needed for future transmission 
lines. The IESO should also leverage existing planning processes to identify and recommend 
development work for priority transmission investments to support decarbonization. 
•	 There should be an increased focus on the work identified in Ontario’s Low-Carbon Hydrogen 
Strategy, including recognizing if and how low-carbon fuels can contribute to the decarbonization 
of the electricity grid. Other investments in innovation and new technologies to meet future needs 
will also be critical. This includes continuing to expand efforts associated with the IESO’s Innovation 
Framework as well as the Grid Innovation Fund.
•	 The IESO should pursue a deeper understanding of the role of long-duration storage such as 
pumped water and compressed air storage, contributing to reliability needs in the 2030s. This 
work could lead to procurements for long-duration storage that would allow the province to reduce 
its reliance on natural gas earlier. 
Independent Electricity System Operator
38
Pathways to Decarbonization
3. Galvanize Collaboration 
As there is no one solution to addressing the challenges and opportunities ahead, it is important to 
engage, understand and build support for a collective approach to how Ontario moves its electricity 
system toward decarbonization. This will require both sector stakeholders and communities to take 
an active role in implementing solutions. To achieve this, the IESO recommends that the Minister: 
•	 Consult on the findings of the Pathways to Decarbonization report to ensure there is a broad 
understanding of the report’s conclusions and to build acceptance for Ontario’s energy policy 
moving forward;
•	 Continue to build partnerships with the federal and municipal governments to ensure a shared 
alignment of energy policy and approaches to managing the cost of Ontario’s energy transition; and
•	 Continue to build partnerships with neighbouring jurisdictions, both in Canada and in the United 
States, that are undergoing similar energy transitions to share learnings and collaborate on 
potential solutions. 
4. Break Down Regulatory Barriers
The scale of the energy transition is far reaching and will require new regulatory approaches to 
govern how Ontario makes decisions and develops and pays for its energy infrastructure. The IESO 
recommends that the Minister: 
•	 Continue the work of the Electrification and Energy Transition Panel and establish a new long term 
energy planning process that is designed to address the energy transition; and 
•	 Work with all levels of government and with regulators to ensure that approaches to regulating the 
development of new large infrastructure projects and expanding the use of CDM, DERs, and other 
innovative technologies are appropriate given the scale and pace of the challenge ahead. 
5. Track Progress and Update Plans in an Open and Transparent Process
This study is a single scenario based on the information available to the IESO today. It is imperative 
that Ontario continue to update, track progress, and refine its planning in support of the energy 
transition. To do this, the IESO recommends that the Minister:
•	 Direct the IESO to establish a new and enduring process to track progress and plan for Ontario’s 
energy transition. The planning should be incorporated into regular planning products such as the 
IESO’s APO. The first iteration should account for the results of the actions identified above.
Independent Electricity System Operator
39
Pathways to Decarbonization
 Independent Electricity 
 System Operator
 1600–120 Adelaide Street West
Toronto, ON M5H 1T1
 Phone: 905.403.6900
Toll-free: 1.888.448.7777
 Email: customer.relations@ieso.ca
 
 	@IESO_Tweets
 	linkedin.com/company/ieso
 ieso.ca
saveonenergy.ca
