Public Health Nurs. 2021;38:321–335.	
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/phn
  |  321
© 2021 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
1 | INTRODUCTION
As the nursing profession addresses the complexity of SARS-
CoV-2 also known as the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19), public health concerns regarding the intersection of climate 
change and emerging pandemics are an urgent problem in the 21st 
century. As noted by Rosenbloom and Markard (2020), the climate 
crisis as well as COVID-19 are global and unprecedented disrup-
tors and require comprehensive and coordinated responses by 
policy-makers, businesses, broader society—and to this, we urge 
the inclusion of public health professionals. Ivanova et al. (2012) 
has suggested that climate change and pandemics may individ-
ually and collectively amplify a cascade of global challenges and 
potential economic collapse. Further Rosenbloom and Markard 
 
Received: 13 July 2020  |  Revised: 10 December 2020  |  Accepted: 25 December 2020
DOI: 10.1111/phn.12866  
R E V I E W  S U M M A R I E S
The intersection of climate change with the era of COVID-19
Sheryl M. Zang1,2 |   Ivy Benjenk2,3,4 |   Suellen Breakey2
 |   Eleonor Pusey-Reid2 |   
Patrice K. Nicholas2
1School of Nursing, SUNY Downstate 
College of Health Sciences and Nursing, 
New York, NY, USA
2School of Nursing, Center for Climate 
Change, Climate Justice, and Health, MGH 
Institute of Health Professions, Boston, MA, 
USA
3University of Maryland College Park, 
College Park, MD, USA
4The George Washington University, 
Washington, DC, USA
Correspondence
Patrice K. Nicholas, School of Nursing, 
Center for Climate Change, Climate Justice, 
and Health, MGH Institute of Health 
Professions, Boston, MA, USA.
Email: Nicholas.patrice@mgh.harvard.edu
Abstract
The purpose of this integrative review is to examine recent literature on the intersec-
tion of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19 novel coronavirus) and climate change that will lead 
to a greater understanding of the complexities of the urgent pandemic linked with 
the emerging climate crisis. A literature search for peer-reviewed, English language, 
literature published since the pandemic emerged was conducted using Cumulated 
Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), PubMed, and the Cochrane 
Library. The final sample yielded a total of 22 commentaries, editorials, discussion 
papers, and a research study that explicitly addressed the intersection of COVID-19 
and climate change. Sixty articles emerged in the initial review of the intersection 
of the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change with the final yield of 22 articles 
deemed valid for inclusion after full text review. With the emergence of COVID-19 
and scholarly discourse that addresses the intersection of the pandemic with climate 
change, key issues emerged that intersect with policy /advocacy, social justice, and 
nursing's public health role in clinical practice, education, policy/advocacy, and re-
search/scholarship. Five themes that emerged included the role of public health in 
COVID-19 and climate change efforts; global approach addressing human-environment 
issues; intersection of COVID-19 and climate change from a community and global per-
spective; impacts of COVID-19, climate change and the environment and professional as-
sociations and specialty organizations’ views and responsibilities with a lens on COVID-19 
and climate change. Despite the importance of addressing racial inequities as well as 
systemic and structural racism that impacts those most affected by climate change 
and pandemics such as COVID-19, no literature addressed this topic. Public health 
nursing has a critical role in addressing climate change and the pandemic response to 
COVID 19 in the 21st century.
K E Y W O R D S
climate change, COVID-19, global warming, SARS-CoV-2
322  |    
ZANG et al.
(2020) suggested that the pandemic directly threatens individuals, 
populations, and health systems, while climate change undermines 
broader natural, ecological, human systems, and populations. 
From a global perspective, it is well established that climate 
change represents a looming health emergency with Lancet and 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports on climate 
change and health contributing to our current state of the science 
and understanding of the deleterious health consequences asso-
ciated with climate change (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change,  2018; Watts et  al.,  2019). There is a pressing need for 
health professionals to galvanize the response to both of these 
challenges for the health of the world's people. The purpose of this 
integrative review is to examine the intersection of climate change 
and COVID-19.
While the threat of COVID-19 is urgent for individual, commu-
nity, population, and global health, climate change is more insidious 
in its impact and a slow march to progressively worsening human 
health. Nursing has a pivotal role in addressing climate change, 
climate justice, and health. In our institution at the MGH Institute 
of Health Professions School of Nursing, the first school of nurs-
ing-led Center for Climate Change, Climate Justice, and Health was 
established to address the deleterious health consequences of cli-
mate change and the critical need for health professions education. 
Literature suggests that education of all of the health professions is 
integral to address the leading public health challenge of our time; 
in health professions education curriculum development, integra-
tion of climate change knowledge in clinical practice, policy/advo-
cacy efforts, and research and scholarship about climate and health 
are key areas for the future (Maxwell & Blashki, 2016). In the midst 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is important to leverage both climate 
change and associated pandemics to address the future of public 
health in the 21st century. From a nursing professional lens from the 
International Council of Nurses, Catton (2020) notes:  
The next decade is likely to produce any number of 
global challenges that will affect health and health 
care, including pannational infections such as the new 
coronavirus, COVID-­19 and others that will be related 
to global warming (p. 4).
2 | OVERVIEW OF THE INTERSECTION OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND COVID-19
It is well known that animals including bats are reservoirs for several 
viruses and were a conduit for the Ebola epidemic as well as severe 
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) Coronavirus 1, Middle Eastern 
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), and the emergence of COVID-19 
(Hemida & Ba Abduallah, 2020). Habitat disruption is the main driver 
of loss of biodiversity, and climate change may play a role by forcing 
species to shift habitat and changing geographical range of species 
(Bale, 2020; Xiao et al., 2020). As species shift habitats, this brings 
animals in closer range to humans and livestock which then serve as 
a vehicle for launching a global pandemic. Even more extreme condi-
tions existed in Wuhan, China, the epicenter of the COVID-19 pan-
demic, where bats and pangolins—with pangolins recently emerging as 
vectors for transmission of viruses—are suggested as vectors for coro-
naviruses since they are housed in crowded, open markets with close 
and often squalid conditions (Bale, 2020; Xiao et al., 2020). Pangolins 
are similar to bat species as mammals that are known to be able to 
be infected with viruses such as coronaviruses (Bale, 2020; Morens 
et al., 2020; Xiao et al., 2020). Emerging evidence may support that in 
our climate-changing world, there is encroachment on animal habitats 
which may impact health and risk for infectious diseases; thus there is 
a need for urgent efforts to limit climate change to address the emer-
gence of new pandemics in the future (Bernstein, 2020).
As discussed by Schwartz (2020), the intersection of climate 
change and COVID-19 has emerged as the most complex and threat-
ening public health challenge ever encountered—surpassing the 
Influenza Pandemic that emerged in 1918 when environmental deg-
radation had not yet accelerated. Further Schwartz suggests: 
The question that haunts my mind is, how would the 
United States handle such a pandemic outbreak if it 
occurred as the coronavirus did in China, just as some 
kind of major climate change crisis was also stressing the 
American healthcare system. Are we prepared? I don’t 
think so, do you? The reality is that not only America but 
the world is utterly unprepared for these outbreaks, and 
when one adds the migrations that climate change will 
compel things look very bleak indeed (p. 141).
Global Environmental Health Day was held on July 1, 2020 and 
Columbia University's Earth Institute released a State of the Planet 
report on COVID-19’s Long-Term Effects on Climate Change—For 
Better or Worse (Cho, 2020). Furthermore, because of recommen-
dations for lockdowns, social distancing, and work from home advi-
sories, significant decreases in transportation occurred globally and 
limited industrial activity resulted in a 17% decrease in daily carbon 
emissions in April (Cho, 2020). Cho's commentary suggested that 
there have been opportunities to both improve and detract from 
improving public health in the time of COVID-19 with a lens on 
climate change. Areas of concern included plans to withdraw from 
the Paris Climate Accord of 2015, delays in international negotia-
tions regarding climate change and the planned climate meeting of 
November 2020, deforestation in the Amazon accelerating during 
the pandemic, weakening of climate policies in the US and rollback 
of US measures. Additional areas of concern identified by Cho are 
disruption of science research during the pandemic, less fund-
ing for climate resilience and renewable energy, and an increase 
in use of plastic to prevent spread of COVID-19. However, Cho 
notes that there are areas of improvement amidst COVID-19 that 
may positively impact public health including a green recovery in 
other countries with funding for renewable energy sources, more 
biking and walking as a COVID/climate change co-benefit, less in-
ternational travel since transportation represents 23% off global 
    |  323
ZANG et al.
carbon emissions and 11% reduction by aviation (Cho, 2020). It is 
important to note that the pandemic has led to simpler living and 
increased engagement of many in the important role of science in 
both public health and pandemic response.
Wu et al. (2020) at the Harvard School of Public Health also sug-
gested that air quality may impact severity of illness in COVID-19. 
They found that long-term exposure to fine particulate matter has 
been associated with a 15% increase in the COVID-19 death rate, 
even after controlling for other health conditions. Although this 
study did not explicitly link air quality with climate change, further 
research is needed on this important linkage. In the United States, 
we have also seen significantly higher rates of COVID rates and 
COVID morbidity and mortality among Blacks and Hispanics (Price-
Haywood et al., 2020). Racial and ethnic minorities are more likely 
to reside in communities with higher rates of pollution and particu-
late matter (Mikati et al., 2018). The high rate of COVID mortality in 
these communities has been attributed to pre-existing conditions 
including respiratory illness and poor access to high quality care, 
but it does appear that climate change may also play a role in the 
etiology of poor air quality and increasing these disparities.
Manzanedo and Manning (2020) analyzed the intersection of 
COVID-19 and the urgent climate crisis addressing the unique areas 
of overlap and differences between the two crises and the key les-
sons that can be learned. These lessons include “high momentum 
trends; irreversible changes; social and spatial inequality; weakening 
of international solidarity, and less costly to prevent than to cure” (p. 
1). Notably, they view one critical difference: since the COVID-
19 pandemic emerged rapidly while the climate crisis has had a 
decades-long emergence with a looming crisis by 2030 if urgent 
action is not taken. Regarding lessons of COVID-19 and climate 
change, high momentum trends also identified as time lags refer to 
the delayed response to the pandemic and to climate change sci-
ence. The authors noted that ignoring calls to action are costlier in 
the long run. Irreversible changes are pressing for the climate crisis 
since unless greenhouse gases are reduced, there will be planetary 
changes that are irreparable with significant damage that may neg-
atively impact health. Social and spatial inequality refers to aspects 
of social determinants of health including poverty, inequity be-
tween wealthy and poor nations, lack of access to care by many of 
the world's people, and increased risk by race/ethnicity for black/
brown populations. This is significant for both COVID-19 whereby 
African-American and Hispanic populations are disproportionately 
affected by the pandemic in the US and have significantly poorer 
outcomes (Azar et  al.,  2020). The weakening of international soli-
darity since the Paris Agreement and the US withdrawal from the 
treaty is another key area of international weakening in the global 
commitment to address climate change. The fact that both the pan-
demic and climate change are less costly to prevent rather than 
to cure is a significant outcome of both challenges that we face. 
As Kerry (2020) wrote “climate change and COVID-19….[are] truly 
the tale of two pandemics deferred, denied, and distorted, one 
with catastrophic consequences [COVID-19], the other with even 
greater risk if we don't reverse course [climate change]” (p. A8).
3 | METHODS
A search for peer-reviewed, English language, literature published 
in the scientific literature since the pandemic emerged in 2020 was 
developed using the following databases: Cumulative Index for 
Nursing and Allied Health (CINAHL), Pubmed, and the Cochrane 
Library. Search terms used were “climate change,” “global warming,” 
“pandemic,” “SARS-CoV-2,” and “COVID-19.” Only articles published 
during 2020 were included since the COVID-19 epidemic globally 
emerged in late 2019 with the eruption of the pandemic in January 
to February 2020. In the initial review process, article titles and 
abstracts were reviewed for relevance for inclusion. Subsequently 
full text of the initial review was conducted by two authors to de-
termine relevance based on the inclusion criteria. Exclusion criteria 
were aimed at limiting any articles that did not address COVID-19 
and its intersection with climate change. The review of articles was 
conducted with literature published between January 2020 and 
June 2020. These articles represented the early emerging literature 
of the intersection of COVID-19 and climate change. Two reviewers 
conducted independent full text article reviews and inclusion was 
determined based on the question: What does the literature indicate 
regarding the intersection of COVID-19 and climate change? Each 
reviewer determined themes independently and subsequently con-
sulted on final emergent themes. The article selection process is pre-
sented in the Preferred Reporting Items of Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram (Figure 1) and the PRISMA 
Scoping Review Checklist for Quality Assessment (Figure 2) to sup-
port the inclusion of the 22 articles of which 21 were discussion 
papers or commentaries and only one was a research-based paper.
4 | FINDINGS
The results of this integrative review represent the key insights, find-
ings, and themes from the selected articles, as detailed in Table 1. 
Five themes, based on two independent reviews, emerged from 
the papers that were selected for inclusion: role of public health in 
COVID-19 and climate change efforts; global approach addressing 
human-environmental issues; COVID-19 and climate change from a 
community and global health perspective; environmental impacts of 
COVID-19 and climate change and built environment; and profes-
sional associations’ and specialty organizations’ views and responsi-
bilities with a lens on COVID-19 and climate change.
5 | THEME 1: ROLE OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN 
COVID-19 AND CLIMATE CHANGE EFFORTS
There are important implications for addressing public health with the 
intersection of COVID-19 and climate change. Since the early influence 
of Florence Nightingale as we celebrate the 200th year of her birth in 
2020, the environment has been critically important in public health. 
Nightingale's nursing philosophy and pioneering efforts were steeped 
324  |    
ZANG et al.
in environmental nursing principles which are as relevant in the 21st 
century as when she first launched her prescient ideas. Further the 
2020 State of the Science Congress on Nursing Research meeting of 
the American Academy of Nursing focused on The Environment's Impact 
On Health, with relevance for Nightingale's environmental principles 
and the challenges of climate change and health. Not since the 1918–
1919 influenza pandemic—widely known as the Spanish flu, has the 
intersection of environment and health been viewed as so profound. It 
is interesting to note that the COVID-19 pandemic emerged during the 
Year of the Nurse 2020, a celebration of Florence Nightingale and her 
contributions to nursing and public health. Nightingale's contributions 
to addressing clean air, water, and light also offer unique contributions 
unlike any pandemic witnessed in over 100 years. This requires that 
public health professionals and climate change advocates address this 
complex situation with the intersection of climate change and associ-
ated deleterious health consequences.
It is clear that the threat-amplifying effects of the intersection 
of COVID-19 and climate change require a cohesive, coordinated, 
and comprehensive response from public health professionals and 
particularly public health nurses who are at the forefront of care. 
The response to COVID-19 demonstrates that a comprehensive ap-
proach that is embodied in the principles of public health practice is 
key. This pandemic response has resulted in grave concerns about 
the possibilities of a pandemic response intersecting with a climate 
change emergency (Catton, 2020). Disasters that are occurring due 
to greenhouse gas emissions such as air quality issues, hurricanes, 
flooding, wildfires, heat stress, and heat stroke due to increasing am-
bient temperatures, and increased vector-borne illnesses should be 
considered amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. Although greenhouse 
gas emissions have decreased during the COVID-19 pandemic, it is 
important to consider resurgence of these emissions post COVID-19 
that are likely to occur globally.
One article by Benjamin (2020) supported this theme and offered 
a recent opinion and analysis. As current president of the American 
Public Health Association, Benjamin noted that the recent COVID-
19 pandemic has not only stressed public health systems in coun-
tries globally, but also has further uncovered gaps in health care for 
those deeply affected by poorer social determinants of health. It is 
important to note that both COVID-19 and climate change dispro-
portionately affect disadvantaged populations with climate change 
affecting those who least contribute to greenhouse gas emissions. 
Benjamin noted: “tragically, underserved and vulnerable populations 
are being disproportionately affected, just as they are by most health 
threats” (p. 3). Healthy People 2020 (Centers for Disease Control & 
Prevention [CDC], 2020) adopted the view of the social determinants 
of health in five domains that include economic stability, education, 
health and health care, neighborhood and built environment, and so-
cial and community context. The social determinants of health have 
broadly included race/ethnicity; however the concepts of racism 
and structural/systemic racism were identified and linked due to the 
overwhelming deleterious impacts on health in COVID-19 and health 
impacts of climate change as noted in Benjamin's (2020) commentary.
FI G U R E 1 PRISMA 2009 flow 
diagram for review of the intersection 
of COVID-19 and climate change [Color 
figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.
com]
Records idenﬁed through 
database searching 
(n =60) 
Screening 
Included 
Eligibility 
n
oit
a
cifit
n
e
d
I
 
Addional records idenﬁed 
through other sources 
(n = 1) 
Records aer duplicates removed 
(n = 60) 
Records screened 
(n = 58) 
Records excluded 
(n = 2) 
Full-text arcles assessed 
for eligibility 
(n = 58) 
Full-text arcles excluded, 
with reasons: No clear 
explicaon of COVID-19 
and Climate Change (n = 
36)  
Studies included as 
Discussion/Commentaries 
Review/Commentaries/ 
Research (n=22) 
(one research paper) 
Final Papers Included in 
Review 
(n = 22) 
    |  325
ZANG et al.
FI G U R E 2 Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR) checklist: 
climate change in the era of COVID-19 [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
SECTION 
ITEM 
PRISMA-ScR CHECKLIST ITEM 
REPORTED ON PAGE # 
TITLE 
Title 
1 
Identify the report as a scoping 
review. 
Integrative review identified in 
Introduction on page 2. 
ABSTRACT 
Structured 
summary 
2 
Provide a structured summary 
that includes (as applicable): 
background, objectives, eligibility 
criteria, sources of evidence, 
charting methods, results, and 
conclusions that relate to the 
review questions and objectives. 
Structured summary provided in 
Abstract on page 1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Rationale 
3 
Describe the rationale for the 
review in the context of what is 
already known. Explain why the 
review questions/objectives lend 
themselves to a scoping review 
approach. 
Rationale described in Introduction and 
why climate change and COVID-19 
should be explored in this review on 
pages 2-3. 
Objectives 
4 
Provide an explicit statement of 
the questions and objectives 
being addressed with reference to 
their key elements (e.g., 
population or participants, 
concepts, and context) or other 
relevant key elements used to 
conceptualize the review 
questions and/or objectives. 
Purpose statement and objectives 
described in Introduction and key 
elements on pages 2 to 3. 
METHODS 
Protocol and 
registration 
5 
Indicate whether a review 
protocol exists; state if and where 
it can be accessed (e.g., a Web 
address); and if available, provide 
registration information, including 
the registration number. 
No review protocol or registration 
exists. Only the approach to the 
literature review and library search on 
page 7. 
Eligibility criteria 
6 
Specify characteristics of the 
sources of evidence used as 
eligibility criteria (e.g., years 
considered, language, and 
publication status), and provide a 
rationale. 
Sources of evidence and characteristics 
of the search are addressed in Methods 
including Cumulative Index for Nursing 
and Allied Health (CINAHL), Pubmed, 
and the Cochrane Library. Search 
terms used were “climate change”, 
“global warming”, “pandemic”, “SARS-
CoV-2”, and “COVID-19”. Only articles 
published during 2020 were included 
since the COVID-19 epidemic globally 
emerged in late 2019 with the eruption 
of the pandemic in January to February 
2020. See page 7. 
Information 
sources* 
7 
Describe all information sources 
in the search (e.g., databases 
with dates of coverage and 
Cumulative Index for Nursing and Allied 
Health (CINAHL), Pubmed, and the 
Cochrane Library. Search terms used 
326  |    
ZANG et al.
SECTION 
ITEM 
PRISMA-ScR CHECKLIST ITEM 
REPORTED ON PAGE # 
contact with authors to identify 
additional sources), as well as the 
date the most recent search was 
executed. 
were “climate change”, “global 
warming”, “pandemic”, “SARS-CoV-2”, 
and “COVID-19”. Only articles 
published during 2020 were included 
since the COVID-19 epidemic globally 
emerged in late 2019 with the eruption 
of the pandemic in January to February 
2020. See page 7. 
Search 
8 
Present the full electronic search 
strategy for at least 1 database, 
including any limits used, such 
that it could be repeated. 
Cumulative Index for Nursing and Allied 
Health (CINAHL), Pubmed, and the 
Cochrane Library. Search terms used 
were “climate change”, “global 
warming”, “pandemic”, “SARS-CoV-2”, 
and “COVID-19”. Only articles 
published during 2020 were included 
since the COVID-19 epidemic globally 
emerged in late 2019 with the eruption 
of the pandemic in January to February 
2020. See page 7. 
Selection of 
sources of 
evidence† 
9 
State the process for selecting 
sources of evidence (i.e., 
screening and eligibility) included 
in the scoping review. 
In the initial review process, article titles 
and abstracts were reviewed for 
relevance for inclusion. Subsequently 
full text of the initial review was 
conducted by two authors to determine 
relevance based on the inclusion 
criteria. Exclusion criteria were aimed at 
limiting any articles that did not address 
COVID-19 and its intersection with 
climate change. The final sample of 
articles represented 22 papers yielded 
in our search from January 2020 
through June 2020 that addressed the 
intersection of COVID-19 and climate 
change. Sixty articles emerged in the 
original search of the intersection of the 
COVID pandemic and climate change 
with 22 articles determined for inclusion 
in this paper. Two reviewers conducted 
the full article reviews. See page 7. 
Data charting 
process‡ 
10 
Describe the methods of charting 
data from the included sources of 
evidence (e.g., calibrated forms or 
forms that have been tested by 
the team before their use, and 
whether data charting was done 
independently or in duplicate) and 
any processes for obtaining and 
confirming data from 
investigators. 
Data were independently reviewed by 
two reviewers and charted and then 
sources of evidence independently 
conducted the full article reviews and 
concurred on findings. Page 8. 
Data items 
11 
List and define all variables for 
which data were sought and any 
assumptions and simplifications 
made. 
Search terms used were “climate 
change”, “global warming”, “pandemic”, 
“SARS-CoV-2”, and “COVID-19”. Page 
7. 
Critical 
appraisal of 
12 
If done, provide a rationale for 
conducting a critical appraisal of 
Critical appraisal was accomplished of 
the individual sources of evidence by 
FI G U R E 2 (Continued)
    |  327
ZANG et al.
SECTION 
ITEM 
PRISMA-ScR CHECKLIST ITEM 
REPORTED ON PAGE # 
individual 
sources of 
evidence 
included sources of evidence; 
describe the methods used and 
how this information was used in 
any data synthesis (if 
appropriate). 
two reviewers. Most papers were 
commentaries or discussion papers. 
Discussed in the Findings section on 
page 8. 
Synthesis of 
results 
13 
Describe the methods of handling 
and summarizing the data that 
were charted. 
Data are synthesized in Results 
Summary Table and Themes are 
described in the Findings. In Table 1. 
RESULTS 
Selection of 
sources of 
evidence 
14 
Give numbers of sources of 
evidence screened, assessed for 
eligibility, and included in the 
review, with reasons for 
exclusions at each stage, ideally 
using a flow diagram. 
PRISMA diagram illustrates 
included/excluded articles. In Figure 1. 
Characteristics 
of sources of 
evidence 
15 
For each source of evidence, 
present characteristics for which 
data were charted and provide 
the citations. 
PRISMA diagram and Findings indicate 
sources of evidence and citations. Page 
8 and Figure 1. 
Critical 
appraisal within 
sources of 
evidence 
16 
If done, present data on critical 
appraisal of included sources of 
evidence (see item 12). 
N/A since most of the n=22 papers are 
discussion/commentary papers. 
Results of 
individual 
sources of 
evidence 
17 
For each included source of 
evidence, present the relevant 
data that were charted that relate 
to the review questions and 
objectives. 
N/A 
Synthesis of 
results 
18 
Summarize and/or present the 
charting results as they relate to 
the review questions and 
objectives. 
Synthesis of results are presented in 
Findings beginning on page 8. 
DISCUSSION 
Summary of 
evidence 
19 
Summarize the main results 
(including an overview of 
concepts, themes, and types of 
evidence available), link to the 
review questions and objectives, 
and consider the relevance to key 
groups. 
Discussion section links the themes 
with the purpose of this integrative 
review. See page 16. 
Limitations 
20 
Discuss the limitations of the 
scoping review process. 
Limitations are explicitly addressed in 
the Conclusions section. See pages 19-
20. 
Conclusions 
21 
Provide a general interpretation of 
the results with respect to the 
review questions and objectives, 
as well as potential implications 
and/or next steps. 
Conclusions section addresses the 
review question and implications for 
future scholarship and research. See 
page 20. 
FUNDING 
Funding 
22 
Describe sources of funding for the 
included sources of evidence,as well 
as sources of funding for the 
scoping review. Describe the role 
No funding sources to report. On Title 
Page. 
of the funders of the scoping review. 
FI G U R E 2 (Continued)
328  |    
ZANG et al.
TA B LE 1 Results summary
Author, date, discipline
Evidence type
Theme
Findings
Amuasi, J. H., Lucas, T., Horton, 
R., Winkler, A. S., 2020, Public 
Health
Commentary/
Perspective
Intersection of climate change and 
COVID−19 from community and 
global experience
The Lancet One Health Commission 
addressed the shared environment and the 
importance of the animal-environment-
human interface in our climate-changing 
world.
Armitage, R., Nellums, L. B., 
2020, Public Health
Commentary/
Correspondence
Intersection of climate change and 
COVID−19 from community and 
global experience
Access to water is critical particularly for 
handwashing, with special needs for water-
stressed settings.
Bell, D., Aronoff-Spencer, E., 
2020, Global Public Health
Commentary/
Perspective
Global approach addressing human-
environment issues
There is a need to reframe global 
health to consider emerging infectious 
diseases with the understanding of the 
interconnectedness of the world's people.
Benjamin, G., 2020, Public 
Health
Commentary/
Analysis
Role of Public Health in COVID−19 and 
Climate Change Efforts
The practice environment for public health 
is key as is addressing social determinants 
of health and a strong public health 
infrastructure.
Catton, H., 2020, Nursing
Commentary/
Perspective
Role of Public Health in COVID−19 and 
Climate Change Efforts
The pandemic represents a public health 
emergency of international concern and 
the World Health Organization and the 
International Council of Nurses are engaged 
in addressing this global health challenge.
Coates, S., Andersen, L. K., 
& Boos, 2020, Professional 
association role in COVID−19 
and climate
Commentary
Professional associations and specialty 
organizations addressing COVID−19 
and climate change
This paper addresses the critical importance 
of balancing public health and lessons 
from climate inaction from the lens of 
the International Society of Dermatology 
Climate Change Committee.
Goyman, W., 2020, Biodiversity, 
climate, and human activity
Commentary/
Editorial
COVID−19, climate change, and 
environment
The COVID−19 pandemic, climate change 
and the crisis of biodiversity offer 
opportunities for lessons regarding our 
global efforts against COVID and climate 
change.
Haines, A., Falceto de Barros, 
E., Berlin, A, Heymann, D. I., 
& Harris, M. J., 2020, Public 
Health/Community Health
Commentary/
Perspective
Intersection of climate change and 
COVID−19 from community and 
global experience
The authors urge that a national program of 
community health workers be developed 
for a UK program of community health 
workers to address COVID−19 in our 
climate-changing world.
Helm, D., 2020, Environment 
and Economics
Discussion paper
COVID−19, climate change, and 
environment
COVID−19 environmental impacts should be 
addressed in our climate-changing world. 
These authors address five questions: 
short-term impacts of emissions, natural 
environmental and environmental 
policy, longer-term consequences from 
deployment of monetary and fiscal stimuli, 
and consequences from deployment of 
stimuli. In addition, there is investment in 
green deals, possible further deglobalization 
and its impact on climate change, 
intergenerational impacts, and behavioral 
changes which may be positive or negative 
on the environment.
Herrero, M., Thornton, P., 2020, 
Public Health
Commentary/
Correspondence
Intersection of climate change and 
COVID−19 from community and 
global experience
COVID−19 presents lessons about 
responding to climate change and 
behavioral responses to global challenges 
are required.
(Continues)
    |  329
ZANG et al.
Author, date, discipline
Evidence type
Theme
Findings
Jin, S., 2020, COVID−19 and 
Environment
Commentary
Global approach addressing human
This editorial reports on the key lessons 
from their work including: We are all in this 
together; we must act now before it is too 
late; science and facts matter; innovation is 
key; international collaboration is key; and 
respect of our environment and planetary 
health is critical.
Jowell, A., & Barry, M., 2020, 
Medicine, Global Health
Commentary/
Perspective
Global approach addressing human-
environment issues
Societies must adopt a “planetary health 
lens” to engage in pandemic response.
Li, Li, Huang, Wang, Zhu, Zu 
et al., 2020, Biodiversity, 
climate, and human activity
Quantitative 
modeling of air 
quality during 
COVID−19 
lockdown in 
China
COVID−19, climate change, and 
environment
Although the COVID−19 pandemic has 
limited greenhouse gas emissions and 
air pollution, there is a need to address 
reductions in air pollution and industrial 
strategy to have a comprehensive air 
pollution plan.
Lorentzen, H. F., Benfield, T., 
Stisen, S., & Rahbek, C., 2020, 
Medicine
Commentary/
Correspondence
Global approach addressing human-
environment issues
The United Nations Climate Conference 
(COP 25) focused on urgently needed 
climate adaptations. With the emergence of 
the COVID−19 pandemic, it is essential to 
address anthropogenic biodiversity.
Manzanedo & Manning, 2020, 
Climate change and 
environment
Discussion paper
Global approach addressing human-
environment issues
These authors examine the intersection of 
COVID−19 and the urgent climate crisis 
addressing the unique areas of overlap 
and differences between the two crises 
and the key lessons that can be learned. 
These lessons include “high momentum 
trends; irreversible changes; social and 
spatial inequality; weakening of international 
solidarity, and less costly to prevent than to 
cure” (p. 1).
Morrison, L., 2020, Lessons from 
former executive secretary 
UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change
Commentary/
Viewpoint
Professional associations and specialty 
organizations addressing COVID−19 
and climate change
Morrison examines the lessons from the 
former executive secretary of the UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change 
and that five major lessons are apparent.
O’Reilly, K. M., Auzenbergs, M., 
Jafari, Y., Liu, Y., Flasche, S., & 
Lowe, R., 2020, Public Health
Commentary
Intersection of climate change and 
COVID−19 from community and 
global experience
Effective transmission of COVID−19 may 
be related to climate and requires further 
investigation.
Patruno, C., Nistico, S., 
Fabbrocini, G., Napolitano, M., 
2020, Dermatology, climate 
change, and COVID−19
Commentary
Professional associations and specialty 
organizations addressing COVID−19 
and climate change
Patruno and colleagues examine whether 
climate change is the next pandemic for 
dermatology with lessons from COVID−19.
Rosenbloom, D., & Markard, J., 
2020, Public Health, Global 
Health
Commentary/
Editorial
Global approach addressing human-
environment issues
COVID−19 may represent an opportunity to 
mitigate health and other challenges related 
to climate change.
Rutz, Loretto, Bates, Davidson, 
Duarte, Jetz et al., 2020, 
Biodiversity, climate change 
and human activity
Commentary
COVID−19, climate change, and 
environment
These authors note that the COVID−19 
quarantine/lockdown offers opportunities 
for researchers and scholars to examine 
human activity and planetary health.
Schwartz, S. A., 2020, 
Environmental Health/Public 
Health
Discussion Paper
Intersection of climate change and 
COVID−19 from community and 
global experience
In our global world, we are poorly prepared 
for pandemic outbreaks and with climate 
change migration, there are complex 
challenges ahead.
TA B LE 1 (Continued)
(Continues)
330  |    
ZANG et al.
A second discussion paper by Catton (2020) identified pan-na-
tional challenges such as COVID-19 and potentially other emerging 
infectious diseases and pandemics in our warming planet. He noted 
the critical message of the International Council of Nurses’ position 
statement on Nurses, Climate Change, and Health which addressed 
the role of nurses globally in engaging in the critical public health 
issues that have emerged due to climate change. In addressing the 
emergent nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and its intersection 
with public health and climate change, Catton (2020) suggested 
that the next decades of the 21st century have looming geopoliti-
cal and environmental challenges that affect public health systems, 
health care infrastructure, and the nursing workforce.
6 | THEME 2: GLOBAL APPROACH 
ADDRESSING HUMAN-ENVIRONMENTAL 
ISSUES
Several articles noted that there is an important role for under-
standing the intersection of planetary health and the human-envi-
ronment relationship. Jowel and Barry (2020) suggested that there 
are interconnected elements between health and environmental 
systems that should be viewed from a planetary health perspec-
tive. Their perspective aimed to address the encroachment of hu-
mans on natural systems and the impact of climate change on the 
emergence of pandemic diseases in the era of COVID-19. Further 
they identified key aspects of a planetary health approach that 
focused not only on specific nations but addressing cross-national 
borders. Further, Jowell and Barry (2020) suggested that:
COVID-19 is not the first example of an emerging 
zoonotic infection that has devastating impacts on 
global human health. In recent decades, humans have 
altered surrounding habitats and increased deforesta-
tion to make room for growing populations, extract 
natural resources, and build farms (p. 1).
They conclude that close human-environment habitats related 
to shifts in land use and forestry, increases in populations and pop-
ulation density are potentially lethal conduits for future pandemics.
Bell and Aronoff-Spencer (2020) offered their commentary re-
garding global health in the pandemic era. They addressed the im-
portance of nongovernmental organizations, multilateral institutions, 
and engaging a fully global view to engage to address the challenges 
of COVID-19. Furthermore, they examined how climate change, social 
unrest, emerging pandemics such as COVID-19 may impact health 
threats and global health funding and capacity. They suggested that:
the current novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pan-
demic underlines the interconnectedness of health 
globally and the risks to all of us of maintaining inequal-
ities in health capacity and infrastructure (p. 1,175).
Lorentzen and colleagues offered their views on COVID-19 as a con-
sequence of a biodiversity crisis related to climate change (Lorentzen 
et al., 2020). With habitat destruction and climate change, they suggested 
that the biodiversity crisis will accelerate as the main driver of our current 
and future emerging pandemics. They also noted that the emergence of 
COVID-19 may be only the beginning of the emergence of novel corona-
viruses and other infectious diseases that will affect humans, livestock, 
birds, marine life, and other organisms in the 21st century.
Furthermore, as Rosenbloom and Markard (2020) suggested 
regarding the intersection of climate change and COVID-19 from a 
planetary health perspective: 
we are witnessing how worldwide lockdowns have 
decreased air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions 
because of reduced transportation, electricity gener-
ation, and industrial production. This shows how in-
tertwined modern economic life and fossil fuels have 
become, and suggests consideration of climate impli-
cations in economic recovery plans (p. 447).
7 | THEME 3: COVID-19 AND CLIMATE 
CHANGE FROM A COMMUNITY AND 
GLOBAL HEALTH PERSPECTIVE
Theme 3 offers a unique lens on COVID-19 and climate change from 
a community and global health perspective that differs from other 
themes in that the discussion papers focus on global responses in-
cluding from the World Health Organization and offering unique 
global perspectives. This theme also focuses on suggested interven-
tions to address community and global emergencies and emergency 
workforce approaches through community health approaches. 
Haines, Falceto de Barros, Berlin, Heymann, and Harris (2020) dis-
cussed the importance of community health workers in COVID-19 
response. Their commentary proposed a large scale emergency 
program to engage community health workers for care of vulner-
able populations in the UK based on the World Health Organization 
Author, date, discipline
Evidence type
Theme
Findings
Shankar, H. M., Ewart, G., 
Garcia, E., Hicks, A., & Hardie, 
W., 2020, American Thoracic 
Society, COVID−19, and climate 
change
Discussion paper
Professional associations and specialty 
organizations addressing COVID−19 
and climate change
The American Thoracic Society presents a 
position statement on COVID−19, climate 
change, and shared responsibility of their 
professional organization related to COVID 
and climate change.
TA B LE 1 (Continued)
    |  331
ZANG et al.
response and suggested that “young people in the range of 
18–30 years deemed at lower risk of acquiring serious consequences 
from the pandemic exposure should offer a coordinated community 
workforce in the pandemic” (p. 1,174). Armitage and Nellums (2020) 
focused on the importance of water in the era of climate change and 
COVID-19 and examined the importance of access to fresh water 
for regular handwashing during the pandemic. They further urged 
that fresh water be provided free of cost to engage populations in 
hygiene recommendations and to limit spread of COVID-19. As they 
suggested, access to water is inextricably linked with climate change 
and integrally related to limiting the spread of the current pandemic.
A commentary by Herrero and Thornton (2020) inquired: “What 
can COVID-19 teach us about responding to climate change?” (p. e174). 
Their most important lesson is that investment in behavioral responses 
such as social distancing and engagement of governments, businesses, 
and resource mobilization can be achieved and may limit the spread of 
the pandemic. They noted that “governments have found $8 trillion 
to help combat the spread and effects of COVID-19 in just 10 weeks” 
(p. e174) and that these same aggressive measures should be applied 
with the same urgency to climate change. O’Reilly et al. (2020) ex-
amined the transmission across the globe and the role of climate in 
mitigation of the current pandemic. They discussed the importance of 
future studies on climate variability, air pollution, heat and humidity 
in the incidence, susceptibility, and surveillance of COVID-19 related 
disease. Further Amuasi and colleagues (2020) examined the inter-
connection of The Lancet One Health Commission with climate change 
and COVID-19. They also suggested a linkage with the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals and the approach of the One Lancet 
Health Commission which includes the animal—environment—human 
interface. Their goal is to enhance health within an environment shared 
by humans and animals in our climate-changing world. Schwartz (2020) 
urged greater preparedness and consciousness about climate change 
and COVID-19 and the need for understanding of what climate change 
migration will bring to the landscape of current and future pandemics. 
Rosenbloom and Markard (2020) offered a lens on COVID-19 recovery 
for our struggling climate and planet. One outcome may be that there 
are opportunities to catalyze change on climate change for communi-
ties, nations, and globally as we address the COVID-19 pandemic.
8 | THEME 4: COVID-19 AND CLIMATE 
CHANGE AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Environmental impacts of COVID-19 and climate change are another 
theme that emerged in this review. Helm (2020) addressed the im-
pacts of the pandemic virus and suggested an agenda for research. 
The agenda included five sets of questions: examining the short-
term impacts on emissions, the natural environment, and the need 
to address environmental policies; the importance of the 26th UN 
Climate Change Conference of the Parties (COP 26); long term con-
sequences of the financial impact of climate change and COVID-19; 
investment in green opportunities and legislation; deglobalization re-
lated to climate change and pandemics; debt and burden of pollution 
on future generations; and positive and negative behavioral changes 
related to the pandemic and climate change (Helm, 2020).
Keenan (2020) focused on resilience and the built environment in 
the era of COVID-19 and our climate-changing world. The physical and 
social environment in which individuals, communities, and populations 
reside in the 21st century in the midst of the current pandemic and 
climate change are important to examine. Their recommendations are 
that current COVID-19 responses yield important efforts for future 
resilience designs in the built environment as well as frameworks and 
practices to address community health amidst climate change with 
lessons learned. Jin (2020) described the importance of renewable 
energy research to address the intersection of climate change and 
COVID-19. The focus was on a message of we are all in this together and 
the time to act is now. Jin noted that “a pandemic and climate change 
are both existential challenges facing the whole human race who share 
this planet together. Neither Coronavirus nor climate see country bor-
ders” (p. 1709). Other key messages offered by Jin are that it is essential 
to act now before it is too late; that science and facts matter; that interna-
tional collaboration is critical; and we must respect mother nature.
Goymann (2020) discussed the COVID-19 pandemic and its 
intersection with climate change and the biodiversity crisis, thus 
fitting with Theme 3 on climate change and the environment; how-
ever Goymann's commentary also overlaps with Theme 2—Global 
Approach Addressing Human-Environmental Issues. The commentaries 
by Helm (2020) and Goymann (2020) are two examples that offer 
key themes that also overlap with other themes.
Goymann (2020) suggested that the pandemic offers opportuni-
ties for governments across the globe to address the urgent challenges 
and to listen to scientists to address carbon emissions to eliminate bio-
diversity loss. Similarly, Rutz and colleagues describe the opportunities 
for researchers to examine the impacts of COVID-19, climate change, 
and the effects of human activity. They described the great pause 
during the COVID-19 pandemic and critical importance of engaging in 
climate change action. In the sole research article found in this inte-
grative review of the intersection of climate change and COVID-19, Li 
and colleagues (2020) studied air quality changes during the COVID-19 
lockdown in the Yangtze River Delta Region of China. They offered in-
sight into the impact of human activity and air pollution and suggested 
that national lockdown policies in China resulted in significantly re-
duced air pollutant emissions with improved air quality. Furthermore, 
they found that human activities—which contribute to greenhouse gas 
emissions and air pollution—were limited with a resulting improvement 
in climate change related impacts such as air quality.
9 | THEME 5: PROFESSIONAL 
ASSOCIATIONS’ AND SPECIALTY 
ORGANIZATIONS’ VIEWS AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES WITH A LENS ON 
COVID-19 AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Although relatively few professional associations and specialty or-
ganizations have addressed the intersection of climate change and 
332  |    
ZANG et al.
COVID-19, Coates and colleagues (2020) examined the critical role 
of advancing public health and climate action from the perspective of 
the International Society of Dermatology's Climate Action Committee. 
They urged a wake-up call for the convergence of climate change and 
COVID-19 and meaningful action for both of these global health cri-
ses. The American Thoracic Society (ATS) discussed the importance of 
shared responsibility in engaging in action to confront COVID-19 and 
climate change (Shankar et al., 2020). The primary focus was on air 
travel and its impact on the environment and as a reservoir of COVID-
19 infection. Their position statement was aimed at urging individuals 
to fly less, fly more efficiently, purchase carbon offsets, and address 
other sources of waste at conference attendance. As a society aimed 
at addressing lung health, the ATS’s commentary was a critical view-
point on opportunities to address our current pandemic and an urgent 
climate change agenda. Furthermore, Morrison (2020) also urged that 
general practitioners examine the importance of COVID-19 in our 
climate-changing world. Morrison's lens was based on an understand-
ing of health and social inequalities during the current pandemic; the 
author also suggested that there is a need for progressive and compre-
hensive actions to assure health equity in pandemics and amidst climate 
change. The findings of Morrison (2020) fit within this theme of the role 
of professional organizations, but also overlap with Theme 2 Global 
Approach Addressing Human-Environmental Issues. Finally, Patruno 
and colleagues (2020) offered a commentary regarding the intersection 
of climate change, COVID-19 and dermatology. They suggested that 
telehealth has emerged as a key way to provided health care to reduce 
contacts and discussed the influence climate change has on dermato-
logical conditions such as cancer in our climate-changing world.
10 | DISCUSSION
The themes that emerged from this integrative review of the inter-
section of COVID-19 and climate change suggested that public health 
professionals—including public health nurses have important roles 
in addressing the current pandemic and the climate change-related 
health consequences that are already occurring. Further the second 
theme and the literature that supported this theme indicated that 
there is a global role for addressing human-environment challenges. 
The third theme offered a lens on both a community and a global 
perspective on COVID-19 and climate change. Theme four supported 
the environmental impacts that uniquely occur due to both COVID-
19 and climate change health consequences, which included a focus 
on the built environment. Finally, the fifth theme addressed the roles 
of professional associations’ and specialty associations’ views and re-
sponsibilities with a lens on COVID-19 and climate change.
11 | PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING IN THE 
ERA OF COVID-19 AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Public health nurses have unique and essential roles in addressing 
COVID-19 and the urgent challenge of climate changes. There are 
important nursing roles in clinical practice integrating climate change 
knowledge in the assessment and care of individuals, families, com-
munities, and populations. It is critical to educate all those whom 
for whom public health nurses provide care, however there are key 
distinctions in that vulnerable and marginalized populations are dis-
proportionately affected by morbidity and mortality in the COVID-
19 pandemic. Thus it is essential for public health nurses to educate 
those whom they serve regarding the acute and chronic impacts of 
climate change amidst the COVID-19 pandemic; this is critical due to 
the complex intersection of overlapping health challenges that may 
occur in our current crisis. Furthermore, vulnerable and marginalized 
populations are also disproportionately affected by the deleterious 
consequences of climate change. Exposure to poor air with associated 
respiratory challenges such as asthma leads to higher morbidity and 
mortality, particularly in pediatric populations and those with co-mor-
bid chronic illnesses. Sharing public health knowledge with individu-
als, families, communities, and populations about the emergence of 
pandemics, the intersection with climate change, and that infectious 
diseases are more likely to emerge in our climate-changing world are 
key roles for public health nurses.
Education of public health nurses to address pandemic care and 
response in the era of climate change is essential in the pre-licen-
sure, graduate, and doctoral levels of education. Health profession-
als also require ongoing continuing education about the emergence 
of pandemics, the care of patients, and the education of individuals, 
families, communities, and populations. There are enormous chal-
lenges that we face in addressing health of the world's people as nat-
ural habitats are destroyed and wildlife encroaches on areas where 
populations reside. Education is key in addressing the health chal-
lenges confronted related to pandemics such as COVID-19 in our 
climate-changing world.
Policy and advocacy efforts are among the most essential areas 
where public health nurses can engage in addressing pandemics and 
climate change in the 21st century. Working with local, state, and 
national legislatures and governing bodies are important venues to 
bring concerns about climate change and its intersection with pan-
demic emergence and response. It is important to be aware key ini-
tiatives of global organizations such as the United Nations (UN) since 
they have also promulgated the UN Sustainable Development Goals 
(UN SDGs) which include Goal 13 aimed at Climate Action.
Furthermore, public health nurses’ efforts should also address 
social justice and climate justice, as well as key issues related to 
pandemic preparedness and response. Where do social justice and 
climate justice intersect in the age of COVID-19? The mission of so-
cial justice is integrally tied to the mission of public health (Gostin & 
Powers, 2006). Widely viewed as embedded in public health prac-
tice, social justice—the idea that benefits and burdens should be 
equally distributed within a society—is embedded in the efforts that 
were espoused by Beauchamp (1999) and Powers and Faden (2006). 
The intersection of public health as well as social justice and climate 
justice are key principles for advancing the health of the world's 
people. The World Health Organization's Commission on Social 
Determinants of Health (2008) stated that: “social justice is a matter 
    |  333
ZANG et al.
of life and death. It affects the way people live, their consequent 
chance of illness, and their risk of premature death” (p. 3).
Many of the groups that have been identified as most vulnerable 
to the health impacts of climate change have emerged as being equally 
vulnerable to the most deleterious effects of COVID-19. This overlap 
occurs with certain communities of color, indigenous populations, the 
very young, and older adults as well as people with chronic medical 
and psychiatric illness and those with disabilities (CDC,  2020). The 
same long-standing health inequities and structural inequalities that 
have led vulnerable groups to experience climate injustice are contrib-
uting to higher rates of COVID-19, hospitalization rates, and death par-
ticularly among racial and ethnic minorities (CDC, 2020). For instance, 
as of June 2020, the CDC (2020) reported that age-adjusted hospi-
talization rates were highest among non-Hispanic American Indian or 
Alaska native and non-Hispanic Black persons.
It is important to note that those who are vulnerable, margin-
alized, from communities of color and those living with chronic 
illnesses are among those individuals, families, communities, and 
populations who are most susceptible to infectious diseases such as 
COVID-19 and climate health consequences. Our integrative review 
on COVID-19 and climate change yielded no specific literature to 
date that explicitly focused on the issues of the most vulnerable. 
This finding is complex and unanticipated since recent literature sug-
gests that systemic and structural racism are embedded in the health 
consequences of COVID-19 and climate change. Azar and colleagues 
found that “compared with non-Hispanic white patients, African 
Americans had 2.7 times the odds of hospitalization, after adjusting 
for age, sex, comorbidities, and income” (Azar et al., 2020, p. 1,253). 
In April 2020, the CDC explicitly linked risk factors for COVID-19 to 
include race/ethnicity, age, gender, certain medical conditions, med-
ication use, poverty/crowding, certain occupations, and pregnancy 
(CDC, April 4, 2020). While in July 2020, the journal Health Affairs 
published a paper calling for racism and racial health inequities to 
be explicitly identified in matters of public health (Boyd et al., 2020), 
which certainly includes the public health problems of COVID-19 
and climate-related health consequences. Further they noted that: 
“In short, racism kills. Whether through force, deprivation, or dis-
crimination, it is a fundamental cause of disease and the strange and 
familiar root of racial health inequities.” Waite et al. (2020) discussed 
structural racism and its disenfranchisement of black/brown race 
groups, suggesting that key steps to address racism for health equity 
are critical for health and public health. They offered a call to action 
for governing bodies of the nursing profession and key leadership 
organizations in public health and global organizations to engage in 
policy and advocacy efforts to address social justice in public health 
practice. Waite et  al.  (2020) further suggested that “social justice 
accounts for human dignity, respect, and recognition of longstanding 
oppressions such as racism that have impacted current health sys-
tems and outcomes” (p. 127). Lemery, Williams, and Farmer (2014) 
noted that there are complex disparities and social inequalities re-
lated to health challenges for those who least contribute to green-
house gas emissions, yet are disproportionately affected by the 
negative health outcomes in our climate-changing world.
Finally, Edmonds, Kneipp, and Campbell (2020) offered key con-
siderations for public health nurses to address the pressing issues 
of the COVID-19 era. They argued that there are urgent acute and 
chronic health issues that are paramount during this unprecedented 
pandemic. Edmonds et al. described the key roles of public health 
nurses in investigating case contact searches, education about so-
cial distancing and face covers as key opportunities for minimizing 
COVID spread, and educating the public about guidelines from the 
CDC. Further they noted that public health nurses are experts in re-
sponding to infectious and chronic disease challenges, and offering 
safe, nondiscriminatory care that can successfully address systemic 
and structural racism and challenges that disproportionately affect 
black/brown people in our COVID-19 situation. These same popula-
tions are also disproportionately affecting these populations in our 
climate-changing world. In this review, we supported these views 
and further advocated that public health nursing has an important 
role in linking COVID-19 and the complex health challenges posed 
by the pandemic with the dire health consequences that are inextri-
cably linked with climate change.
12 | CONCLUSIONS
As evidenced by the themes yielded from this review, nursing has 
a global role which requires an urgent response in public health 
challenges locally, regionally, nationally, and internationally. Further 
nursing workforce development globally is poised to expand the role 
of nurses in addressing the current pandemic and future potential 
pandemics. Further education of nurses about these public health 
challenges must be incorporated in formal nursing education pro-
grams as well as continuing education programs. The themes that 
emerged in our review offer opportunities for the future of public 
health nursing; these themes may also further support a framework 
of public health and necessary tenets that are critical in addressing 
the intersection of COVID-19 and climate change. Understanding 
human-environmental impacts are important in the current pan-
demic and offering insight for the emergence of future pandemics 
and the climate crisis. A community and a global perspective are 
integral to engaging in a public health approach to this dual crisis. 
Environmental impacts, including the built environment are impor-
tant for policy and advocacy efforts by public health professionals. 
Professional associations and specialty organizations should fully 
engage in advancing knowledge about the current and possibly fu-
ture pandemics and the emerging current climate crisis and associ-
ated health consequences. Recommendations for future scholarship 
and research should focus on the critical role of public health nursing 
in addressing emerging infectious diseases and potential pandemics 
and further study of health consequences of climate change within 
the lens of public health nursing.
Limitations of this integrative review include the nascent body 
of knowledge of COVID-19 which only recently emerged in 2019 
with viral spread intensifying globally throughout 2020. The rec-
ommendations for prevention of spread of disease and treatment 
334  |    
ZANG et al.
were ambiguous and at times—conflicting—early in the pandemic. 
Emerging knowledge and development of an effective vaccine will 
galvanize our future public health response and amplify current pub-
lic health recommendations aimed at limiting the spread of COVID-
19. Similarly, fostering a unified message and a comprehensive public 
health approach to address the crisis of climate change and associ-
ated health consequences also requires persistence by public health 
nurses in addressing the needs of individuals, families, communities, 
and populations in the face of this complex intersection of COVID-
19 and climate change.
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
The authors report no conflicts of interest.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All data that emerged from this study are available from the corre-
sponding author, Dr. Patrice Nicholas.
ORCID
Suellen Breakey 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9298-2336 
Patrice K. Nicholas 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9519-7587 
REFERENCES
Azar, K. M. J., Shen, Z., Romanelli, R. J., Lockhart, S. H., Smits, K., 
Robinson, S., Brown, S., & Pressman, A. R. (2020). Disparities in out-
comes among COVID-19 patients in a large health care system in 
California. Health Affairs, 39(7), 1–10.
Bale, R. (2020). Trafficked pangolins can carry coronaviruses closely 
related to pandemic strain. Scientific American, 322. Retrieved from 
https://www.natio​nalge​ograp​hic.com/anima​ls/2020/03/pango​lins-
coron​aviru​s-covid​-possi​bilit​y/
Beauchamp, D. E. (1999). Public health as social justice. In D. E. 
Beauchamp & B. Steinbock (Eds.), New Ethics for the Public’s Health 
(pp. 105–114). Oxford University Press.
Benjamin, G. C. (2020). Ensuring health equity during the COVID-19 pan-
demic: The role of public health infrastructure. Pan American Journal 
of Public Health, 44, e70. https://doi.org/10.26633/​RPSP.2020.70
Bernstein, A. (2020). An interview with Dr. Aaron Bernstein at the 
Harvard School of Public Health: Coronavirus and climate change. 
Retrieved from https://www.hsph.harva​rd.edu/c-chang​e/subto​pics/
coron​aviru​s-and-clima​te-chang​e/
Boyd, R. W., Lindo, E. G., Weeks, L. D., & McLemore, M. R. (2020). On 
racism: A new standard for publishing on racial health inequities. 
Health Affairs, Published online July 2, 2020.
Catton, H. (2020). Global challenges in health and health care for nurses 
and midwives everywhere. International Nursing Review, 67(1), 4–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/inr.12578
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). COVID-19 in racial 
and ethnic minority groups. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/
coron​aviru​s/2019-ncov/need-extra​-preca​ution​s/racia​l-ethni​c-minor​
ities.html
Cho, R. (2020). COVID-19 impacts climate change. Retrieved from 
https://blogs.ei.colum​bia.edu/2020/06/25/covid​-19-impac​ts-clima​
te-chang​e/
Coates, S. J., Andersen, L. K., & Boos, M. D. (2020). Balancing public 
health and private wealth: Lessons on climate inaction from the 
COVID-19 pandemic - a report from the International Society of 
Dermatology Climate Change Committee. International Journal of 
Dermatology, 59(7), 869–871. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.14917
Gostin, L. O., & Powers, M. (2006). What does social justice require for 
the public’s health? Public health ethics and policy imperatives. Health 
Affairs, 25(4), 1053–1060. https://doi.org/10.1377/hltha​ff.25.4.1053
Goymann, W. (2020). What the Corona (SARS-CoV 2) pandemic, climate 
change, and the biodiversity crisis teach us about human nature. 
Ethology, 126(6), 593–594. https://doi.org/10.1111/eth.13031
Helm, D. (2020). The environmental impacts of the coronavirus. 
Environmental and Resource Economics, 76, 21–38. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s1064​0-020-00426​-z
Hemida, M. G., & Ba Abduallah, F. (2020). The SARS-CoV-2 outbreak from 
a one health perspective. One Health, 10, https://doi.org/10.1016/​
j.onehlt.2020.100127
Herrero, M., & Thornton, P. (2020). What can COVID-19 teach us about 
responding to climate change. The Lancet Planetary Health, 4(5), e174. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542​-5196(20)30085​-1
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2018). Global warming of 
1.5 degree C. An IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 
1.5degree C. above preindustrial levels and related greenhouse gas emis-
sion pathways, in the strengthening of the global response to the con-
text of climate change. World Meterological Society. Retrieved from 
https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
Ivanova, M., Baste, I., Lee, B., Belliethathan, S., Gelil, I. A., Gupta, J., Haas, P., 
Habtezion, Z., Halpaap, A., Mohamed-Katerere, J., King, P., Kok, M., Lee, 
M., Patterson, T., Campal, V., Chambers, B., Goodall, M., Milutinovic, 
S., & Preston, F. (2012). GEO5 – Global environmental outlook – 
Environment for the future we want. Retrieved from https://www.
resea​rchga​te.net/publi​catio​n/25883​8485_GEO5_-_Global_Envir​
onmen​tal_Outlo​ok_-_Envir​onment_for_the_Future_We_Want/stats
Jin, S. (2020). COVID-19, climate change, and renewable energy re-
search: We are all in this together, and the time to act is now. ACS 
Energy Letters, 5(5), 1709–1711. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsen​ergyl​
ett.0c00910
Jowell, A., & Barry, M. (2020). COVID-19: A matter of planetary, not only 
national health. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 
103(1), 31–32. https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.20-0419
Keenan, J. M. (2020). COVID, resilience, and the built environment. 
Environment Systems and Decisions, 40, 216–221. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s1066​9-020-09773​-0
Kerry, J. F. (2020). The parallels between the coronoavirus and the cli-
mate. The Boston Globe, p. A8.
Li, L., Li, Q., Huang, L., Wang, Q., Zhu, A., Xu, J., Liu, Z., Li, H., Shi, L., Li, R., 
Azari, M., Wang, Y., Zhang, Z., Liu, Z., Zhu, Y., Zhang, K., Zue, S., Ooi, 
M. C. G., Zhang, D., & Chan, A. (2020). Air quality changes during the 
COVID-19 lockdown over the Yangtze River Delta Region: An insight 
into the impact of human activity pattern changes on air pollution 
variation. Science of the Total Environment, 732, 139282. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scito​tenv.2020.139282
Lorentzen, H. F., Benfield, T., Stisen, S., & Rahbek, C. (2020). COVID-19 is 
possibly a consequence of the anthropogenic biodiversity crisis and 
climate changes. Danish Medical Journal, 67(5), A205025.
Manzanedo, R. D., & Manning, P. (2020). COVID-19: Lessons for the cli-
mate change emergency. The Science of the Total Environment, 742, 
140563. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scito​tenv.2020.140563
Maxwell, J., & Blashki, G. (2016). Teaching about climate change in med-
ical education. Journal of Public Health Research, 5, 673. https://doi.
org/10.4081/jphr.2016.673
Mikati, I., Benson, A. F., Luben, T. J., Sacks, J. D., & Richmond-Bryant, 
J. (2018). Disparities in distribution of particulate matter emission 
sources by race and poverty status. American Journal of Public Health, 
108, 480–485. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2017.304297
Morens, D. M., Breman, J. G., Calisher, C. H., Doherty, P. C., Hahn, B. 
H., Keusch, G. T., Karamer, L. D., LeDuc, J. W., Monath, T. P., & 
Taubenbergger, J. K. (2020). The origins of COVID-19 and why it 
matters. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, https://
doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.20-0849
    |  335
ZANG et al.
Morrison, L. (2020). Viewpoint: The COVID-19 and climate crises. British 
Journal of General Practice, 70(694), 241. https://doi.org/10.3399/
bjgp2​0X709637
O’Reilly, K. M., Auzenbergs, M., Jafari, Y., Liu, Y., Flasche, S., & Lowe, R. 
(2020). Effective transmission across the globe: The role of climate 
in COVID-19 mitigation strategies. The Lancet Planetary Health, 4(5), 
e172. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542​-5196(20)30106​-6
Patruno, C., Nistico, S. P., Fabbrocini, G., & Napolitano, M. (2020). 
Is climate change the next pandemic for dermatology? Lessons 
from COVID-19. Dermatologic Therapy, 33(4), e13682. https://doi.
org/10.1111/dth.13682
Powers, M., & Faden, R. (2006). Social justice: The moral foundations of 
public health and health policy. Oxford University Press.
Price-Haywood, E. G., Burton, J., Fort, D., & Seoane, L. (2020). 
Hospitalization and mortality among Black patients and White pa-
tients with Covid-19. New England Journal of Medicine, 382(26), 2534–
2543. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMs​a2011686
Rosenbloom, D., & Markard, J. (2020). A covid-19 recovery for climate. 
Science, 268(6490), 447. https://doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.abc4887
Schwartz, S. A. (2020). Climate change, Covid-19, preparedness, and con-
sciousness. Explore, 16(3), 141–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.explo​
re.2020.02.022
Shankar, H. M., Ewart, G., Garcia, E., Hicks, A., & Hardie, W. (2020). 
COVID-19, climate change, and the American Thoracic Society. A 
shared responsibility. Annals of the American Thoracic Society, 17(9), 
1052–1055. https://doi.org/10.1513/Annal​sATS.20200​2-180VP
Waite, B., Sayer, L., & Waite, D. (2020). A call to action for community/
public health nurses: Treat structural racism as the critical social 
determinant of health it is. Public Health Nursing, 37, 147–148. https://
doi.org/10.1111/phn.12717
Watts, N., Amann, M., Arnell, N., Ayeb-Karlsson, S., Belesova, K., 
Boykoff, M., Byass, P., Cai, W., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Capstick, S., 
Chambers, J., Dalin, C., Daly, M., Dasandi, N., Davies, M., Drummond, 
P., Dubrow, R., Ebi, K. L., Eckelman, M., … Montgomery, H. (2019). 
The 2019 report of The Lancet Countdown on health and climate 
change: Ensuring that the health of a child born today is not defined 
by a changing climate. The Lancet, 394, 1836–1878. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140​-6736(19)32596​-6
Wu, X., Nethery, R. C., Sabat, B. M., Braun, D., & Dominici, F. 
(2020). Exposure to air pollution and COVID 19 mortality in the 
United States: A nationwide cross-sectional study. https://doi.
org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054502
Xiao, K., Zhai, J., Feng, Y., Zhou, N., Zhang, X. U., Zou, J.-J., Li, N. A., Guo, 
Y., Li, X., Shen, X., Zhang, Z., Shu, F., Huang, W., Li, Y. U., Zhang, Z., 
Chen, R.-A., Wu, Y.-J., Peng, S.-M., Huang, M., … Shen, Y. (2020). 
Isolation of SARS-CoV-2-related coronavirus from Malayan pango-
lins. Nature, 583(7815), 286–289. https://doi.org/10.1038/s4158​
6-020-2313-x
How to cite this article: Zang SM, Benjenk I, Breakey S, 
Pusey-Reid E, Nicholas PK. The intersection of climate 
change with the era of COVID-19. Public Health Nurs. 
2021;38:321–335. https://doi.org/10.1111/phn.12866
