www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 5   July 2021	
e479
Viewpoint
Lancet Planet Health 2021; 
5: e479–86
CSIRO Land & Water, Brisbane, 
QLD, Australia (B B Lin PhD); 
Department of Plant Sciences, 
University of California, Davis, 
CA, USA (A Ossola PhD); 
Department of Biological 
Sciences, Macquarie University, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia 
(A Ossola); School of Ecosystem 
and Forest Sciences, University 
of Melbourne, Burnley, VIC, 
Australia (A Ossola); 
Department of Urban Design 
and Planning,University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA 
(Prof M Alberti PhD); Stockholm 
Resilience Centre, Stockholm, 
Sweden (E Andersson PhD, 
Prof T Elmqvist PhD, 
T McPhearson PhD); Unit for 
Environmental Sciences, 
North-West University, 
Potchefstroom, South Africa 
(E Andersson); Fenner School of 
Environment & Society, 
Australian National University, 
Canberra, ACT, Australia 
(Prof X Bai PhD); Center for 
Modeling and Monitoring 
Ecosystems, School of Forest 
Engineering, Faculty of Science, 
Universidad Mayor, Santiago, 
Chile (C Dobbs PhD); 
Department of Animal and 
Plant Sciences, University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK 
(K L Evans PhD); Centre for 
Urban Transitions, Swinburne 
University of Technology, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
(Prof N Frantzeskaki PhD); 
School of Biological Sciences, 
University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia 
(Prof R A Fuller PhD); 
Environment and 
Sustainability Institute, 
University of Exeter, Penryn, 
UK (Prof K J Gaston PhD); 
Department of Geography, 
Humboldt University of Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany 
(Prof D Haase PhD); Department 
Computational Landscape 
Ecology, Helmholtz Centre for 
Environmental Research–UFZ, 
Leipzig, Germany 
(Prof D Haase); Department of 
Social Sciences, Education 
University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong Special  
Integrating solutions to adapt cities for climate change
Brenda B Lin, Alessandro Ossola, Marina Alberti, Erik Andersson, Xuemei Bai, Cynnamon Dobbs, Thomas Elmqvist, Karl L Evans, Niki Frantzeskaki, 
Richard A Fuller, Kevin J Gaston, Dagmar Haase, Chi Yung Jim, Cecil Konijnendijk, Harini Nagendra, Jari Niemelä, Timon McPhearson, 
William R Moomaw, Susan Parnell, Diane Pataki, William J Ripple, Puay Yok Tan
Record climate extremes are reducing urban liveability, compounding inequality, and threatening infrastructure. 
Adaptation measures that integrate technological, nature-based, and social solutions can provide multiple co-benefits 
to address complex socioecological issues in cities while increasing resilience to potential impacts. However, there 
remain many challenges to developing and implementing integrated solutions. In this Viewpoint, we consider the 
value of integrating across the three solution sets, the challenges and potential enablers for integrating solution sets, 
and present examples of challenges and adopted solutions in three cities with different urban contexts and climates 
(Freiburg, Germany; Durban, South Africa; and Singapore). We conclude with a discussion of research directions and 
provide a road map to identify the actions that enable successful implementation of integrated climate solutions. We 
highlight the need for more systematic research that targets enabling environments for integration; achieving 
integrated solutions in different contexts to avoid maladaptation; simultaneously improving liveability, sustainability, 
and equality; and replicating via transfer and scale-up of local solutions. Cities in systematically disadvantaged 
countries (sometimes referred to as the Global South) are central to future urban development and must be prioritised. 
Helping decision makers and communities understand the potential opportunities associated with integrated 
solutions for climate change will encourage urgent and deliberate strides towards adapting cities to the dynamic 
climate reality.
Cities confronting unprecedented climate 
challenges
Extreme weather events are increasingly common across 
cities on every continent.1 Climate records in 2019 have 
chronicled widespread heatwaves across the northern 
and southern hemispheres.2 Wildfires induced by climate 
change devastated cities and towns in California, Chile, 
and Australia during 2018 and 2019,3 and at the same 
time more extreme precipitation patterns are increasing 
both urban drought and flood risk.4 Rising sea levels, 
coupled with other environmental issues in coastal cities, 
have triggered environmental and social change with no 
historical parallel.5 Current climate change models 
predict that the mean maximum temperature in cities 
globally will increase by 2–8°C in just a few decades, with 
cities in Europe, South America, and Africa potentially 
facing stronger and more frequent droughts, exacerbating 
current water scarcity and crises.6
Today more than half of the world’s population lives in 
cities, with the proportion of urban residents set to rise 
to over 70% by 2070.7 The increased focus on cities over 
the past decade, coupled with the challenges that climate 
change will certainly bring about, has encouraged a large 
push by all scales of governments to generate activities, 
innovations, and transformative changes to help cities 
address the impacts of climate change.8,9 These actions 
have proven to be insufficient, and there is a clear need 
to help decision makers think strategically about layering 
adaptation solutions within cities that can lead to greater 
resilience across multiple potential futures.10
Integrating diverse adaptation measures will be 
required to realise the transformations needed to build 
resilience to climate change and protect urban 
infrastructure and communities. This Viewpoint aims to 
spur a discussion on how to systematically integrate 
three types of solutions (ie, technological, nature-based, 
and social solutions), to strengthen urban climate 
resilience, and outline ways for overcoming the range of 
challenges that hamper integration. We present three case 
studies with different limitations and contexts of decision 
making to highlight diverse approaches. Finally, we 
describe how integration might enable long-term and 
fundamental change.
Major types of urban solutions
A large body of evidence supports the relevance of a 
range of technological, nature-based, and social solutions 
to adapt cities to climate challenges, but the question 
remains as to how best to integrate these different, but 
complementary, solutions to maximise benefits. We 
present a summary of each solution type, indicate what 
some of the main benefits are, consider the challenges 
and enablers that might exist to integrate them, and then 
present three short case studies to show how integration 
has occurred and how challenges were overcome to 
achieve multiple goals related to sustained mitigation 
and adaptation.
Urban technological solutions
Technological solutions for adapting cities to climate 
change are well studied, and new technologies are 
continually emerging and examined for their overall 
efficacy. For example, air conditioning is considered a 
protective factor for health during heatwaves, but 
changes towards systems-based heating and cooling 
that take advantage of cooling towers or district 
distribution can save energy and reduce sensible heat 
discharge.11 Simple technological solutions have also 
been widely adopted to help cities create more resilient 
systems.12 Building materials that increase the albedo of 
e480	
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 5   July 2021
Viewpoint
Administrative Region, China 
(Prof C Y Jim PhD); Department 
of Forest Resources 
Management, University of 
British Columbia, BC, 
Vancouver, Canada 
(Prof C Konijnendijk PhD); 
Centre for Climate Change and 
Sustainability, Azim Premji 
University, Bengaluru, India 
(Prof H Nagendra PhD); 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland (Prof J Niemelä PhD); 
Urban Systems Lab, 
New School, New York, NY, 
USA (T McPhearson); 
Cary Institute of Ecosystem 
Studies, Millbrook, NY, USA 
(T McPhearson); Tufts 
University, Medford, MA, USA 
(Prof W R Moomaw PhD); 
Woodwell Climate Research 
Center, Falmouth, MA, USA 
(Prof W R Moomaw); African 
Centre for Cities, University of 
Cape Town, Cape Town, 
South Africa 
(Prof S Parnell PhD); School of 
Geographical Sciences, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, 
UK (Prof S Parnell); School of 
Biological Sciences, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA 
(Prof D Pataki PhD); 
Department of Forest 
Ecosystems and Society, 
Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, OR, USA 
(Prof W J Ripple PhD); National 
University of Singapore, 
Singapore (P Y Tan, PhD)
Correspondence to:
Dr Brenda B Lin, CSIRO Land & 
Water, Brisbane, QLD 4001, 
Australia
brenda.lin@csiro.au
urban surfaces to reflect sunlight, such as light-
coloured paint, can reduce the heat load of buildings 
during summer,13 and permeable pavements that 
replace asphalt can mitigate urban heat and stormwater 
runoff by reflecting radiation, providing evaporative 
cooling, and allowing underlying soil to absorb 
precipitation.14 Increasingly, big data and internet-of-
things tools can inform decision makers in real time to 
make more effective decisions on resource needs and 
flows in cities. Sensors and automated or unmanned 
systems (eg, on-demand watering systems) are 
increasingly common under smart-cities frame­works to 
save, recycle, and upcycle water before or during 
droughts 
and 
floods.15,16 
Although 
technological 
solutions are well studied and new solutions are 
continually developed or improved, they remain out of 
reach for many cities without the resources to 
implement and maintain them. Often, technological 
solutions require social and governmental intervention 
to overcome barriers of implementation.17,18
Urban nature-based solutions
Nature-based solutions (ie, the use of vegetation and 
blue-green infrastructure), can provide a multitude of 
ecosystem services, such as improving the environment 
and delivering health and wellbeing outcomes.19,20 
Increasingly, nature-based solutions have been adopted 
to help alleviate problems such as extreme heat, drought, 
or flooding.21,22 Tree cover is often used to cool 
transportation corridors, and regional tree cover can 
itself influence mesoclimatic patterns.23 In flood-prone 
cities, bioswales along streets or constructed wetlands in 
newly built suburbs help to regulate vertical and 
horizontal hydrological flows.24
However, urban nature-based solutions are sensitive to 
many of the climate challenges they are meant to address 
because changes in temperature and precipitation will 
affect green infrastructure itself.25 For example, reduced 
water availability to support trees and their canopy might 
lead to a rapid decline in shade cover, transpiration, and 
evaporative cooling.26 For this reason, nature-based 
solutions require adequate management to maintain their 
desired functions and performances as the environment 
changes.27 The resilience of urban vegetation must, 
therefore, be planned under alternative future climate 
change scenarios to ensure that the benefits can continue 
to be delivered.28,29 Although gaining increasing attention 
from researchers and practitioners, it remains unclear to 
what extent nature-based solutions are comparable with, 
and thus can replace, grey infrastructure in terms of 
effectiveness.30 Nature-based solutions, when imple­
mented at scale, can have major financial and governance 
challenges.31
Urban social solutions
Social solutions to climate change are based on 
examining shifts in social values that encourage 
individuals to change their behaviours and practices.32 
These solutions can increase acceptance and adoption of 
new or previously uncomfortable measures.33 Social 
mobilisation initiatives, from government-led planning 
processes to neighbour­hood-scale grassroots initiatives, 
can lower perceived barriers around sustainable climate 
solutions and motivate action through engagement, 
learning, and hands-on involvement.34 Many social 
solutions aim to reduce inequality and impact on 
vulnerable groups of people, such as those who might 
have fewer resources for technological solutions (eg, air 
conditioning), less access to cooler private or public 
green spaces, as well as less access to information for 
adaptation.35 In cities with a large number of poor 
communities, awareness of climate risk might be high 
but the ability to self-protect can be limited.36 Political 
disenfranchisement or isolation might further exacerbate 
risks from climate change if groups are not involved in 
decision-making processes regarding adaptation and 
mitigation.37
Existing patterns of vulnerability highlight the need to 
consider structural inequality in designing incentives, 
public engagement, and emergency plans that do not 
exacerbate or compound existing inequality. Strategies 
such as building alliances between municipal and local 
institutions might be necessary to incentivise collab­
oration across regional processes (eg, transportation 
networks, water systems, and land use policies).38 
Strategic roles, such as network brokers, can link 
disconnected or disenfranchised groups, to ensure that 
all stakeholders are heard and knowledge is shared and 
co-produced.39
The value of integration
Individual solution types are unable to address the 
complexity and scale of climate change adaptation in 
cities. The different qualities of the individual solution 
types, when integrated, can provide the necessary com­
ponents to enable structural or systemic transformation, 
while ensuring that the focus is not too narrow with 
specific or one-dimensional outcomes.40 For example, 
although air conditioning provides a protective factor 
from high temperatures, social solutions such as 
changing the culture of an office to allow for more casual 
work attire or shifting operating hours to cooler times to 
reduce energy use can also reduce carbon emissions.41 
Technological flood protection, such as dikes or pumping 
stations, will be enhanced by nature-based solutions, 
such as beach nourishments, waterfront renaturing, or 
wetlands, to protect cities from wave action while also 
providing valuable spaces for recreation and biodiversity 
conservation.42
Another example of a sector that would benefit greatly 
from the integration of solution types is urban 
transportation. For example, developing public and active 
transport systems (eg, walking and cycling pathways) 
that use permeable pavements and are shaded by 
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 5   July 2021	
e481
Viewpoint
vegetation will provide cooler pathways for urban 
dwellers to travel during extreme heat events; however, a 
change in behaviour towards public or active transport 
might also require a social component to encourage 
communities to limit vehicle use and take advantage of 
these alternatives.43 A change to more sustainable and 
affordable transport solutions, such as reducing car use 
and moving towards public transport or cycling, requires 
economic and psychological tools to encourage behaviour 
change (eg, incentives and disincentives).44
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) aim to 
tackle several goals at once, including ending poverty 
(Goal 1), providing good health and wellbeing (Goal 3), 
building sustainable communities and cities (Goal 11), 
creating inclusive institutions at all levels (Goal 16), and 
more. The impacts of climate change on cities threaten 
all of these SDGs as well as those relating to biodiversity 
conservation. Taking climate action (Goal 13) is, 
therefore, essential to achieving sustainable cities 
because cities are already experiencing many of the 
impacts of climate change.45 By adopting comprehensive 
suites 
of 
integrated 
solutions, 
multidimensional 
resilience can be developed to address the challenges 
(figure 1).
Challenges and enablers towards an integrated 
approach for adaptation
There is a large body of evidence of societal vulnerability 
to extreme heat, flood, and drought events, and 
immediate action is required to help with adaptation to, 
and mitigation of, the potential impacts of climate 
change in cities. Increasing rates of urbanisation will 
expose more urban dwellers to urban heat islands and 
extreme weather events, lead to urban expansion further 
into floodplains, and increase the damage risk faced by 
urban built infrastructure.4 Even for cities that have the 
appropriate governance structures and processes, and 
financial capacity to respond to climate pressures, the 
convergence of urbanisation and fast-paced climate 
change might erode their ability to respond in an 
effective, equitable, and timely manner. The potential 
addition of 4 billion people to the poorest regions of the 
Figure 1: Different circumstances across a city might require the integration of different solution sets
In some locations one solution type might be the focus, whereas in other areas integration of different solutions will be crucial to delivering desired outcomes. 
This figure provides examples of how this diversity of solution integration and implementation can come together to create a multi-layered resilience for the city.
Nature-based
Peri-urban forest belt 
provides 
opportunities for 
nature-based 
solutions for 
temperature 
regulation and water- 
sensitive urban design
Social-technological
Integrated transport 
systems provide active 
and public transport 
options, but require 
incentives for  
behaviour change
Social-ecological
Interest in reducing 
emissions from 
transportation 
(eg, for leisure or 
food transport) puts 
local green spaces to 
new uses
Techno-ecological
Transport systems 
designed to take 
advantage of 
nature-based 
solutions (eg, for 
greater stormwater 
retention)
All three solution sets
Neighbourhood
pre-planned through 
community 
consultation 
to adopt technological, 
nature-based, 
and social 
solutions into the 
development
Technological
Buildings designed 
or retroﬁtted to save 
energy from heating 
and cooling—using 
passive and active 
means
Social
Public awareness 
campaigns help 
people adapt to 
climate change 
through behaviour 
change
1
1
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
2
Technological
solutions
Integrated
solutions
Nature-based
solutions
Social
solutions
e482	
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 5   July 2021
Viewpoint
globe will create increasing challenges towards ensuring 
equity and responsive adaptation.46
Many of the barriers are likely to be similar in 
systematically advantaged countries (sometimes referred 
to as the Global North) and systematically disadvantaged 
countries (sometimes referred to as the Global South), 
with normal operations siloed and opaque decision 
making reducing the capacity to develop integrated 
solutions.47 However, cities are complex and varied, with 
different 
barriers, 
limitations, 
and 
oppor­tunities 
(eg, resources, capital, and leadership) depending on 
their unique circumstances.48 Previous work in urban 
sustainability emphasises that both systems thinking 
and complex adaptive solutions are needed,49,50 and the 
need for such solutions is especially true of climate 
change-related impacts on cities.51,52 Climate change will 
bring additional challenges to these already complex 
systems, 
in 
which 
transformations 
might 
have 
unintended trade-offs, especially in areas where the 
complexity is not well characterised.49 Additionally, when 
rolling out any city-specific suite of solutions the 
sequence and timeline of the imple­mentation of 
individual solutions needs to be considered. Although 
some solutions might have an immediate tangible effect, 
others could be effective only once enabling solutions are 
in place (panel).
Enabling integration through social–cultural change—
Freiburg, Germany
Freiburg (population ~230 000 people, 153 km² area), 
located in the southwest of Germany, has a long history of 
citizen action, dating back to the 1970s. One of the main 
goals of citizen action was to reject nuclear power to focus 
on safer, energy-efficient sources. Although the campaign 
was originally focused on energy, the larger societal and 
cultural change that developed through this action has 
enabled Freiburg to overcome some of the major 
challenges to larger transformation and integration of 
adaptation solutions for climate change.53 Many of the 
changes made were initiated at the local scale, but 
integration across jurisdictions has allowed for integration 
at multiple scales and large infrastructure projects.
At the city level, three main changes occurred. First, 
substantial gains in urban design were made to increase 
the accessibility of public transport. For example, as a 
techno-ecological solution, tram corridors were built 
with grassed, pervious surfaces as part of water-sensitive 
urban design and for stormwater drainage. As a social 
solution, public transport costs were subsidised to 
discourage car use.54 Additionally, mixed-use zoning 
ensured that community needs were met locally (eg, 
schools, shops, services, and green spaces), thus reducing 
the need for private car ownership.55 Second, design and 
maintenance of extensive green spaces for climate 
protection and human wellbeing was considered. Nature-
based solutions, such as the active management of 
600 hectares of parks and 5000 hectares of forest, 
supported community health and wellbeing while also 
reducing air temperatures by 2–3°C during heatwaves.56 
Finally, an effort was made to reduce carbon emissions 
and increase energy savings. As a socio-technical solution 
to encourage energy savings, a support programme to 
retrofit buildings (eg, putting in insulation) was instituted 
in Freiburg, reducing energy consumption by up to 
38% per building across schools and offices.53 Tax credits 
and subsidies from the federal government and regional 
utilities have encouraged the adoption of renewable 
energy.54
The integration of solutions was also implemented at 
the neighbourhood scale. An example of this the 
Vauban district, developed in the 1990s, which adopted a 
community co-governance structure to guide decision 
making, demonstrating inclusivity and a desire for 
alternative channels for decision making.57 Integrated 
solutions within the single neighbourhood of Vauban 
were created through community co-development across 
multiple user groups to learn and design for various 
Panel: Examples of potential challenges and enabling solutions
Potential challenge of competing priorities between current and future issues
Potential enabling solutions:
•	
Develop adaptive pathways that allow for current issues to be considered while 
planning for future change
•	
Maintain flexibility in planning to allow for changes in solutions over time
•	
Create solutions with many co-benefits that address current issues, but that do not 
create maladaptation to future change
Potential challenge of limited public space for implementing green strategies, and 
retrofitting infrastructure
Potential enabling solutions:
•	
Focus on improving the quality of existing green space
•	
Create incentives for changes to occur on private land
•	
Think creatively and strategically about new opportunities, for example, green walls, 
rooftop kitchen gardens, elevated greenways, and linear parks, designing multi-
functional spaces
Potential challenge of limited resources (money and knowledge) at multiple scales
Potential enabling solutions:
•	
Develop opportunistic development of programmes that leverage existing projects
•	
Create social protection programmes that work on multiple sustainability focused 
objectives at once
•	
Use financial incentives (eg, payment for ecosystem service schemes) to help in 
instigating change by private citizens at scale
Potential challenge of dealing with uncertainty around timing and impact of climate 
change
Potential enabling solutions:
•	
Develop adaptation planning models that allow for flexible decision making over time
•	
Consider risk management that takes into account climate change impacts and 
timelines in prioritisation decisions
•	
Use adaptive designs via interventions that are easy to set up, dismantle, and 
rearrange
•	
Choose so-called no-regrets approaches to current options
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 5   July 2021	
e483
Viewpoint
needs. For example, Vauban’s buildings were designed 
with “Passivhaus” (translated as passive house) principles 
but were enabled through the integration of tech­
nological, nature-based, and social solutions.55 The high-
tech insulated buildings absorb solar heat during winter 
and allow for quick heat dissipation in the summer 
through passive ventilation. Linden trees (Tilia sp) shade 
buildings during the summer but allow for solar heating 
after leaf drop in autumn. A large educational campaign 
encouraged residential behaviour change, leading to 
about an 80% reduction in energy use.
Opportunistic integration to build adaptation 
pathways—Durban, South Africa
Durban, South Africa (population ~3·1 million people, 
2292 km² area), is grappling with highly unequal social, 
economic, and environmental conditions. Durban is 
the largest container port on the African continent yet 
is South Africa’s poorest large metropolitan area. Antici­
pation that climate change could undermine develop­
ment efforts and exacerbate the plight of the city’s most 
vulnerable residents has instigated a focus on adaptation. 
Key climate vulnerabilities for people in Durban include 
extreme heat, changing amount and distri­bution of 
rainfall, and sea-level rise—all of which affect ecosystem 
degradation and livelihood sustainability.58
In Durban, the main challenge associated with climate 
adaptation is competition for resources and political 
support with other development processes and projects 
in the municipality.59 Adaptation, however, requires 
appropriate financial and technological support; thus, 
the proposed climate change adaptation projects needed 
to deliver as much benefit as possible, including to 
infrastructure and service delivery, tackling issues of 
inequality and developing economic opportunities for 
the community.60
Due to limited precedents, interest, leadership, 
institutional support, and resources, Durban’s adaptation 
approach was necessarily phased and opportunistic.61 
The city relied on cultivating institutional champions 
who have deep sectoral knowledge, and who can then 
identify points of integration and overlapping spheres of 
influence and networks.62 These policy champions were 
crucial in bringing climate change in as a key develop­
ment issue and raising its profile.58 For example, the 
municipality established a multi-stakeholder partner­ship 
to work on the development of biological infra­structure 
(com­bined ecological and technical solutions) to address 
increasing water security issues in the Umgeni River 
catchment. This type of integrated framework also 
helped in creating cross-sectoral coalitions (eg, between 
the municipal water, infrastructure, and energy 
departments) and strategic multi-stakeholder planning 
opportunities to allow for larger scale discourse of the 
adaptation agenda, and in creating a so-called no-regrets 
approach that took into account water, biodiversity, 
climate, and poverty challenges.62
Another enabler of integrated adaptation within Durban 
has been a move towards adaptive management that has 
allowed the city government to learn from successes and 
failures, and has generated a cycle of reflective practice to 
understand the complexity of adaptation actions.63 Moving 
beyond siloed approaches and bringing in integrated 
approaches to develop multi-beneficial solutions can 
provide long-term sustainability gains that help overcome 
resource and political challenges.
Using big data to integrate information for adaptation 
planning—Singapore
Singapore (population ~5·4 million people, 724 km² area) 
is known as one of the most compact cities in the world.64 
This high pace of urbanisation has reduced forest extent 
in Singapore, but the concept of integrating green open 
spaces into buildings and urban infrastructure has earned 
Singapore the nickname of the Garden City. In the past 
decade, the emphasis has switched to becoming a City in 
Nature to strengthen biodiversity conservation and 
application of nature-based solutions.65 Climate models 
project that temperatures will continue to increase in 
Singapore, with long-term mean temperatures of 
+1·4–4·6°C by 2100.66 However, the compact urban design 
has also increased the urban heat island effect within the 
city, which can be in excess of 7°C between urban and 
rural areas in Singapore. Singapore’s popula­tion, 
economy, and ecosystems are vulnerable to the negative 
effects of further temperature increases.66
Mitigating increasing temperatures from climate 
change and the urban heat island effect require integrated 
solutions for climate-sensitive design across Singapore’s 
local environment. The challenge in Singapore is the 
competition for the limited space to make changes in a 
high-density city. Many solutions have been ecological 
and technological in nature, with urban design guidelines 
cognizant of building design technologies and the 
develop­ment of green roofs and walls, and Cooling 
Singapore, an interdisciplinary project between univer­
sities and the Government of Singapore, has resulted in 
the compilation of a strategy document specifically for 
Singapore’s climate.66 However, the new phase of research 
will use big data and spatial information platforms to 
develop an island-wide digital urban climate twin (DUCT) 
of Singapore by integrating relevant computational 
models 
(including 
environmental, 
land 
surface, 
industrial, traffic, building energy) as well as regional-
scale and micro-scale climate models. The idea of such a 
DUCT is to develop a decision support system to help 
prioritise and select strategies across environ­mental, 
economic, and social facets.
In this sense, the technology to develop an integrated 
model of the city will help urban planners, engineers, 
and researchers weigh the benefits and costs of various 
planning scenarios, including integrated solution sets, to 
assess different cooling measures with the most benefits. 
These solutions might include innovative transportation 
e484	
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 5   July 2021
Viewpoint
systems, advanced building technologies, vegetation 
typologies, materials for buildings and pavements, and 
climate-sensitive urban design solutions across spatial 
scales. Developing this capability is crucial for the city 
planning agencies to create robust climate-informed 
policy making in the future.
The three case studies presented in this Viewpoint 
highlight that technological, nature-based, and social 
solutions can be combined as a suite that work in concert 
with each other to address many sustainability goals 
simultaneously, as well as produce outcomes that 
increase the resilience of the city to climate change across 
diverse socioeconomic contexts (figure 2). Developing, 
monitoring, and evaluating strategies to better allow for 
the understanding of their use in different contexts will 
be increasingly necessary for transferring and scaling up 
solutions.
Research directions and pathways forward
Integrating solutions that are context sensitive and locally 
grounded will be necessary to build urban resilience to 
climate change. Developing and implementing integrated 
solutions that embrace all three targets (ie, technically 
sound, nature-based, and socially equitable) will have 
many challenges and will require systematic research that 
aims to uncover the barriers to effective outcomes.
First, research on how to create enabling environments 
will allow for and support integrated solutions. The 
Freiburg case study shows a strong need for social 
supports across the community and for local governments 
to create neighbourhood-wide to city-wide integrated 
solutions. In Durban, identifying leaderships and creating 
multi-sectoral collaboration was necessary to take 
advantage of opportunistic integrated action. These 
examples highlight that adaptation and mitigation 
decisions should be developed with stakeholders through 
co-development processes to recognise the range of 
values within the community and to build collective 
agency and support for decisions.68 Involving more people 
and co-producing knowledge can lead to a greater 
representation of experiences, knowledge, and interests 
that generate alternative ways of solving problems.69 More 
research is required to understand how institutional 
enablers and barriers affect societal adaptation and 
behavioural change, and how cities can manage processes 
to encourage change at all levels of decision making.
Second, there is a need to understand how to integrate 
solutions in different contexts. Each individual solution 
will have different qualities and effects that might make it 
more or less effective when combined with other solutions. 
For example, the development of a bicycle pathway that is 
shaded with trees as well as created with permeable 
pavement can create a much cooler pathway than either of 
those two solutions alone. However, there might be trade-
offs and feedbacks of one solution on the efficacy of other 
solutions. For example, nature-based solutions that involve 
water storage to reduce flood risk or to provide evaporative 
cooling, if not well managed, can provide breeding 
grounds for insect disease vectors. Thus, different 
alternatives for meeting the same targets will have to be 
considered, and flexibility to change the solutions across 
different urban contexts and climates will allow cities to 
take advantage of the strengths of varied solutions and to 
avoid competing goals and maladaptations.
Third, cities can invest in understanding how solutions 
can work together to improve liveability, sustainability, 
and equality. Much of the current research on urban 
sustainability comes from cities of the Global North, and 
there is a gap in understanding the social, environmental, 
and economic context in emerging urban regions of the 
Global South and how their ability to adapt to climate 
change can inform other cities globally. Many regions 
have been under-studied, particularly in the Global South, 
yet these regions have larger populations of vulnerable 
urban groups with less access to resources, and are thus 
disproportionately affected by climate extremes.45,70 
Crucially, informal urban settlements in many developing 
countries have little access to technological solutions and 
might depend primarily on nature-based solutions to 
adapt to climate challenges due to their relatively low cost 
and broad accessibility.71 Climate change adaptation and 
mitigation measures might exacerbate socioeconomic 
inequalities across populations within a city, across 
cities globally, or even inter-generationally. Alternatively, 
actions taken now can have compounded benefits for 
future generations.
Lastly, researchers can work with decision makers of 
cities in a coordinated approach to take these localised 
solutions and find ways to connect, amplify, transfer, and 
scale up solutions and innovations at a sustained pace that 
can effectively respond to climate change in cities. This 
approach might mean that cities will need to monitor and 
evaluate their own solution sets while also collaborating 
and translating learnings across cities. Collaboration and 
cooperation across cities will need to transcend 
Figure 2: Three examples of how integration can be enabled
(A) Freiburg, Germany: citizen action can be harnessed to create a cultural change in values that enables broad 
integrated action (credit Daniel Schoenen). (B) Durban, South Africa: multi-institution connections can lead to 
opportunistic integrated measures (photo shows an example of integrated water and climate change adaptation, 
from Twitter67). (C) Singapore: the use of big data can allow for modelling of integrated actions to assist decision 
makers (credit Winston Chow).
A
B
C
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 5   July 2021	
e485
Viewpoint
administrative boundaries, sectoral responsibilities, and 
knowledge groups, and organisa­tions such as C40 and 
ICLEI are creating networks to create knowledge bridges. 
Some learnings can be scaled up regionally or transferred 
to cities with similar climate, landscape types, and 
populations; however, many proposed solutions will not 
be immediately suitable for deployment in a particular city 
and will require further development and context-sensitive 
translation.72 Coordi­nated actions might also require 
different coalitions and governance structures to develop 
integrated ways of problem solving and future visioning 
or foresighting.39
Conclusions
Integrating solutions for adapting to climate change 
offers opportunities and great potential for long-term 
sustainable change. However, there are challenges to 
creating 
and 
implementing 
integrated 
solutions, 
including competing priorities, lack of resources, and 
planning under uncertainty. The three case studies show 
that there are enablers, such as citizen action, multi-
institutional 
opportunism, 
and 
big-data 
scenario 
modelling, which can help overcome these challenges, 
but more research is needed. A better understanding for 
how to create enabling environments, how to integrate 
solutions in different contexts, how solutions can be 
complementary, and how to transfer and scale up 
solutions are all important next steps for embedding 
integrated solutions into the urban adaptation decisions 
of cities globally.
Contributors
BBL and AO conceived the idea for this Viewpoint. BBL led the writing 
and development of the Viewpoint. AO led the development of figures 
with support from TM. All authors contributed to the literature review, 
writing, revising, and editing of the Viewpoint.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
TM was supported by the US National Science Foundation through 
grants #1444755, #1927167, and #193493 to participate in the writing of 
the Viewpoint. BBL received funding from CSIRO Land & Water and the 
Julius Career Award. We would like to thank Claudia Tomateo for their 
contributions to the graphics in this Viewpoint.
References
1	
Mishra V, Ganguly AR, Nijssen B, Lettenmaier DP. Changes in 
observed climate extremes in global urban areas. Environ Res Lett 
2015; 10: 024005.
2	
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. July 2019 was 
hottest month on record for the planet. 2019. https://www.noaa.
gov/news/july-2019-was-hottest-month-on-record-for-planet 
(accessed June 14, 2021).
3	
Kramer HA, Mockrin MH, Alexandre PM, Radeloff VC. 
High wildfire damage in interface communities in California. 
Int J Wildland Fire 2019; 28: 641–50.
4	
Güneralp B, Güneralp İ, Liu Y. Changing global patterns of urban 
exposure to flood and drought hazards. Glob Environ Change 2015; 
31: 217–25.
5	
Newton A, Carruthers TJ, Icely J. The coastal syndromes and 
hotspots on the coast. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 2012; 96: 39–47.
6	
Huang K, Li X, Liu X, Seto KC. Projecting global urban land 
expansion and heat island intensification through 2050. 
Environ Res Lett 2019; 14: 114037.
7	
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 
Population Division. World urbanization prospects: the 2018 
revision (ST/ESA/SER.A/420). 2018. https://population.un.org/
wup/Publications/Files/WUP2018-Report.pdf (accessed 
June 14, 2021).
8	
Ürge-Vorsatz D, Rosenzweig C, Dawson RJ, et al. Locking in 
positive climate responses in cities. Nat Clim Chang 2018; 8: 174–77.
9	
Pancost RD. Cities lead on climate change. Nat Geosci 2016; 
9: 264–66.
10	
McPhearson T, Raymond CM, Gulsrud N, et al. Radical changes are 
needed for transformations to a good Anthropocene. 
NPJ Urban Sustain 2021; 1: 1–13.
11	
Dhakal S, Hanaki K. Improvement of urban thermal environment 
by managing heat discharge sources and surface modification 
in Tokyo. Energy Build 2002; 34: 13–23.
12	
Wilhelmi OV, Hayden MH. Connecting people and place: a new 
framework for reducing urban vulnerability to extreme heat. 
Environ Res Lett 2010; 5: 014021.
13	
Francis LFM, Jensen MB. Benefits of green roofs: a systematic 
review of the evidence for three ecosystem services. 
Urban For Urban Green 2017; 28: 167–76.
14	
Li H, Harvey JT, Holland T, Kayhanian M. The use of reflective and 
permeable pavements as a potential practice for heat island 
mitigation and stormwater management. Environ Res Lett 2013; 
8: 015023.
15	
Rathore MM, Ahmad A, Paul A, Rho S. Urban planning and 
building smart cities based on the internet of things using big data 
analytics. Comput Netw 2016; 101: 63–80.
16	
Koop SH, van Leeuwen CJ. The challenges of water, waste and 
climate change in cities. Environ Dev Sustain 2017; 19: 385–418.
17	
Pasquini L. The urban governance of climate change adaptation in 
least-developed African countries and in small cities: 
the engagement of local decision-makers in Dar es Salaam, 
Tanzania, and Karonga, Malawi. Clim Dev 2020; 12: 408–19.
18	
Biresselioglu ME, Nilsen M, Demir MH, Røyrvik J, Koksvik G. 
Examining the barriers and motivators affecting European decision-
makers in the development of smart and green energy technologies. 
J Clean Prod 2018; 198: 417–29.
19	
Fischer LK, Honold J, Botzat A, et al. Recreational ecosystem 
services in European cities: sociocultural and geographical contexts 
matter for park use. Ecosyst Serv 2018; 31: 455–67.
20	 Lin BB, Egerer MH, Ossola A. Urban gardens as a space to 
engender biophilia: evidence and ways forward. Front Built Environ 
2018; 4: 79.
21	
Scott M, Lennon M, Haase D, Kazmierczak A, Clabby G, Beatley T. 
Nature-based solutions for the contemporary city. 
Plann Theory Pract 2016; 17: 267–300.
22	 Kabisch N, Frantzeskaki N, Pauleit S, et al. Nature-based solutions 
to climate change mitigation and adaptation in urban areas: 
perspectives on indicators, knowledge gaps, barriers, and 
opportunities for action. Ecol Soc 2016; 21: art39.
23	 Hobbie SE, Grimm NB. Nature-based approaches to managing 
climate change impacts in cities. Phil Trans R Soc B 2020; 
375: 20190124.
24	
Pauleit S, Andersson E, Anton B, et al. Urban green 
infrastructure—connecting people and nature for sustainable cities. 
Urban For Urban Green 2019; 40: 1–3.
25	 McPhearson T, Andersson E, Elmqvist T, Frantzeskaki N. Resilience 
of and through urban ecosystem services. Ecosyst Serv 2015; 
12: 152–56.
26	 Ward K, Lauf S, Kleinschmit B, Endlicher W. Heat waves and urban 
heat islands in Europe: a review of relevant drivers. Sci Total Environ 
2016; 569–70: 527–39.
27	
Andersson E, Langemeyer J, Borgström S, et al. Enabling green and 
blue infrastructure to improve contributions to human well-being 
and equity in urban systems. Bioscience 2019; 69: 566–74.
28	 Ossola A, Lin BB. Making nature-based solutions climate-ready for 
the 50°C world. Environ Sci Policy 2021; 123: 151–59. 
29	 Burley H, Beaumont LJ, Ossola A, et al. Substantial declines in 
urban tree habitat predicted under climate change. Sci Total Environ 
2019; 685: 451–62.
30	 Bai X. Advance the ecosystem approach in cities. Nature 2018; 
559: 7–8.
e486	
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 5   July 2021
Viewpoint
31	
Seddon N, Chausson A, Berry P, Girardin CAJ, Smith A, Turner B. 
Understanding the value and limits of nature-based solutions to 
climate change and other global challenges. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2020; 375: 20190120.
32	 Sheppard D. Social solutions for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation: cross cultural lessons from Denmark to the 
United States. Intersect 2011; 4: 67–91.
33	 Simon D. Rethinking sustainable cities: accessible, green and fair. 
Bristol: Policy Press, 2016.
34	
Westerhoff L, Sheppard SR, Iype DM, Cote S, Salter J. Social 
mobilization on climate change and energy: an evaluation of 
research projects in British Columbia, Canada. Energy Res Soc Sci 
2018; 46: 368–80.
35	 Pelling M, Garschagen M. Put equity first in climate adaptation. 
Nature 2019; 569: 327–29.
36	 Dodman D, Leck H, Rusca M, Colenbrander S. African 
urbanisation and urbanism: implications for risk accumulation and 
reduction. Int J Disaster Risk Reduct 2017; 26: 7–15.
37	
Hesed CDM, Paolisso M. Cultural knowledge and local vulnerability 
in African American communities. Nat Clim Chang 2015; 5: 683–87.
38	 Adelekan I, Johnson C, Manda M, et al. Disaster risk and its 
reduction: an agenda for urban Africa. Int Dev Plan Rev 2015; 
37: 33–43.
39	 Ernstson H, Barthel S, Andersson E, Borgström ST. Scale-crossing 
brokers and network governance of urban ecosystem services: 
the case of Stockholm. Ecol Soc 2010; 15: art28.
40	
Scoones I, Stirling A, Abrol D, et al. Transformations to 
sustainability: combining structural, systemic and enabling 
approaches. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2020; 42: 65–75.
41	
Potera C. Air conditioning use and heat-related deaths: how a 
natural disaster presented a unique research opportunity. 
Environ Health Perspect 2017; 125: 104007.
42	
Aerts JC, Botzen WJ, Emanuel K, Lin N, de Moel H, 
Michel-Kerjan EO. Climate adaptation. Evaluating flood resilience 
strategies for coastal megacities. Science 2014; 344: 473–75.
43	
Fontaras G, Zacharof N-G, Ciuffo B. Fuel consumption and 
CO2 emissions from passenger cars in Europe–Laboratory versus 
real-world emissions. Pror Energy Combust Sci 2017; 60: 97–131.
44	
Byerly H, Balmford A, Ferraro PJ, et al. Nudging pro-environmental 
behavior: evidence and opportunities. Front Ecol Environ 2018; 
16: 159–68.
45	
IPCC. Summary for Policymakers. In: Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, 
Pörtner H-O, et al, eds. Global warming of 15°C. An IPCC special 
report on the impacts of global warming of 15°C above 
pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission 
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the 
threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to 
eradicate poverty. Geneva: World Meteorological Organization, 
2018: 32.
46	
Bongaarts J. Development: slow down population growth. Nature 
2016; 530: 409–12.
47	
Howarth C, Monasterolo I. Opportunities for knowledge 
co-production across the energy-food-water nexus: making 
interdisciplinary approaches work for better climate decision 
making. Environ Sci Policy 2017; 75: 103–10.
48	
Wigginton NS, Fahrenkamp-Uppenbrink J, Wible B, Malakoff D. 
Cities are the future. Science 2016; 352: 904–05.
49	
Elmqvist T, Andersson E, Frantzeskaki N, et al. Sustainability and 
resilience for transformation in the urban century. Nat Sustain 2019; 
2: 267–73.
50	 Acuto M, Parnell S, Seto KC. Building a global urban science. 
Nat Sustain 2018; 1: 2–4.
51	
Bai X, Dawson RJ, Ürge-Vorsatz D, et al. Six research priorities for 
cities and climate change. Nature 2018; 509: 158–60.
52	 Solecki W, Rosenzweig C, Dhakal S, et al. City transformations in a 
1·5°C warmer world. Nat Clim Chang 2018; 8: 177–81.
53	 Hoppe K, Klas C, Staden M. City of Freiburg, Germany, European 
Union. Freiburg: Environmental Protection Office, 2008.
54	
Thorpe D. The ‘one planet’ life: a blueprint for low impact 
development. London: Routledge, 2014.
55	 Coates GJ. The sustainable urban district of Vauban in Freiburg, 
Germany. Int J Des Nat Ecodyn 2013; 8: 265–86.
56	 Lee H, Mayer H, Chen L. Contribution of trees and grasslands to 
the mitigation of human heat stress in a residential district of 
Freiburg, Southwest Germany. Landsc Urban Plan 2016; 148: 37–50.
57	
Hamiduddin I, Daseking W. Community-based planning in 
Freiburg, Germany: the case of Vauban. In: Gallent N, Ciaffi D, eds. 
Community action and planning: contexts, drivers and outcomes. 
Policy Press Scholarship Online, 2014: 241–56.
58	 Chu E, Anguelovski I, Roberts D. Climate adaptation as strategic 
urbanism: assessing opportunities and uncertainties for equity and 
inclusive development in cities. Cities 2017; 60: 378–87.
59	 Sutherland C, Scott D, Nel E, Nel A. Conceptualizing ‘the urban’ 
through the lens of Durban, South Africa. Urban Forum 2018; 
29: 333–50.
60	 Ethekwini Municipality. Integrated Development Plan. 2019. http://
www.durban.gov.za/City_Government/City_Vision/IDP/
Documents/IDP2019_2020.pdf (accessed June 14, 2021).
61	
Roberts D, O’Donoghue S. Urban environmental challenges and 
climate change action in Durban, South Africa. Environ Urban 2013; 
25: 299–319.
62	 Sutherland C, Hordijk M, Lewis B, Meyer C, Buthelezi S. Water and 
sanitation provision in eThekwini Municipality: a spatially 
differentiated approach. Environ Urban 2014; 26: 469–88.
63	 Leck H, Roberts D. What lies beneath: understanding the invisible 
aspects of municipal climate change governance. 
Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2015; 13: 61–67.
64	
Aflaki A, Mirnezhad M, Ghaffarianhoseini A, et al. Urban heat 
island mitigation strategies: a state-of-the-art review on 
Kuala Lumpur, Singapore and Hong Kong. Cities 2017; 62: 131–45.
65	 Rowe PG, Hee L. A City in Blue and Green: the Singapore story. 
Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2019.
66	 Cooling Singapore. Strategies for cooling singapore. Singapore: 
Cooling Singapore, 2017.
67	
@eTheKwiniM. Sept 3, 2020. https://twitter.com/ethekwinim/statu
s/1301434770728067073?lang=en (accessed June 14, 2021).
68	 Colding J, Barthel S. The potential of ‘Urban Green Commons’ in 
the resilience building of cities. Ecol Econ 2013; 86: 156–66.
69	 Colding J, Elmqvist T, Olsson P. Living with disturbance: building 
resilience in social-ecological systems. In: Berkes F, Colding J, 
Folke C, eds. Navigating social-ecological systems: building 
resilience for complexity and change, 1st edn. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2002: 163–85.
70	
Nagendra H, Bai X, Brondizio ES, Lwasa S. The urban south and 
the predicament of global sustainability. Nat Sustain 2018; 1: 341–49.
71	
Yahia MW, Johansson E, Thorsson S, Lindberg F, Rasmussen MI. 
Effect of urban design on microclimate and thermal comfort 
outdoors in warm-humid Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Int J Biometeorol 
2018; 62: 373–85.
72	
Eisenack K, Moser SC, Hoffmann E, et al. Explaining and 
overcoming barriers to climate change adaptation. Nat Clim Chang 
2014; 4: 867–72.
Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an 
Open Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
