 
 
 
 
PLANNED RETREAT 
APPROACHES 
TO SUPPORT 
RESILIENCE TO 
CLIMATE CHANGE IN 
CANADA
Natural Resources Canada
Prepared for: 
Prepared by: 
Gevity Consulting Inc.
 
 
Natural Resources Canada 
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division 
588 Booth Street, Ottawa ON  K1A 0E8 
Contact: nrcan.adaptation.rncan@canada.ca 
 
GEVITY CONSULTING INC. 
Head Office: 350–375 Water Street, Vancouver, BC V6B 5C6 
+1-604-608-1779 | info@gevityinc.com | http://www.gevityinc.com 
Suggested citation: Saunders-Hastings, P., Barnard, M., and Doberstein, B. (2020). Planned 
Retreat Approaches to Support Resilience to Climate Change in Canada. Natural Resources 
Canada: Ottawa, Canada. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
This report was produced for Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) in support of Canada’s Climate Change 
Adaptation Platform, which brings together representatives from government, industry and professional 
organizations, to collaborate on adaptation priorities. NRCan initiated this report to enable a common 
understanding of planned retreat approaches in Canada and provide a foundation of good practices to support 
planning and action in this area. 
This report was coordinated by NRCan and developed in collaboration with climate change adaptation experts 
across Canada. We gratefully acknowledge the following individuals for their guidance, support and input 
throughout the process as members of the Advisory Committee and expert reviewers: 
 
Anna Ziolecki, Partners for Action, University of Waterloo 
 
Colleen Mercer Clarke, International Federation of Landscape Architects  
 
Danika van Proosdij, TransCoastal Adaptations, Saint Mary’s University 
 
Enda Murphy, National Research Council Canada  
 
Graham Farstad, Arlington Group Planning Ltd. 
 
Kim Olson, Environment and Climate Change Canada 
 
Linda Mortsch, Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo 
 
 
Mary-Ann Wilson, John Sommerville, Nicky Hastings, Thomas James, Monique Aunger, Pamela 
Kertland, Gordon Stevens, Ericha Moores, Brenda Reid, Carolyn Mann, Natural Resources Canada  
 
Mike Sullivan, Sullivan Planning Services Inc. 
 
Patricia Manuel, School of Planning, Dalhousie University 
 
Tracey Wade, Alliance Planning and Environmental Consulting 
 
Yves Thériault and Marijo Cyr, Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada 
The report also benefited from the contributions of key experts in the field of planned retreat who were willing to 
offer their insights via key informant interviews. The authors would like to thank these individuals for their 
contributions to the project.  
The core team that drafted this report found the exercise to be deeply rewarding. The perspectives we shared with 
each other, the perspectives we heard from experts and the stories we read and watched of communities 
impacted by change enriched us. We are proud to have been able to contribute in this small way to helping 
Canada’s communities thrive in the coming decades and are grateful to NRCan for the opportunity to support this 
important effort. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Table of Contents 
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................... 2 
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................... 4 
1. Introduction ....................................................................................................................... 9 
1.1. 
Project Goals & Objectives ..................................................................................... 11 
1.2. 
Target Audience ..................................................................................................... 11 
1.3. 
Methodology ......................................................................................................... 11 
1.4. 
Report Outline ....................................................................................................... 12 
2. 
Background .................................................................................................................. 12 
2.1. 
Retreat in the Context of Climate Change Adaptation ............................................. 12 
2.2. 
Scan of Planned Retreat in Canada ......................................................................... 15 
2.3. 
Scan of Planned Retreat in Relevant International Contexts ................................... 17 
2.4. 
Scope of Planned Retreat ....................................................................................... 18 
3. 
Canadian Case Studies .................................................................................................. 18 
3.1. 
Surrey, BC .............................................................................................................. 19 
3.2. 
High River, AB ........................................................................................................ 21 
3.3. 
Great Lakes, ON ..................................................................................................... 24 
3.4. 
Pointe Gatineau, QC............................................................................................... 27 
3.5. 
Tuktoyaktuk, NWT ................................................................................................. 30 
3.6. 
Truro, N.S .............................................................................................................. 33 
4. 
Key Findings ................................................................................................................. 36 
4.1. 
Triggers for Planned Retreat .................................................................................. 36 
4.2. 
Sources of Resistance to Retreat ............................................................................ 38 
4.3. 
Common Considerations and Approaches .............................................................. 41 
4.4. 
Enablers and Barriers ............................................................................................. 44 
5. 
Planned Retreat and Health .......................................................................................... 46 
5.1. 
Direct Health Impacts ............................................................................................ 46 
5.2. 
Long-Term Individual Impacts ................................................................................ 47 
5.3. 
Long-Term Community Impacts.............................................................................. 47 
 
 
3 
 
6. 
Good Practices and Considerations for Proactive Planned Retreat ................................. 48 
6.1. 
Good Practices for Municipal Leaders ..................................................................... 50 
6.2. 
Good Practices for Provincial & Subnational Leaders .............................................. 53 
6.3. 
Good Practices for National Leaders ....................................................................... 54 
7. 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 55 
8. 
References .................................................................................................................... 56 
Appendix 1: Glossary ........................................................................................................... 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Executive Summary 
Planned retreat forms an essential component of minimizing the adverse consequences of climate change and its 
impacts. However, relatively little is known about how this can be done to best protect, preserve and promote 
individual and community well-being. To advance knowledge in this area, Natural Resources Canada (NRCan), in 
collaboration with Gevity Consulting Inc. and a broad team of planned retreat practitioners and subject matter 
experts from academia, government and industry, produced this report. The aim of this report is not to arrive at a 
concrete set of best practices, as this space is still rapidly evolving and very context dependent. Rather, the report 
seeks to identify success factors and common pitfalls that are likely to extend more broadly across planned retreat 
efforts.  
Climate change impacts are increasing in frequency and severity, outpacing preparedness and increasing costs for 
Canadians and businesses. At the time of preparing this report, the world is responding to a coronavirus pandemic, 
and this crisis reinforces the value of proactive planning to reduce risks and increase resilience. While the impacts 
of climate change may be slower and, sometimes, less visible than those of the COVID-19 pandemic, the same 
disastrous impacts on our health, our communities and our economies are possible. Across the globe, resiliency 
measures are being put to the test. 
The effects of climate change are exacerbating the impacts of natural and human-caused disasters affecting 
communities across Canada. For example, the coronavirus is currently affecting our ability to deal with people put 
at disproportionate risk by the impacts of climate change. Opening emergency shelters for flood victims is not 
advisable or recommended. Planned cooling shelters for increasingly hot summers put those most vulnerable at 
risk of exposure to COVID-19. Disasters do not recognize each other’s boundaries, and so we must adapt and 
become resilient to them. 
Ceding homes, communities and land uses to nature is very difficult, yet may be necessary. Climatic changes 
continue to accelerate, and even optimistic emission reduction scenarios suggest that significant impacts and 
challenges will manifest over the longer term. However, planned retreat may offer a sustainable cost-effective 
option for reducing the risks of climate change by moving people, buildings, critical infrastructure and land uses to 
lower-risk locations where they can thrive. 
There are excellent examples of planned retreat globally, with New Zealand providing a particularly strong 
example of how to communicate and implement retreat. This strength in risk communication has extended 
beyond the context of planned retreat, with New Zealand also being praised for its leadership in response to the 
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. While lessons can be learned from New Zealand, insights from the United States, 
Europe and, most especially, Canada are also of relevance to informing practice. Too often, planned retreat occurs 
only after multiple disasters have rolled through a community, at great human and economic expense. Too often, 
retreat occurs as a patchwork, with deep inequities within and between communities. Too often, retreat takes far 
too long to be implemented, with people living on the brink of the next disaster but unable to adapt. In 2020, four 
homes in Tuktoyaktuk were successfully moved to a lower-risk area, being relocated from the disappearing 
coastline to inland locations. However, the process of planned retreat has been underway in Tuktoyaktuk since the 
1960s and is still far from complete. 
A review of retreat approaches in Canada and relevant international contexts revealed that retreat is most often 
implemented as a reactive measure, typically following a natural disaster such as a flooding event. It was found 
that economics can drive retreat as an option, both for homeowners and communities, when full accounting of the 
cost of persisting in place, with rebuilding accommodations, is double or more the cost of retreat, along with the 
cost of health and emergency services. Retreat also lacks standardization, with communities in close proximity to 
each other often having disparate responses. In the Ottawa-Gatineau region, affected homeowners in Quebec 
received buyouts following two record floods in April 2017 and May 2019, while residents in Ottawa received no 
buyouts. Inequity based on socioeconomic status and systemic marginalization is a persisting problem. In the 
United States, affluent, mostly white communities were able to garner state and federal support for mass 
 
 
5 
 
movement or for enhanced protections. Bureaucracy can also be a second disaster for affected communities, with 
municipalities, businesses and individuals often wading through multiple agencies and bureaucratic processes to 
gain support and aid, even as they are coping with rebuilding. 
This report is primarily intended for practitioners and community stakeholders considering the difficult choice of 
planned retreat in the context of climate change adaptation. Retreat can be a painful process for individuals, who 
have to give up their attachment to place in support of the broader community well-being. This process is 
challenging, stressful and hard—but making sacrifices on behalf of others can also be an enriching opportunity. 
The case studies in this report (summarized in Table E1) highlight a number of good practices, such as the benefits 
of a transparent process and coordinating effectively with relevant stakeholders when considering a complex and 
potentially life-changing approach such as planned retreat. Top-down approaches may facilitate rapid retreat, but 
retreat without effective community engagement can have health, financial and social consequences for affected 
individuals and communities. While pursuing a collaborative approach with communities may slow down the 
retreat process, strong community engagement and ownership, alongside consideration of the areas to which 
affected communities will relocate, are essential to protecting and promoting the health and well-being of those 
affected. A summary of good practices and considerations for leaders and practitioners to consider are 
summarized in Table E2. 
Table E1. Summary of Canadian retreat case study examples, focusing on planned and reactive approaches.  
Case Study  
Summary  
Surrey, BC 
 
With a population of 520,000, Surrey, BC is one of the municipalities that is part of the 
Greater Vancouver Area. Up to 20% of the land area lies within the coastal flood zone. The 
Semiahmoo First Nation lies geographically within Surrey’s boundaries and includes part of 
the coastal floodplain. Historically, Surrey has employed an “avoid and protect” strategy 
that evolved from both coastal and riverine flooding that occurred in 1948 and 1972. More 
recently, Surrey has developed a Coastal Flood Adaptation Strategy (CFAS) due to a 
recognition of the possibility of enhanced hazards due to climate change. The CFAS 
included planned retreat as an adaptation strategy in three distinct planning areas: Mud 
Bay, Crescent Beach and Semiahoo Bay. The CFAS was a long-term visioning process in 
which there was significant stakeholder engagement throughout the five-phase process. 
One of the most innovative aspects of the public engagement process was collaborative 
development of public “values criteria.” Seven values were eventually agreed upon:  
 
Residents: Number of people permanently displaced by the option and related 
health/safety impacts 
 
Agriculture: Amount of agricultural land permanently lost due to the option 
 
Environment: Anticipated environmental impact (positive/negative) expected 
from the option 
 
Infrastructure: Transportation/utilities disruptions expected from the option  
 
Economy: Permanent loss of businesses expected from the option 
 
Recreation: Recreation opportunities (positive/negative) expected from the 
option 
 
Culture: Semiahmoo First Nation cultural impacts expected from the option 
Use of these values criteria for adaptation decision-making marks a significant 
empowerment of Surrey residents and the Semiahmoo First Nation, and this, combined 
with the extensive public engagement generally, allowed for greater acceptance of and 
support for project decisions. 
High River, AB 
Located 40 km south of Calgary on the Highwood River, High River, AB has experienced at 
least 12 floods of high magnitude since the late 1800s. In 2013, the community 
experienced its highest ever flood event, which occurred a mere eight years after the 
 
 
6 
 
previous high flood event in 2005. The Town of High River had begun preliminary flood 
reduction planning after the 2005 event, which led to the plan to “build back better” after 
the 2013 event. Planned retreat became a method of adaptation when the Alberta 
provincial government launched the Floodway Relocation Plan for six southern Alberta 
communities in 2013. This announcement came after the province’s new regulations on 
floodway development and related restriction on the Disaster Recovery Fund (DRF) 
eligibility. In total, 94 High River homes were purchased by the Alberta government under 
this program and a CP railway bridge was removed that created a “choke point.” The 
planned retreat process in High River can be characterized as a primarily top-down, non-
collaborative process in which Provincial and Town officials largely decided on planned 
retreat for the community. Most of the retreat land has not been repurposed and only 
basic naturalization has been completed. The lack of community engagement led to a 
retreat process that resulted in anger, confusion and additional stress on the residents. 
Rapid retreat was realized with the top-down approach; however, there was little trust or 
transparency in the retreat process to foster buy-in and well-being from the residents. 
Utilizing a slower consultation approach within flood-affected communities would likely 
generate longer-term community-driven approaches to resilience. 
Great Lakes, ON 
Over the last seven years, increased lake levels have triggered significant coastal and bluff 
erosion and coastal flooding along a 60 km stretch from Erieau to Leamington on Lake 
Erie’s northern coastline. Lake Erie water levels fluctuate seasonally and over longer time 
periods in response to inflows from Lake St. Clair/Huron, rain and snow events over the 
lake, and inflows from the many smaller rivers which drain directly into the lake. 
Thousands of waterfront cottages, homes, estate homes, farms and tourist 
accommodations dot the waterfront, many less than 2 m above the long-term average 
(LTA) lake level. Onshore winds and storm events, as well as ice shoves, magnify the impact 
of high water levels, and typical storm events can increase lake levels locally by more than 
0.5 m and accelerate erosion. There are now several current or future planned realignment 
projects. Local authorities have reactively realigned some stretches of coastal roads and 
are proactively considering the realignment of additional roads. Erie Shore Drive near 
Erieau, has flooded repeatedly since 2017 which has resulted in recent studies that have 
identified planned retreat as one disaster risk reduction option. Towards Leamington, 
several planned retreat projects are already completed, and more are at the proposal 
phase. The main lesson learned from this case is that reactive post-erosion retreat can be 
used constructively as a trigger and signal about the need for proactive climate change 
adaptation. 
Pointe Gatineau, QC 
Pointe Gatineau, QC has been in existence in one form or another for over 200 years. 
Located at the confluence of the Gatineau and Ottawa rivers, the community has had a 
long history of flooding. Although the construction of upstream locks (1911) and 
hydropower dams (1920 and 1964) reduced the frequency of flooding, significant flood 
events continued to be experienced by the community, including in 1926, 1947, 1951, 
1974 and 1976. Portions of the Pointe Gatineau community are established in what is now 
considered to be a 1:20-year floodplain. After an approximately 40-year quiet period, two 
record floods occurred in April 2017 and May 2019, inundating the community and 
triggering planned retreat via two successive waves of home buyouts that continue to this 
day. Following the 2017 flood, provincial legislation banned home reconstruction in the 
1:20 floodplain, and within weeks, the Quebec government facilitated planned retreat 
through a special 2017 flood-related program that expanded on its standard “Financial 
Assistance for Disaster Victims” program. Further refinements to the buyout program were 
announced in 2019, to cap the maximum amount of the buyouts to encourage flood 
victims to relocate elsewhere. Planned retreat in the Pointe Gatineau community can best 
be summarized as being carried out reactively in the face of repeated flood disasters, 
funded by a combination of municipal, provincial and federal government funding. Retreat 
 
 
7 
 
mainly involving single detached homes, featured a mix of voluntary and involuntary 
elements of choice, and has been followed up by a promising community engagement and 
redevelopment process. 
Tuktoyaktuk, NT 
The Hamlet of Tuktoyaktuk is located on the Beaufort Sea in the Western Canadian Arctic 
on a low-lying peninsula on the delta of the Mackenzie River. The original permanent 
settlement was established in 1934 and was affected by rapid erosion early in its history. 
Starting in 1974, several erosion mitigation techniques were tried before effective 
adaptation measures were found. Erosion protection was implemented between 1998 and 
2001. However, sea-level rise and melting permafrost has increased the rate of erosion. In 
2003, researchers projected that coastal erosion would cause the tip of the peninsula to 
disappear within 10 years (Atkinson, 2005). This community has historically relied upon 
winter roads for transportation as well as marine traffic for supplies. In 2017, the Inuvik-
Tuktoyaktuk highway opened, the first overland year-round transportation route to the 
community. In March 2019, an engineering report named Tuktoyaktuk Coastal Erosion 
Study was completed by W.F. Baird & Associates Coastal Engineers Ltd. This pointed to the 
need for the inclusion of planned retreat in Tuktoyaktuk’s adaptation plan, which could 
now be possible because the all-weather road expands the range of options available for 
retreat and relocation. Planned retreat is understood to be necessary to adapt to these 
hazards. The Hamlet of Tuktoyaktuk is now entering its next phase where the preliminary 
results have helped the community to decide on a hybrid structural option to mitigate the 
coastal erosion of the peninsula. Despite some progress in Tuktoyaktuk, persistent 
challenges—particularly those related to funding availability, relocation destination 
planning and timelines, as well as the lack of technical (e.g. engineering) expertise in the 
community—have been identified as important issues. 
Truro, NS 
The Town of Truro, Nova Scotia, now a regional centre of approximately 12,000 residents, 
has faced flooding on an almost annual basis since records began. A Truro flood risk study 
commissioned in 2017 suggested that past flooding did not appear to trigger significant 
risk reduction efforts. This changed significantly following major flooding in 2012 caused by 
a storm associated with remnants of tropical Storm Leslie. With a policy window for 
change now open, the Joint Flood Advisory Committee (comprised of the Town of Truro, 
County of Colchester, and Millbrook First Nation) commissioned a comprehensive flood 
risk study for the region. The Truro-Onslow dyke project emerged out of the Flood Risk 
Study as a project which would not only add floodplain capacity but would also reduce 
dyke maintenance costs, by realigning dykes inland, and adding new riverine and salt 
marsh habitats. The project is an example of the voluntary retreat of dyke infrastructure 
and the conversion of agricultural land into salt marsh habitat. Potentially affected 
landowners were consulted, and the wider public was engaged on the Flood Risk Study 
that raised the realignment possibility. Other than compensation for land purchases, no 
overt incentives were used in the ultimate decision to realign the dyke. Landowners were 
free to reject purchase offers or to vote against the dyke realignment plan. As such, this 
project represents an excellent model for voluntary, community-engaged disaster risk 
reduction and climate change adaptation. 
Table E2. Summary of good practices and considerations for leaders and practitioners to consider 
Practice 
Considerations 
Communication Good Practices 
Communicate early and often Establish a list of stakeholders, title and rights holders early. Update it as 
necessary. Communicate regularly both individually and in appropriate groups. 
Include planned retreat as an 
option 
Over the past five years, awareness and acceptance of the need for planned 
retreat to be considered have grown substantially. 
 
 
8 
 
Choose terminology carefully 
Planned retreat can be referred to as, amongst other options, planned relocation 
or proactive retreat. Decide with trusted advisors what the right language is for 
the community. 
Put planned retreat in 
context of adaptation 
Planned retreat is not a separate discussion, but part of a long-term assessment 
of options to deal with climate vulnerability; this includes building awareness and 
capacity, mobilizing resources, and assessing and implementing adaptation 
actions. 
Consider culture 
Where a community’s culture is tied to place —most notably in the case of First 
Nations—this must be taken into consideration during planning, consultation and 
implementation of adaptation. 
Leave time for planned 
retreat discussions 
Planned retreat consensus-building takes longer than other adaptation options. 
Computer graphics are 
persuasive 
Good visualizations, often animated, have helped communities to understand and 
internalize the challenges they face in a way that spreadsheets and maps may 
not. Try to have them established in the adaptation process. 
Governance Good Practices 
Communities decide 
Decisions for planned retreat of residences or infrastructure need to be made 
with and preferably by the community, for the community. 
Pick leader(s) and 
champion(s) carefully 
The people who take on the mantle of leading the long and sometimes 
contentious process of adaptation, resilience building and retreat are taking on an 
important role; as such, the continuity and traits of such people are key. 
Establish and fund a program 
and roles 
Adaptation processes often last longer than municipal, provincial, territorial and 
federal governments. Establish approaches and funding processes that support 
programs able to sustain activities for years. 
Start funding efforts early 
There is currently no targeted Canadian budget and funding model for planned 
retreat. Each instance assembles provincial and federal funding for municipalities.  
Manage the tax base 
Losing high-value waterfront properties and residents can be mitigated through 
proactive planning and rezoning. 
Process Good Practices 
Adaptation and building 
resiliency are a cyclical 
process 
Retreat may feel unavoidable but may not be accepted at present. There will 
likely be an opportunity to re-introduce it as an option later. 
Start early 
Risk analysis and planning takes time and effort. If adaptation assessments and 
discussions have not yet started, start soon. Key resources are often booked in 
advance. 
Protect and promote physical 
and mental health 
Many engaging in retreat discussions or affected by retreat have suffered through 
disasters and have physical and mental health concerns. Regardless, this process 
is sure to be stressful. 
Plan a future for the 
retreated properties 
In the best case, create a community green space with memorials of the sacrifices 
made by those affected in support of broader community well-being. At 
minimum, demolish buildings and return the property to nature. Do not resell to 
developers. 
Get universities and granting 
agencies to help 
Many areas where there is a need for expert assessment have university 
programs specifically focused on the topic. Contact them and see if research 
grants will pay for grad students and PhDs to provide value for the community. 
Get professional assistance 
There are Canadian firms in landscape architecture and planning industries that 
have expertise in adaptation, resilience building and planned retreat. There are 
 
 
9 
 
also agencies and consultants that specialize in public consultation and 
engagement that can support communities through the public consultation 
process.  
Be creative in retreat 
solutions 
Land swaps, buy and leaseback, and shifting service costs to residents and 
businesses that choose to remain in place have all been used by different 
communities. 
Be inclusive and use an all-
hazards approach when 
identifying and monitoring 
hazards. 
Use an all-hazards approach that assesses all potential risks, e.g., sea-level rise, 
coastal erosion, river and lake hazards (water-level fluctuations, flooding, etc.), 
landslides, and tsunamis, any of which may be affected by climate change. 
Consider overlapping 
disasters as a risk 
Wildfires followed immediately by flooding are occurring. Pandemics preventing 
emergency shelters and cooling stations are a reality. Do not assess risks in 
isolation, but in likely combinations. 
Plan for municipal, provincial, 
territorial and federal 
elections 
Changes in governments are mostly scheduled, and with them can come changes 
in priorities. Tailor the plan to avoid, where possible, critical decision points or 
funding lapses directly before or after elections. 
Planned or proactive retreat can address current risks as well as climate change impacts contextualized within the 
broader climate change adaptation process of “protect, accommodate, retreat and avoid.” By identifying 
populations and infrastructure assets that are most likely to be exposed and vulnerable to particular climate 
impacts and hazards, communities can begin weighing the social, economic, and health costs of persisting in place 
versus relocating to another location. What is clear from an overview of international contexts is that the entire 
space of planned retreat is still emergent and few proactive retreat examples exist.  
This report provides a broad analysis of planned retreat processes, including triggers, sources of resistance, 
common considerations and key enablers and barriers. The most common trigger for planned retreat was 
experience with a disaster, which tended to open “policy windows” for planned retreat activities. However, 
proactive action is preferable, with multiple sources, including the Global Commission on Adaptation and the 
Insurance Bureau of Canada, stating that investments in community resilience have a return on investment of 
$2–$10 in future averted losses for every $1 spent proactively (Global Commission on Adaptation, 2019). There are 
numerous sources of resistance to planned retreat, which may vary widely and include psychological resistance to 
retreat, financial resistance, community cohesion resistance, resistance due to concerns for individual well-being, 
and resistance due to political concerns. 
This report provides the reader with a comprehensive analysis of the use of planned retreat as an adaptation 
mechanism for climate change. Both domestic and international approaches to planned retreat are examined. Five 
case studies from various parts of Canada are presented including discussion of the programs and processes that 
were used in each of the case studies to achieve desired results. Planned retreat is evolving as an adaptation 
approach in Canada and may prove to be a sustainable and preferred approach under continued climate change. 
1. Introduction 
Canada’s climate has warmed and will warm further in the future, driven by human influence (Bush and Lemmen, 
ed. 2019). Climate change—together with its many, multisectoral and cross-jurisdictional impacts—presents one of 
the critical challenges of the 21st century. Despite major international efforts to curb emissions and slow climate 
change, mitigation efforts have been insufficient to eliminate the impacts and risks associated with climate change. 
In recent years, Canada has produced a series of national climate assessments, including sector- and location-
specific reports (Bush & Lemmen, 2008; Lemmen et al., 2008; Warren et al., 2014; Maxwell et al., 1997). Across 
these assessments, numerous threats and risks to Canadians and communities have been identified, pointing to 
the need for proactive planning to improve resilience. A report by the Council of Canadian Academies (2019) 
 
 
10 
 
identified 12 major areas of risk associated with climate change in Canada, with critical infrastructure, coastal 
communities, and human health being amongst the most acute. 
Climate change adaptation planning can be conceptualized into five general stages (Lemmen et al., 2016):  
1. Understand climate impacts 
2. Assess vulnerability  
3. Identify and select adaptation options 
4. Implement actions 
5. Monitor/adjust 
Within the context of adaptation options, this report considers the broader PARA framework (Protect, 
Accommodate, Retreat and Avoid) (Doberstein et al., 2019). Planned retreat has been gaining increasing attention 
as a potential option, out of recognition that there are cases where the impacts of climate change are too 
disruptive, costly, or uncontrollable to sufficiently protect human health or infrastructure; in these cases, it may be 
necessary to abandon the area altogether. However, there is relatively little guidance available for retreat in the 
Canadian context. Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) initiated a process to address this knowledge gap. 
This report is intended to inform proactive planning and implementation of planned retreat approaches that 
consider future climate change impacts. In Canada, insured catastrophe losses have been increasing steadily, rising 
from 405 million annually between 1983 and 2008 to over CAD 1.8 billion between 2009 and 2018, primarily from 
flooding events (Golnaraghi et al., 2020). A proactive adaptive management approach is more likely to reduce risks 
and costs long-term, allowing communities to seize opportunities and overcome barriers. Proactive retreat 
planning can also be more cost-effective and facilitate a more organized approach, fully engaging communities and 
a broad range of stakeholders and decision makers, with the goal to prevent future risks from natural hazards and 
build climate resilience.  
Planned retreat is situated within the wider context of human migration, disaster risk reduction, and climate 
change adaptation. The overall aim of this Analysis Report is to orient practitioners and community leaders to the 
common themes and research results in planned retreat including from government publications and key 
informant interviews. While emphasis is placed, where possible, on considerations for proactive, forward-looking 
retreat, insights from retreat in response to disaster events are also included. 
The term “managed retreat” is commonly used to describe the retreat process. However, “managed” has 
connotations of being imposed by others, while the term “retreat” itself can have strong negative connotations 
associated with surrender and loss. Further, the Canadian history of forced relocation, particularly of Indigenous 
groups, can make “retreat” conversations especially difficult and painful. In the spirit of Reconciliation with 
Indigenous peoples, it is fundamental to incorporate the following considerations in the process: 
 Honouring treaties; 
 Acknowledging and respecting Indigenous rights and titles; 
 Recognizing the role Indigenous peoples have held in the creation of Canada; 
 Recognition and support of the deep connections Indigenous peoples have to the land; and 
 Building relationships. 
It is important to consider community-driven and community-owned retreat and to use language and terminology 
that is responsive and sensitive to the contexts in which retreat is being considered. “Planned retreat” was 
identified as the preferred term, though others—including “planned relocation,” “climate migration,” and 
“planned migration”—may be more appropriate in some contexts. However, regardless of the term being used, 
retreat and relocation discussions are likely to be difficult and painful for those affected and require substantial 
time to foster effective local engagement and ownership. 
 
 
11 
 
This report deals specifically with planned retreat in the context of climate change adaptation. A number of 
climate change reports relevant to the implementation of planned retreat have been published in recent years, 
including Canada’s Changing Climate Report, Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate, Case Studies on 
Climate Change in Floodplain Mapping, the Canadian Centre for Climate Services provides Canadians access to 
climate information and support.  
1.1. 
Project Goals & Objectives 
The overall goal of this Report is to analyze the current state of planned retreat approaches and policies in Canada 
and internationally, in order to generate a series of good practices and considerations which can help guide 
Canadian practitioners and community stakeholders engaged in or exploring proactive planned retreat. 
The following guiding principles informed the design, execution and synthesis of this project: 
1. Long-term time horizon – A longer-term view of risk assessment and management planning in the context 
of a changing climate was taken in order to support proactive adaptation planning. 
2. Risk-Based – Recommendations and considerations in this report were developed by taking into account 
hazards, exposures, vulnerabilities, probabilities and consequences as they relate to populations and 
infrastructure assets; this should support evidence-informed recommendations. 
3. Equity – Recommendations considered social justice with regard to the equitable distribution of costs and 
benefits, aiming to promote fairness in retreat processes. 
4. Collaborative – The importance of multi-stakeholder collaboration in the planning and implementation of 
retreat has been emphasized throughout this report in an effort to support local ownership of retreat 
discussions. 
1.2. 
Target Audience 
This report is generally intended for a broader audience of practitioners and community stakeholders that may be 
considering planned retreat as a potential adaptation option. The intent is to advance discussions of good practices 
in planned retreat in hopes that these may be useful in future retreat efforts. As such, authors have sought to 
avoid the more technical and scientific details of climate change adaptation and planned retreat, which may be of 
less interest to this audience. 
1.3. 
Methodology 
This report is informed by a broader environmental scan of the current state of planned retreat, both in Canada 
and relevant international contexts. Data collection efforts targeted peer-reviewed literature, government 
publications, and specific organizations with mandates relevant to climate change adaptation and planned retreat. 
Findings of this scan are described in additional detail in Section 2. 
This descriptive analysis was leveraged alongside a series of key informant interviews with planned retreat 
practitioners and subject matter experts from government, industry and academia to inform this analysis effort. 
Informants are kept anonymous, but included city managers, provincial and federal program managers, university 
researchers, and consultants. A thematic analysis was conducted to integrate findings and elicit key themes and 
recommendations (Sections 4–6). 
 
 
12 
 
1.4. 
Report Outline 
This report is organized into seven sections. Section 1 introduces the projects and its overall goals and objectives. 
Section 2 provides some useful background related to the current state of planned retreat, both in Canada and 
internationally. Section 3 provides six detailed case studies of Canadian retreat. Section 4 synthesizes key findings 
of the analysis, related to triggers, sources of resistance, common approaches and enablers and barriers of 
planned retreat. Section 5 is dedicated to a detailed analysis of the direct and long-term health impacts of retreat. 
Section 6 offers a discussion of some good practices and considerations for proactive retreat. Section 7 concludes 
the report with a closing statement. 
2. Background 
As mentioned above, a broad environmental scan was conducted to assess the current state of planned retreat in 
Canada and in relevant international contexts. The scan sought to understand three primary questions: 
1. What are some of the key approaches and pathways currently being used to implement planned retreat, 
both in Canada and internationally? 
2. What climate adaptation practices and contexts present viable opportunities for planned retreat as a 
preferred option? 
3. What are some of the most common applications and approaches for planned retreat? 
Key finding from the environmental scan and analysis are summarized in the sections below. 
2.1. 
Retreat in the Context of Climate Change Adaptation 
Climate change impacts are increasing in frequency and severity, outpacing preparedness and increasing costs for 
Canadians and businesses. Temperature change projections to 2040 are fairly consistent across modelling 
scenarios and assumptions, while those more distant vary more broadly; for example, global temperature 
increases for low-emission and high-emission scenarios range from 1.8 to 6.3 oC by 2100 (Flato et al., 2019).1 
Canada has been warming at a rate more than twice that of the global average, as the loss of snow and sea ice 
drives further surface warming, amplifying warming at high northern latitudes (Flato et al., 2019). Northern Canada 
is expected to continue experiencing stronger warming than the rest of Canada, especially in the winter. In the 
Canadian North, the impacts of higher temperatures are already severe and will intensify in coming decades. These 
changes include the extent and duration of snow and ice cover, sea-level changes, permafrost degradation, 
temperature changes, freshwater availability, fire weather, other extremes of weather and climate. In Canada, 
precipitation patterns are also expected to change, with larger projected increases in annual precipitation in 
Northern Canada. Northern Canada is unique in having communities and infrastructure built on permafrost, or 
subsurface permanently frozen soil. Thawing permafrost has direct and indirect challenges for northern 
communities, infrastructure and even basic research. Mass movement hazards, including slope instability, feature 
in a number of managed retreat cases both internationally and in Canada. Canadian communities including North 
Vancouver BC, Chilliwack BC, Fort McMurray AB, and Lemieux ON, have each been exposed to mass movement 
hazards that necessitated the relocation of residents and demolition of houses. In Canada, shifts in precipitation 
patterns will increase wildfire risks, mostly in the western portion of the country. Both the Fort McMurray fire and 
the Australian fires have been partially attributed to climate change, and the communities affected were built in 
areas with a higher likelihood of risk from wildfires. 
Relative sea level is projected to decrease across much of Northern Canada as a result of vertical land motion 
(uplift) due to postglacial rebound. Major population centres located in southern Canada, such as Halifax and 
Vancouver, will experience a rise in sea level at or greater than the global average (Lemmen et al., 2016). By 2050, 
                                                 
1 Detailed projections of projected climatic changes, both globally and in Canada, are outside the scope of this analysis and are described in 
detail in other publications (Dresser & Phillips, 2014; Flato et al., 2019; Lemmen et al., 2016). 
 
 
13 
 
sea-level rise and storm surge are expected to impose $4–17 billion per year in flood damages to homes along 
Canada’s coastlines (Lemmen et al., 2016). Climate change includes significant changes to precipitation patterns, 
variations of which are already occurring and have been impacting Canadian communities. Precipitation patterns 
have changed more due to climate change than other factors and riverine flooding was a greater pre-existing risk 
than other common hazards facing Canadian communities. Meanwhile, lake and river-level increases have been 
observed, pointing to potential increases in erosion and flooding. The majority of hurricane-related impacts on 
Canada are more pertinently categorized into coastal flooding—including storm surge and king tide events—and 
riverine flooding.  
Taking these factors into consideration, it is likely that existing vulnerabilities will be exacerbated by climate 
change (Derksen et al., 2018; Lemmen et al., 2016). Adaptation efforts that are sufficient and locally appropriate 
now may be inadequate to protect populations in the future. Put simply, the hazards driving the need for 
adaptation, locations in need of adaptation, and scope of adaptation policies and programs are likely to shift and 
expand, requiring ongoing monitoring and adjustment. Climate change impacts are highly location specific, and it is 
important to work with climate service providers to obtain the most relevant information for the community that 
can be understood and considered within the broader risk and impact assessment and adaptation planning 
contexts. Proactive adaptation investments, including retreat, tend to provide overall economic savings. Multiple 
sources, including the Global Commission on Adaptation and the Insurance Bureau of Canada, calculate that 
investments in community resilience have a return on investment of $2–$10 in future averted losses for every $1 
spent proactively (Global Commission on Adaptation, 2019).  
It is important to note that planned retreat occurs within a broader climate change adaptation framework. As 
summarized in Figure 1, climate change adaptation generally occurs in a cyclical, five-step process: 
 
Understand climate impacts: locally specific environmental monitoring is essential to understanding the 
impacts of climate change on a specific community or region. 
 
Assess risks and vulnerabilities: risk assessments that are founded in best practices are useful tools for 
identifying populations and infrastructure assets that are most likely to be exposed and vulnerable to 
particular climate impacts and hazards, while capacity to adapt and improve resilience can also be 
assessed. This is useful for prioritizing areas and sectors for intervention. 
Identify and select adaptation options: based on knowledge of climate impacts and community 
vulnerabilities, local stakeholders must decide which adaptation options are reasonable and acceptable 
for their circumstances. It is important to evaluate social, environmental and economic considerations for 
each option for informed decision-making. Options include: 
o 
Protect: reduce likelihood of exposure to climate change hazards and impacts (such as floods) 
o 
Accommodate: reduce vulnerability (or increase resilience) of population or infrastructure 
o 
Retreat: relocate at-risk populations or infrastructure to low-risk areas 
o 
Avoid: use community plans and zoning by-laws to build future housing, businesses and critical 
infrastructure preferentially (or only) in lower-risk areas 
 
Implement actions: proper planning, design and execution of adaptation policies and programs often 
requires a lengthy process, including steps to obtain funding and implement changes. 
 
Monitor/adapt: adaptation efforts require monitoring and evaluation plans developed a priori, allowing 
the community and users to evaluate success, respond to changes, and foster accountability. 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Climate change adaptation framework 
This PARA framework is well established and has been applied both in Canada (British Columbia Ministry of 
Environment, 2013; Harford, 2016) and internationally (Dronkers et al., 1990; Eichhorst et al., 2011; Rijke et al., 
2012), most commonly in the context of preparation for coastal flooding. For example, the Netherlands has 
historically been a leader in “protect” approaches, including dykes and storm walls, but has more recently 
incorporated other adaptation options such as home buyouts and retreat to elevated grounds (Rikke et al., 2012). 
However, researchers contend that the PARA framework is more broadly applicable to proactive adaptation 
planning for other climate change hazards (Doberstein et al., 2019). It offers a useful suite of adaptation options, 
the most appropriate of which will be determined on a case-by-case basis and specific to community contexts, 
risks and values. While the scope of our analysis is limited to planned retreat, more specific analysis of other 
adaptation options—as well as Canadian case studies—is available in a recent report by Doberstein et al (2019).  
Good practices for planned retreat are not limited to just the identification phase. As mentioned throughout this 
report, regular, active communication is an essential good practice for effective planned retreat activities. 
Establishing your list of title and rights holders and other stakeholders, and communicating regularly with them, 
starts at the very beginning of the adaptation cycle and is repeated throughout. Finding funding for the chosen 
adaptation option(s)—including retreat—is an ongoing effort, with sources of funding ending or opening over 
time. Provincial and federal adaptation programs and practices are much longer than any community’s assessment 
of adaptation options.  
Planned retreat in Canada will be driven by various and increasing climate risks, particularly those associated with 
acute emergency or disaster situations. Planned retreat for long-term climate change adaptation often proceeds 
along a very different timetable as compared to retreat for disaster-related reasons, and the “pathways approach” 
has been developed to provide guidance for this. The pathways approach is a “strategic, flexible and structured 
decision-making” approach (CoastAdapt, 2020), which allows decision makers and communities to design adaptive 
climate change strategies that are resilient to unexpected changes or future developments (Zandvoort et al., 
2017). One of the key hallmarks of climate change is the high degree of uncertainty surrounding future climatic 
conditions and associated hazards. The term “pathways” conjures up the image of communities navigating a 
journey into this uncertainty, taking a single step at a time, pausing to scan the new surroundings, and then 
choosing the most promising next steps on the pathway. When communities adopt a pathways approach, climate 
change adaptation decisions become “a sequence of manageable steps or decision points over time” (CoastAdapt, 
 
 
15 
 
2020) rather than a single one-time comprehensive plan. Another way of viewing the approach is as a repetitive 
series of smaller climate change adaptation decision cycles (see Figure 1) rather than one large decision cycle. 
When putting a pathways approach into action, communities map out a series of possible climate change-related 
thresholds and decision triggers that will guide the “steps” communities take over time. Thresholds (sometimes 
also called “tipping points”) may be environmental (e.g. formerly healthy coastal ecosystems are now dying due to 
sea-level rise-induced saltwater intrusion), social (e.g. flooding is causing damage in the community once every 
three years on average) or adaptation options-related (e.g. an existing seawall is no longer high enough to contain 
rising sea levels) (CoastAdapt, 2020; Zandvoort et al., 2017). Once a threshold has been reached, a series of 
options are examined to see how they perform against plausible futures (e.g. the next 10–15 years of expected 
climate change) and a community-engaged decision-making process then leads to the choice of the option that will 
make up “the next step.” Another key part of the pathways approach is being careful to avoid maladaptation 
(CoastAdapt, 2020), taking steps that lead communities down a pathway towards loss of resilience or closed off 
future options (e.g., building a massive and expensive seawall or dyke that forecloses other future options). 
Researchers who have examined the pathways approach have concluded that it is best applied at a 
local/community level, and its use depends on community consensus about both the adaptation “problem” and 
the thresholds that will trigger the various steps along the climate change pathway (Zandvoort et al., 2017). 
The advice of the report pertains to all causes of planned retreat, but examples are dominated by coastal and 
riverine flooding, which are most commonly referenced in this report. We expect more planned retreats in the 
face of other hazards in the coming decades. 
2.2. 
Scan of Planned Retreat in Canada 
Most efforts to date in both Canada and internationally have focused on adaptation in place and infrastructure 
hardening. This is being done in the context of the five stages of adaptation: understand climate impacts, assess 
vulnerability, identify and select adaptation options, implement actions, and monitor/adjust. Increasingly, an 
option being put forth is planned retreat away from areas where the impacts of climate change are too disruptive 
to prevent significant risk to human lives or where infrastructure is too costly to be made more resilient. 
The social and economic costs associated with climate change impacts in Canada are high and projected to grow. 
Planned retreat needs to be included in adaptation option discussions and is likely to be an increasingly viable and 
desirable approach as climate change progresses. Municipalities and local leaders need guidance alongside strong 
and coordinated support from provincial and federal organizations to manage the fraught process of deciding on 
and implementing retreat. 
Prior to this report, there were no summaries of good practices for planned retreat in the Canadian context. 
Furthermore, emergent risks such as potential retreat from areas more subject to wildfires have not been 
considered as of yet. For many communities, gaining sufficient insight into the specific risks that they face is time 
consuming, expensive and difficult. Key themes and insights from the Canadian context are summarized in Table 2. 
Table 2. Insights from environmental scan of current state of planned retreat 
Insight 
Discussion 
Retreat is reactive 
Retreat is still being done almost entirely reactively to disasters (particularly flooding) as 
opposed to proactively. Communities experiencing repeat riverine or coastal flooding events 
often delay retreat actions. The Truro area flooding, for example, occurred multiple times 
with flooding overtopping dykes before retreat was considered seriously. 
No standard 
approaches 
Retreat lacks standardization, with communities in close proximity to each other often having 
disparate responses. In the Ottawa-Gatineau region, affected homeowners in Quebec 
 
 
16 
 
Insight 
Discussion 
received a buyout, but hunting lodge and vacation property owners did not. Across the 
Ottawa River in Ontario, no buyout was provided at all. 
Varying 
governmental 
support 
Municipalities have put varying degrees of emphasis on retreat, with some municipalities 
actively promoting waterfront development for the tax base. Every province’s approach is 
different. There is no tailored federal funding program currently available. However, Quebec 
has asked for and received federal funding for buyouts, while Ontario has not. 
Adaptation 
overlaps political 
cycles 
The process of adaptation, including retreat, generally extends beyond normal political 
timelines. In BC, the Surrey Coastal Flooding Adaptation Strategy (CFAS) process overlapped 
political cycles and the actual implementation of the currently chosen options may take 
decades. 
Increased 
awareness of 
retreat 
Between 2010 and 2015, awareness of retreat being a serious option and acceptance of the 
need to consider it increased sharply. This is true in the United States, with Superstorm 
Sandy driving awareness, and in Canada, where the Surrey CFAS process was surprised by 
very broad and deep citizen support for retreat. 
Retreat language 
is fraught 
The language used to introduce and describe planned retreat can itself be a source of conflict 
and resistance. “Managed” has connotations of being imposed by others. “Retreat” has 
connotations of giving up and losing. Other language has historical precedents that can be 
challenging, especially for Indigenous peoples. 
Inequity persists 
Inequity in retreat based on socioeconomic status and systemic marginalization is a persisting 
problem. In the United States, affluent, mostly white communities were able to garner state 
and federal support for mass movement or for enhanced protections. Communities with 
lower socioeconomic status, often communities of colour, frequently encountered 
patchwork retreat as individual homeowners worked through the challenges of federal 
paperwork to garner buyouts. In both countries, some disadvantaged communities persist in 
the most at risk areas, while more affluent homeowners see larger buyouts. 
Retreat is an 
economic decision 
In the end, economic factors drive retreat as an option, both for homeowners and 
communities. While retreat is difficult, when full accounting of the cost of persisting in place 
with rebuilding and accommodations double or more the cost of retreat, valuing the real 
estate accurately is hard to do. Communities and provinces have the additional burden of 
health and emergency services costs to consider. 
Communities 
decide 
Community engagement and collaboration are essential to ethical and successful planned 
retreat. The best examples of well-done retreats in Europe and North America have the 
community deciding after extended discussion amongst themselves and affected parties 
what the right choice of action is. Higher levels of government are best understood as a 
source of funding, regional coordinators and governance. 
Retreat impacts 
health 
Both the physical and mental health of people considering and undertaking retreat can be 
adversely impacted. Typically, individuals have been through successive stressful and 
sometimes physically debilitating disasters before retreat is strongly considered and 
undertaken. For many, place attachment is strong, and leaving their family home is very 
challenging emotionally. 
Bureaucracy can 
be a second 
disaster 
In a post-disaster setting, the bureaucracy surrounding retreat can delay action and become 
a “second disaster.” Municipalities, businesses and individuals have to wade through multiple 
agencies and bureaucratic processes to gain support and aid, even as they are coping with 
rebuilding. In many cases, programs and governments changed and the entire bureaucratic 
process had to be restarted. This has been the case for several in the Gatineau region of 
Quebec with the home buyout program. 
 
 
17 
 
Insight 
Discussion 
Good practices are 
scattered 
Good practices in planned retreat exist, but these are scattered and often highly context 
specific. Often guidance is highly specific to portions of retreat or specific programs that do 
not exist in other countries or even neighbouring states or provinces. 
2.3. 
Scan of Planned Retreat in Relevant International Contexts 
This section provides a high-level overview of the current state of planned retreat in international contexts of 
relevance to Canada. Europe has focused on ecosystem and coastal transformation under the term “managed 
realignment.” While precipitation patterns in Europe have been changing and have climate change links, this has 
not yet led to well-documented shifts in infrastructure or communities. While considerations and best practices in 
managed realignment may not always be applicable to planned retreat processes—given that realignment may not 
involve retreating farmland, communities and infrastructure—several Canadian case studies on managed 
realignment were considered in this report, including realignment efforts in the Great Lakes region and Truro, 
Nova Scotia. As European communities tend to be older than Canadian communities, development patterns have 
shifted out of the highest-risk zones for normal flooding events over centuries, and coastal hardening had been put 
in place, again often centuries in the past. Much of the practices are concerned with making coastal areas more 
resilient with increased marshland, along with removal of coastal hardening efforts. 
In the United States, a number of retreat approaches were implemented following Superstorm Sandy in the New 
York City region. Both New York and New Jersey coastal communities have seen a patchwork of buyouts with little 
guidance provided to families and businesses about where to relocate. As a result, those relocating have often 
ended up moving to areas which are at equal or greater risk a few kilometres away. These programs provide useful 
insights on social justice concerns, legal ramifications and analogous policy and program impacts on planned 
retreat. 
New Zealand, as a Pacific island state which expects to be heavily impacted by sea-level rise, has been active in 
developing and implementing policies to deal with the impact of climate change, including planned retreat. 
Material from this country provides insights on language use, social implications, and policy alignment. 
Australia provides an informative counterexample to New Zealand. Having initially been a leader on climate-
related policies—such as the introduction of a carbon tax in 2012—and good practices on planned retreat, the 
country has recently experienced political challenges, and climate adaptation approaches such as planned retreat 
have been leveraged for political gain by opponents of climate action. There are crucial lessons here which can be 
brought to the Canadian context. 
A wide variety of tactics for implementing planned retreat have been identified. These include, but are not limited 
to: rolling easements, increased risk sharing with homeowners who choose to persist in place, changes to flood 
and other insurance coverages to shift the insurance burden to homeowners who wish to persist, purchase and 
leaseback of at-risk properties to homeowners in preparation for eventual movement, federal home purchase 
programs, and community amenity building on retreated land. 
For two of the key concerns in the Canadian context—permafrost thaw and wildfire risks—no international 
examples were found. One exception to this is the relocation of numerous Alaskan coastal Indigenous 
communities, but arguably this is more due to coastal erosion than to generalized permafrost thaw. 
What is clear from an overview of international contexts is that the entire space of planned retreat is still 
emergent. Globally, we are still learning from attempts and failures in different contexts, but to date there has 
been no attempt to synthesize this information into a prescriptive guidebook that can be adapted and adopted for 
Canadian use. 
 
 
18 
 
2.4. 
Scope of Planned Retreat 
The focus of this report is on proactive planned retreat of human communities and critical infrastructure in the 
context of a changing climate. 
Within the scope of this report, “human communities” include people, houses, neighbourhoods, human land uses, 
and businesses in increasingly at-risk areas. “Critical infrastructure” includes coastal roads, rail lines, transmission 
lines, bridges, dykes, hospitals, ambulance and police stations, fire halls, emergency operation centres, electrical 
substations, water storage and treatment facilities, sewage treatment plants, and pipelines in increasingly at-risk 
areas. 
While past examples of retreat in Canada have been dominated by repeated riverine flooding or long-lasting 
coastal erosion, these were mostly due to communities being located in areas where they were exposed to long-
established patterns of environmental hazards, rather than emerging or increased hazards brought about by 
climate change. This report is informed by these examples of retreat and by ongoing and projected changes to 
hazards brought about by climate change. The goal is to enable Canadian communities and other key groups to 
engage in proactive planning for effective adaptation to climate-change induced hazards. 
3. Canadian Case Studies 
This section reviews a series of recent Canadian cases in which planned retreat has played a role in either disaster 
risk reduction or climate change adaptation, or a combination of both. The overall aim of this section is to examine 
the variable realities of recent and, in some cases, ongoing planned retreat actions in Canadian communities. The 
five cases are intended to represent diversity across a number of dimensions, including: 
 
Geography: coastal, northern, and interior regions  
 
Physical “triggers”: rapid onset (e.g. flooding) vs. slow onset (e.g. coastal erosion) 
 
Timelines: rapid retreat vs. slow/incremental retreat 
 
Degree of choice: spectrum from involuntary to voluntary 
 
Approach: reactive vs. proactive 
 
Assets involved: households, neighbourhoods, infrastructure 
 
Community types: remote northern, highly urbanized, coastal 
It should be noted that these case studies do not represent the full breadth of planned retreat examples available 
or considered in this study. For example, the province of Prince Edward Island (PEI) faces challenges associated 
with sea-level rise, storm surge, and coastal erosion, as well as planned retreat linked to these challenges. Recent 
studies show that some PEI coastlines are eroding an average of 28 cm per year (Welsh, 2019). A UPEI Climate Lab 
assessment of infrastructure at risk from erosion over the next 90 years found that 1,000 houses, 17 lighthouses, 
146 commercial buildings, and 50 km of roads were vulnerable (Fenech, 2014). 
Numerous small-scale retreat initiatives have already been undertaken, including the Cape Egmont lighthouse 
about 20 years ago, and lighthouses in East Point and Cape Bear. More ambitiously, PEI’s 2019 Climate Change 
Action Plan identifies planned retreat as an adaptation option, particularly for vulnerable coastal infrastructure 
across the Province. Using the term “relocate” rather than retreat, one of eight provincial action plan items is to 
“Retrofit, relocate, or protect critical and vulnerable public infrastructure to address the impacts of climate change, 
as is feasible and cost-effective” (Government of Prince Edward Island, 2019). Relocation is being considered for 
“new and existing provincially owned roads, bridges, buildings and other assets” at risk from climate change. 
 
 
19 
 
This report identified and examined a representative sample of planned retreat case studies across Canada, in 
conjunction with insights from document review and key informant interviews to develop recommendations on 
good practices. 
3.1. 
Surrey, BC 
With a population of approximately 520,000, Surrey, BC is the second largest of the 21 municipalities making up 
Metro Vancouver (City of Surrey, 2020). Although separate administratively, the Semiahmoo First Nation lies 
geographically within Surrey’s boundaries, and the Semiahmoo Bay coastal floodplain forms part of the First 
Nation territory (City of Surrey, 2019). 
 
Figure 2. Map of Surrey, British Columbia2 
Surrey’s history with coastal and riverine flooding (e.g. Fraser River flooding of 1948 and 1972) led the City to 
pursue a combined “avoid” and “protect” strategy for flood risk reduction. The “avoid” approach includes zoning 
and development restrictions on large areas of the floodplains in Surrey, while the “protect” approach includes 
multiple sea dams, breakwaters, and BC’s largest municipal dyking system, a comprehensive network of over 
150 km of coastal and riverine dykes (City of Surrey, 2019). However, the “avoid and protect” approaches have 
increasingly been seen as inadequate for the changing nature of hazards under climate change. About 20% of the 
City is considered to be within the coastal floodplain (City of Surrey, 2019), and thus the main climate change-
related hazards of concern are sea-level rise and associated coastal erosion and storm-related flooding, as well as 
potentially enhanced riverine and pluvial flooding. 
As a coastal city experiencing the effects of climate change, Surrey is facing the possibility of several enhanced 
hazards, and this led municipal officials to include the possibility of planned retreat as a part of the City’s Coastal 
Flood Adaptation Strategy (CFAS, City of Surrey, 2020). The CFAS planning process, covering the area considered to 
be within the coastal floodplain, ran from 2016 to 2019, with project implementation expected to span from 2020 
to 2100. The stated goal of the CFAS was identifying “the current and potential impacts of climate change on 
Surrey’s large coastal floodplain area and developing a long-term strategy to reduce climate change-driven coastal 
flooding risks now and into the future.” Funding in the amount of $76 million for the study—and the associated 
13 climate adaptation projects identified through the CFAS—was provided through the federal Disaster Mitigation 
and Adaptation Fund (DMAF), which will be augmented by $61.3 million from the City of Surrey and another 
$49.1 million in third-party funding for an expected final investment of $187 million (City of Surrey et al., 2019). 
                                                 
2 Image source: Maps Surrey. (2020). Available at https://maps-surrey.com/surrey-street-map 
Crescent Beach 
 
 
20 
 
Although the CFAS exercise was designed to address all parts of Surrey’s coastal floodplain, there were two areas 
where planned retreat was considered more seriously: these are referred to in the CFAS as “distinct Planning 
Areas” and encompass Mud Bay and Crescent Beach. 
The CFAS process was conceived of as a long-term visioning exercise in which Surrey stakeholders and the wider 
public would provide significant input and direction on the City’s overall climate change adaptation vision and 
associated projects and initiatives (City of Surrey, 2020). Public engagement and incorporation of local knowledge 
were core project objectives running throughout the five main phases of CFAS (Figure 3), although these were 
perhaps more prevalent in Phases 1, 3 and 5 (i.e. Phases 2 and 4 involved city-led technical or design planning). 
Phase 1 had CFAS staff present community stakeholders with plausible climate change futures, focusing on the 
projected effects of sea-level rise and coastal flooding on low-lying and flood-prone coastal communities and 
valued infrastructure. Phase 2 and 3 involved developing adaptation alternatives and soliciting feedback via a 
broad array of community stakeholder engagement events and a citywide survey. Phases 4 and 5 were based on 
the results of community engagement preferences expressed in the previous phase and involved the selection of 
preferred adaptation options prior to a final round of community engagement and feedback. 
 
Figure 3. CFAS planning process (City of Surrey, 2019) 
A wide variety of public engagement methods were used in the project, which ensured that numerous different 
community stakeholders’ perspectives were represented in project outcomes. These stakeholders included “First 
Nations, community and environmental organizations, business associations and groups, senior levels of 
government, farmers and the agricultural community, and neighbouring jurisdictions” (City of Surrey, 2018). One 
of the most innovative aspects of the public engagement process was collaborative development of public “values 
criteria”—the important elements of “life in Surrey” that residents collectively agreed were most important to 
maintain or enhance through climate change adaptation. Seven values were eventually agreed upon, and formed 
the criteria by which various adaptation options, including planned retreat, were assessed in Phase 3 of the project 
(City of Surrey, 2019):  
 
Residents: number of people permanently displaced by the option and related health/safety impacts  
 
Agriculture: amount of agricultural land permanently lost due to the option 
 
Environment: anticipated environmental impact (positive/negative) expected from the option 
 
Infrastructure: transportation/utilities disruptions expected from the option 
 
Economy: permanent loss of businesses expected from the option  
 
Recreation: recreation opportunities (positive/negative) expected from the option 
 
Culture: Semiahmoo First Nation cultural impacts expected from the option 
 
 
21 
 
Use of these values criteria for adaptation decision-making marks a significant empowerment of Surrey residents 
and the Semiahmoo First Nation, and this, combined with the extensive public engagement generally, allowed for 
greater acceptance of and support for project decisions (City of Surrey, 2019), including the consideration of 
planned retreat. The final community engagement statistics for CFAS are > 100,000+ Social Media Impressions, 
> 1,750 online surveys completed, > 200 youth engaged, and 18 workshops conducted. Over 30 distinct institutions 
and more than 2,000 stakeholders participated in engagement events over the three years of the project (City of 
Surrey, 2019). Additional details on the CFAS planning process are contained in the 100-page final report and in the 
project’s public engagement summary report (City of Surrey, 2018). 
Planned retreat as an adaptation option was featured in a variety of CFAS phases as well as for several 
communities and infrastructure assets. For example, one of four shortlisted adaptation options for the Mud Bay 
CFAS Planning Area was described as “Managed Retreat: removing dykes over time” (City of Surrey, 2018), while 
the other three options were variations of enhanced or new dyking. Importantly, the retreat/dyke removal option 
was also acknowledged to go hand-in-hand with the planned retreat of farmhouses, farming infrastructure and 
neighbourhoods currently protected by Mud Bay dykes. Similarly, in the Crescent Beach CFAS Planning Area, a 400-
home seaside residential community, one of four shortlisted adaptation options was simply “Move (managed 
retreat).” Although planned retreat was initially ranked the second most preferred option for Crescent Beach, it 
was eventually removed after further public engagement, the reason given being that it was “not the right timing” 
for this option, although planned retreat may be brought back for further discussion in subsequent cycles of the 
climate change adaptation process. Planned retreat was not featured as a shortlisted option for the Semiahmoo 
First Nation CFAS Planning Area, although one of the preferred options was “raising or relocating Beach [road]” 
(City of Surrey, 2018) and it is uncertain whether road relocation would also trigger the retreat of houses. 
When examining planned retreat, it is important to trace the degree of choice associated with the retreat decision. 
Under the CFAS, it is clear that planned retreat is not currently proceeding in any of the Planning Areas or wider 
coastal floodplain, and that these decisions were made voluntarily under a transparent public engagement 
process. There did not appear to be any coercive measures used in reaching these decisions (e.g. penalties, 
incentives, political or peer pressure). However, it is also worth pointing out that the decision against retreating 
could potentially be reopened in future cycles of the climate change adaptation process.  
Perhaps the single most important “lesson learned” from the CFAS process is that transparent and broad public 
engagement which devolves significant power to the public is crucial when considering a complex and potentially 
life-changing climate change adaptation approach such as planned retreat. Public engagement in the CFAS was 
built into the project’s core objectives and permeated every aspect of the three-year planning process. Planned 
retreat was ultimately not pursued under this cycle of adaptation, but the option could be revisited down the road 
as climatic conditions change, the community makeup evolves, and direct community experiences with the 
impacts of climate change continue to be experienced. 
3.2. 
High River, AB 
High River is located 40 km south of the Calgary city limits and is named after the Highwood River that flows 
through the community. The area surrounding what is now known as the Town of High River was a common First 
Nations gathering place for centuries, with the Blackfoot First Nation referring to the site as Ispitzee (“place of high 
trees along running water”). The town has a total of 5,560 dwelling units (i.e. single detached homes, duplexes, 
townhouses and apartments) with the majority of residential development located on the south side of Highwood 
River (Statistics Canada, 2020). 
 
 
22 
 
Highwood River floods are driven primarily by spring snowmelt, rain-on-snow, or heavy rainfall events in the upper 
Rocky Mountain and foothills catchment (Amec Foster Wheeler & Advisian, 2017). Since the late 1800s, there have 
been at least 12 floods of high magnitude affecting the High River area, while the 2013 event was by far the largest 
discharge amount ever recorded and the most damaging flood in High River’s history. Characterized as a stalled 
low-pressure system, a total of over 200–300 mm of rain fell in the upper catchment in just 2–3 days, triggering 
rapidly rising downstream water levels that some described as a “flash flood.” With only a few hours’ notice, the 
entire town of High River was issued a mandatory evacuation order, forcing 13,000 people to leave their homes for 
several weeks following the flood. Post-flood damage assessments revealed that over 6,300 buildings were 
damaged and approximately 60% of the town was affected to some degree by floodwaters (Figure 4) (Darwish, 
2018). 
Figure 4. High River at peak flood, June 20133 
Once floodwaters receded, questions about how to “build back better” by reducing the town’s exposure to flood 
damages and building flood resilience began to permeate recovery discussions. Previous flood events (including in 
2005) had already triggered preliminary flood risk reduction planning by the town, and these plans allowed local 
planners and officials to move forward relatively quickly with funding requests for a combination of structural 
flood protection (including construction of temporary and permanent dykes, berms, and berm/dyke/road 
upgrades), and enhanced emergency preparedness upgrades (Darwish, 2018). The question of planned retreat for 
some of the damaged neighbourhoods and infrastructure also came up in the immediate post-flood period, and 
this would prove to be the most contentious component of High River’s flood recovery. 
Planned retreat in High River was clearly reactive to the 2013 flood disaster. Approximately two months after the 
floodwaters receded, Municipal Affairs Minister Doug Griffiths announced a Floodway Relocation Program 
whereby the Government would offer buyouts to approximately 250 homeowners in six flood-affected southern 
Alberta communities, including High River, stating “We want to give homeowners the choice to relocate to safer 
areas” (CBC News, 2013a). The program offered compensation equal to the most recent tax assessment of eligible 
properties, as well as demolition and site remediation costs. At the time of the initial announcement, it was 
estimated that up to 102 High River properties—initially those located in designated floodways—would be eligible 
for buyouts (CBC News, 2013a). It is worth noting that, one month after the 2013 floods (but a month before the 
                                                 
3 Image source: Global News. (2014). 15 compelling images of High River in the 2013 flood. Available at 
https://globalnews.ca/news/1338253/15-compelling-images-of-high-river-in-the-2013-flood/. 
 
 
23 
 
buyout program announcement), the Alberta Government issued new provincial regulations about floodway 
development and related restrictions on Disaster Recovery Fund (DRF) eligibility. These two new provincial 
announcements are examples of the Alberta Government’s first attempts to use planned retreat to reduce 
exposure to flood risks. 
In High River, two communities—Beachwood Estates and Wallaceville—were the focus of buyouts, although the 
timing of buyout offers (or what some homeowners described as buyout “pressure” and “coercion”) differed 
significantly for the two communities. The Beachwood Estates community was deemed by the Province to be 
located in a floodway and, almost immediately, 31 homeowners—many with homes worth over $1 million—were 
offered a buyout. Although the buyouts were “offered” (i.e. the homes were not expropriated), the new provincial 
regulations made it clear that if homeowners chose to rebuild instead, eligibility for DRF funding would cease for 
Beachwood Estates properties affected by any future flood event (Alberta WaterPortal Society, 2020). Thus, the 
buyout was widely seen as a “one time only” offer. By contrast, Wallaceville residents faced a very different 
timeline for their buyout offers. The community was not considered by the Province to be located in a floodway, so 
flooded homeowners were told that they were not eligible for a buyout offer. However, four months later, the 
same residents were offered a provincial buyout, as the land was deemed critical to flood mitigation works 
(e.g. river channel widening) (CBC News, 2013b). In those four months, some Wallaceville residents had begun to 
rebuild, yet the buyout offer they received only covered the most recent tax assessment, not any of their cleanup 
or rebuilding costs. When several residents suggested that they might wait for town expropriation, the Mayor 
suggested that this would not be in the homeowner’s best interest given that expropriation would be done at post-
flood market value, and that they should “take a buyout or they’re on their own in any future flood event” (High 
River Online, 2013). In total, 94 High River homes were purchased by the Alberta government for a total of 
$92.9 million (National Post, 2017). Five and a half years after the flood, the planned retreat process was 
complete: 54 homes had been demolished, 26 were deemed salvageable and auctioned off, and another 14 homes 
remain standing but are uninhabited. In addition to these homes, a Canadian Pacific Railway bridge was also 
removed in order to unblock a river “chokepoint” (CBC News, 2013c). 
 
Figure 5. High River boundary with flood hazard overlay4 
                                                 
4 Image source: High River Land Use Bylaws Section 3.3 Index. Available at https://highriver.ca/land-use-bylaws/2_MapsAndOverlays.html. 
 
 
24 
 
Although difficult to state conclusively, the planned retreat process in High River can be characterized as a 
primarily top-down, non-collaborative process in which provincial and town officials largely decided on planned 
retreat for—rather than with—the community. The province’s Floodway Relocation Program led directly to a 
provincial announcement that Beachwood Estates homeowners would be bought out, and then, months later, 
Wallaceville residents—who were initially denied a buyout and had spent months and thousands of dollars 
rebuilding their homes—were suddenly advised by town officials to either accept a buyout or risk being 
expropriated at post-flood market value. Research examining the High River post-disaster public engagement 
process indicates that much of that engagement was basic public education, cosmetic urban design feedback, and 
a significant amount of “anger management” (Bogdan & McDonald-Harker, 2018). This was in lieu of more 
powerful forms of engagement such as decision-making about planned retreat or providing inputs on a collective 
community vision for post-flood resiliency. Communication was similarly top-down, with provincial and town 
officials tending to feed information and decisions to the public rather than facilitating a two-way flow of 
information in pursuit of collaborative decision-making. 
There has not been a significant attempt to revitalize or repurpose the “retreated lands” left over after home 
demolition or removal, but, of course, this may still occur sometime in the future. All but 14 of the bought-out 
homes have now been removed, and only basic naturalization of the two sites has been completed; most of the 
built features (e.g. homes, sidewalks, paved roads) have been removed, and the lots have been graded and 
hydroseeded with grass (Town of High River, 2020). In an unusual twist, the Mayor who advised Wallaceville 
residents to accept buyouts in 2013 is lobbying the provincial Government to sell the 14 homes that are still 
standing back to the Town of High River so they can be fixed up and put back on the market (CBC News, 2019a).  
Lessons learned from the High River planned retreat process are threefold. Firstly, lack of community engagement 
on the part of both provincial and town officials appears to have led to a retreat process that triggered significant 
confusion, anger, and additional mental health stress for a community already reeling from the flood disaster. 
Secondly, top-down approaches that feature significant coercive elements may facilitate rapid retreat, but the 
trade-off is that these approaches will likely add to mental health consequences and other challenges for flooded 
homeowners. Trust and transparency in the retreat process are essential to fostering public buy-in and promoting 
well-being. There is no evidence that town or provincial officials assisted homeowners with the buyout decision-
making process (e.g. by providing on-the-ground support workers or mental health counsellors) or in identifying 
new homes in safer locations. This approach to planned retreat is therefore best described as unsupported 
“involuntary retreat.” Thirdly, pursuing a broadly consultative approach with flood-affected communities may slow 
down the planned retreat approach, but will likely pay longer-term dividends in generating a community-wide 
post-flood resilience approach and vision. 
3.3. 
Great Lakes, ON 
Over the last seven years, the Great Lakes have experienced record lake levels that show no signs of peaking 
(CBC News, 2019b). Along Lake Erie’s northern coastline, particularly the portion stretching from Rondeau 
Provincial Park/Erieau to Point Pelee National Park/Leamington, there are now several current or future planned 
realignment projects, while large-scale future planned retreat of households, farms, and related infrastructure 
near the lake is a possibility (Zuzek & Mortsch, 2020).   
The primarily rural region in question stretches approximately 70 km from the community of Erieau (population of 
approximately 500) (CBC News, 2020a) to the municipality of Leamington (population of approximately 32,990) 
(Statistics Canada, 2020). Local roads and highways, including Erie Shore Drive (Highway 10) and Talbot Drive 
(Highway 3) hug the coastline along this stretch of Lake Erieau, in some places set back less than 10 m from the 
lakefront. Hundreds if not thousands of waterfront cottages, homes, estate homes, farms, and tourist 
accommodations dot the waterfront, many less than 2 m above the long-term average (LTA) lake level. 
Lake Erie water levels fluctuate seasonally and over longer time periods in response to inflows from Lake 
St. Clair/Huron, rain and snow events over the lake, and inflows from the many smaller rivers that drain directly 
 
 
25 
 
into the lake. Beginning in about 2013, Lake Erie water levels began a steady rise above the LTA lake level of 
174.15 m, and as of July 2019, had risen almost one metre to 175.14 m, their highest levels ever recorded (Zuzek & 
Mortsch, 2020). Onshore winds and storm events, as well as ice shoves, magnify the impact of high water levels, 
and typical storm events and the seiche effect (from standing waves in enclosed bodies of water) can increase lake 
levels locally by more than 0.5 m and accelerate erosion. Although it is difficult to predict future lake levels, there 
is a possibility that Lake Erie levels could rise further under climate change (Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6. Lake Erie historical lake levels (1918–2019) and future extremes due to climate change (Zuzek & Mortsch, 
2020) 
Over the last seven years, the increased lake levels have triggered significant coastal erosion, bluff erosion and 
coastal flooding in many locations along the 60 km stretch from Erieau to Leamington. This has led local authorities 
to reactively realign some stretches of coastal roads, to proactively consider the realignment of additional roads, 
and to consider the possibility of both reactive and proactive planned retreat for coastal homeowners and farmers. 
One portion of Talbot Trail, stretching 30 km westward from Erie, was realigned in 2010 by the Municipality of 
Chatham-Kent at a cost of $200,000 (Chatham Daily News, 2019), and another portion of the Trail is currently 
closed due to erosion damage and will be realigned as soon as possible (CTV News, 2019). There are also proposals 
being put forward to realign the majority of the remainder of Talbot Trail (BT Engineering, 2020) at an estimated 
cost of $31–40 million (Zuzek & Mortsch, 2020). One recent assessment for this stretch suggests that up to 
439 primary or secondary buildings will likely be affected by coastal erosion within 50 years or less, with a total 
assessed value of $59.7 million (Zuzek & Mortsch, 2020). 
Planned retreat is actively being considered as a proactive climate change adaptation option for many of these 
properties. One area of immediate concern, Erie Shore Drive near Erieau, has flooded repeatedly since 2017 (Zuzek 
& Mortsch, 2020). This roadway was built on top of a protective dyke from the 1920s, and homes and cottages 
were then built between the dyke/road and lake. Concerns about a possible dyke breach in the winter of 
2019–2020—which could have flooded hundreds of hectares of land north of Erieau—led to the emergency 
closure of the road, and homeowners were not allowed access to their homes for up to four weeks. Recent studies 
have identified planned retreat as one disaster risk reduction option for the Erie Shore Drive homes, which have a 
collective assessed value of $20 million (Zuzek & Mortsch, 2020); a planned retreat program featuring home 
buyouts would likely cost at least the assessed home value. An additional 11 portions of coastal roads are also at 
threat from erosion, and these sections are under consideration for realignment. 
Towards Leamington, several planned retreat projects are already completed, and more are at the proposal phase. 
One 500 m portion of a bluff top road known as Bluff Line was realigned approximately 75 m inland due to nearby 
rapid bluff erosion of 1.4 m/year (Figure 7). Additionally, the flat farmland immediately north of Point Pelee 
 
 
26 
 
National Park and east of Leamington is at risk of inundation and coastal erosion as lake levels rise. Flood 
protection dykes that currently prevent inundation of this area during high water events are in need of significant 
repair, as they do not presently meet minimum provincial standards. Dyke repair costs plus the additional cost to 
add height to the dykes currently protecting approximately 5,000 acres of farmland may be more than the land is 
worth, leading to the possibility that the planned retreat of hundreds of current rural residents may be inevitable if 
lake levels continue to rise.5  
 
Figure 7. Impact of bluff erosion on Bluff Line road (Zuzek & Mortsch, 2020) 
The process leading to the planned retreat cases mentioned above has varied depending on the category of asset 
under consideration. Although specific details are not available about the processes used to reactively realign 
portions of Bluff Line and Talbot Trail, it is assumed that a standard transportation planning approach was used for 
both (e.g. identify a preferred rerouting option, carry out environmental assessment studies, acquire land, and 
then realign the road). The process used to identify proactive planned retreat as an option for multiple portions of 
roadway stretching from Erieau and Leamington is described in a 2020 report produced by consultants Zuzek and 
Mortsch entitled Chatham-Kent Lake Erie Shoreline Study. Once the areas at risk were identified, a series of 
adaptation options were identified using the familiar PARA framework, and a cost-benefit analysis was carried out 
for each option. A class environmental assessment entitled “Talbot Trail Environmental Assessment Study” is now 
being carried out for the multiple portions of Talbot Trail that will need to be realigned (BT Engineering, 2020). 
The process used to identify the planned retreat option for the 439 lakefront buildings between Erieau and 
Leamington is also well documented in the Zuzek and Mortsch report (Zuzek & Mortsch, 2020). A dedicated 
website (“Let’s Talk Chatham-Kent”) was used for information-sharing, public engagement and feedback about 
climate change adaptation options. Nine public meetings over a seven-month period were also held with almost 
1,000 participants to introduce the study, generate ideas about possible adaptation approaches, and solicit 
feedback on the various options identified by the consultants. Two roundtables were also held with municipal 
officials, conservation authority staff, and senior provincial and federal government officials. 
It is still too early to know whether planned retreat will be chosen as an adaptation option for the sites identified, 
and this leaves many questions. How will the planned retreat of buildings deal with the issue of compensation 
(e.g. assessed value vs. market value)? Will an effort be made to support homeowners, farmers and building 
                                                 
5 Zuzek, P, and Mortsch, L. (2020). Personal Communication. March 30, 2020. 
 
 
27 
 
owners throughout all stages of the retreat process? To what extent will retreated lands need to be remediated 
before coastal erosion or coastal inundation consumes the land left behind? 
The main lesson learned from this case is that reactive post-erosion retreat can be used constructively to trigger 
and signal the need for proactive climate change adaptation. Once several assets were threatened by erosion, the 
Chatham-Kent authorities commissioned future-oriented hazard assessment studies that allowed them to 
proactively identify planned retreat as a viable climate change adaptation option. 
3.4. 
Pointe Gatineau, QC 
Pointe Gatineau, QC, is a community that has been in existence, in one form or another, for over 200 years. Now 
part of the larger Gatineau municipality as “Pointe Gatineau electoral district,” the community became a city in 
1959 and was amalgamated into the larger City of Gatineau in 1975 (The French-Canadian Genealogist, nd). The 
most recent census indicates a population of 13,935 (Ville de Gatineau, 2020). 
Located at the confluence of the Gatineau and Ottawa rivers, the community has had a long history of flooding. In 
the late 1800s and early 1900s, the community experienced regular (and, some sources suggest, “annual”) 
flooding, the most severe of which (1876) swept away 30 houses and caused another 200 houses to be 
abandoned. Although the construction of upstream locks (1911) and hydropower dams (1920 and 1964) reduced 
the frequency of flooding, significant flood events continued to be experienced by the community, including in 
1926, 1947, 1951, 1974 and 1976 (The French-Canadian Genealogist, nd). Portions of the Pointe Gatineau 
community are established in what is now considered to be a 1:20-year floodplain (CBC News, 2017).  
After an approximately 40-year quiet period, two record floods occurred in April 2017 and May 2019, inundating 
the community and triggering planned retreat via two successive waves of home buyouts that continue to this day. 
Approximately 1,800 homes were affected by flooding in the wider Gatineau municipality during the spring 2017 
floods, with the Pointe Gatineau neighbourhood being hit particularly hard, and flooding in the spring of 2019 
exceeded the record set in 2017.  
Following the 2017 flood, provincial legislation banned home reconstruction in the 1:20 floodplain and, within 
mere weeks, the Quebec government facilitated planned retreat through a special 2017 flood-related program 
that piggybacked on its standard “Financial Assistance for Disaster Victims” program. The special program offered 
up to $200,000 in home buyout funding to residents whose homes were significantly damaged, with an additional 
$50,000 for the lot/land (Canadian Underwriter, 2017). Within four weeks post-flood, the City of Gatineau 
mobilized to assist homeowners by waiving administration fees and speeding up the application process for 
demolition and construction permits. 
In mid-April 2019, just as record spring flooding again began to inundate Pointe Gatineau, the province announced 
a new disaster relief program expressly facilitating planned retreat by setting “hard caps on the amount of 
compensation available to homeowners in flood zones, with the goal of encouraging them to move elsewhere” 
(CBC News, 2019c). The 2019 flood program stipulated that, once home flood damages surpassed 50% of the 
home’s value or exceeded $100,000, homeowners would be offered either up to $100,000 to rebuild or $200,000 
plus $50,000 to relocate to another property. If homeowners were outside the 1:20-year floodplain and chose to 
rebuild, the $100,000 compensation became a lifetime limit on flood compensation (i.e. the limit would apply to 
the home title in perpetuity, and any future flood damages would only be compensated if the home had not yet 
reached the $100,000 limit). 
As of November 2019, over 185 home and condominium owners in Pointe Gatineau or the wider Gatineau 
municipality had accepted buyouts, and empty lots currently dot low-lying areas of the community in what is often 
called a “Swiss-cheese pattern” of retreat (Figure 8). Although the planned retreat in Pointe Gatineau has primarily 
involved single detached homes, the record flooding of spring 2019 structurally damaged a 16-unit condominium 
that was subsequently bought out and demolished, with all residents moving to other properties. 
 
 
28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Pointe Gatineau Home Buyouts (lots outlined in pink) as of February 20196 
The final cost of the planned retreat/buyout programs in Pointe Gatineau has not yet been tallied, given that 
buyouts continue, but using the $250,000 maximum compensation per property and multiplying by the 
185 properties that have already been bought out, a figure surpassing $30–50 million would not be unexpected. 
The Quebec government has approached the Federal government through its Disaster Financial Assistance 
Arrangements (DFAA) program for help in offsetting the cost of the community’s ongoing retreat efforts (CP24, 
2019). 
 
Figure 9. Flooded condominium and post-buyout home demolition signs7 
Planned retreat in Pointe Gatineau has unfolded slowly and with limited guidance and support for residents 
wishing to relocate. The initial round of 2017 buyout applications was completed several months after the spring 
floods, yet many residents reported that they still had not had their applications processed by the following winter 
of 2018, with some reporting delays that lasted into 2019. One woman whose 2017 application had not been 
approved before the subsequent 2019 floods had to begin the process all over again due to 2019 program 
                                                 
6 Image Source: CBC News. (2019). Pointe-Gatineau residents to pitch ideas for revitalizing flood-ravaged community. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/pointe-gatineau-flood-neighbourhood-revitalization-1.5012624. 
7 Image source: Doberstein, B. (2019). Personal photos. 
 
 
29 
 
changes. Delays were also introduced simply due to the sheer scale of the flood disaster, as it took many months 
for Quebec public safety department inspectors to examine all flooded properties and issue the damage 
assessment paperwork needed to initiate buyout applications. Local municipal officials suggested that they were 
able to intervene and provide support in a small number of especially problematic cases, but they acknowledged 
that their influence was limited. 
Other than the aforementioned municipal assistance (i.e. waiving fees, speeding up demolition permits), there is 
no evidence to suggest that flooded homeowners had significant ongoing support or assistance throughout the 
planned retreat process. For example, residents were not offered assistance in deciding which relocation home to 
purchase. Rather, once home buyout compensation was paid out, it appears that residents turned individually to 
the real estate market to decide where to move. Similarly, there did not appear to be any formal assistance to help 
residents decide whether to relocate individually or as a group/neighbourhood, nor any attempt to assist residents 
with purchasing homes in “safer” locations. The lengthy program delays have generally been ascribed to a 
combination of a convoluted/bureaucratic application process, lack of guidance or on-the-ground support for 
applicants and, in some cases, long turnaround times once applications were submitted. 
The Pointe Gatineau community continues to work on a plan for the land that is currently vacant. In mid-2018, the 
City of Gatineau began a series of community engagement and visioning events focused on post-retreat 
community redevelopment for what might be called the “retreated lands,” meaning the empty lots and 
deurbanized landscape left behind by the planned retreat. Pointe Gatineau residents were invited to meet with 
representatives from community-based organizations, municipal services and a landscape architecture firm. One of 
these events involved a community walk in which residents were encouraged to think about how to reimagine the 
post-flood, post-retreat landscape for community benefit and livability. This was followed up with a community 
workshop in February 2019, in which community members were shown what had been done in other communities 
facing similar flood-related planned retreat (e.g. Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, Hurricane Sandy in Coastal New 
York/New Jersey), and then residents began to brainstorm land uses that both respected the ongoing flood hazard 
and conferred benefits to the community. 
A community redevelopment committee was formed, and the committee began to identify low-cost initiatives that 
could be implemented relatively quickly (e.g. removing damaged asphalt, building a walking path, creating an 
arboretum and community garden, establishing a commemoration site). This work was put on hold when the 
spring 2019 floods again inundated the community, but work picked up again later that year and an $80,000 grant 
was secured by the committee to develop an initial community redevelopment plan. Longer term, local municipal 
representatives have indicated that the City will apply for funding to carry out the more expensive process of 
implementing the redevelopment plan through changes to infrastructure, landscape and, likely, official zoning. 
Planned retreat in the Pointe Gatineau community can best be summarized as being carried out reactively in the 
face of repeated flood disasters, funded by a combination of municipal, provincial and federal government 
funding. Retreat mainly involving single detached homes, featured a mix of voluntary and involuntary elements, 
and has been followed up by a promising community engagement and redevelopment process. Some flooded 
residents were forced to move (completely involuntary retreat) if their homes were located in the 1:20-year 
floodplain, while others faced the difficult choice to either rebuild in a risky location (knowing that future flood 
damages would not be covered) or accept a buyout (coerced retreat). As with many disaster-related retreat 
programs, a post-disaster environment is a chaotic time in which to plan retreat and, in Pointe Gatineau, this has 
led to significant gaps in program implementation, unmet community needs, and elements of what might be called 
“unplanned planned retreat.” 
Lessons learned in this case are twofold. Firstly, government officials implementing a post-disaster planned retreat 
program should expect that impacted homeowners will need significant support and guidance to navigate program 
requirements and the retreat process generally. This might include the provision of dedicated on-the-ground 
support staff to help homeowners with their retreat decision, walk homeowners through every step of the buyout 
process, assist homeowners with their search for new homes, and navigate unexpected roadblocks in the 
application process. Secondly, a municipal process that engages the community in transparent decision-making 
 
 
30 
 
about post-retreat lands and the resulting community landscape can go a long way towards helping communities 
maintain resiliency in the face of both disaster and planned retreat. 
3.5. 
Tuktoyaktuk, NWT 
Located on a low-lying, narrow peninsula reaching out into the Arctic Ocean, Tuktoyaktuk is one of six communities 
located in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region of the western Canadian Arctic (Figure 10). According to the most 
recent Canadian Census, Tuktoyaktuk has a population of approximately 900 people (mean age: 31.9 years), 
comprised primarily of Inuvialuit (Statistics Canada, 2019). The community economy combines elements of 
subsistence harvesting—important both culturally and as a source of food—and wage employment in sectors such 
as health, government, social services and construction (Andrachuk & Smit, 2012). The unemployment rate in 
Tuktoyatuk far exceeds the national average, generally standing near 30% with total median income at $21,984. 
 
Figure 10. Map of Tuktoyaktuk8 
The western Canadian Arctic has experienced notable climatic changes in the past half century. Warming of 2–3 °C 
has resulted in changes to sea-ice thickness and distribution, permafrost degradation, wind patterns, and wildlife 
distribution (Berkes & Jolly, 2001). It is expected that Tuktoyaktuk will experience warmer temperatures, increased 
precipitation (especially in winter), increased storm frequency (especially in the fall), and greater variability in 
weather (Forbes, 2011; Lemke et al., 2007; Sou & Flato, 2009).  
                                                 
8 Image source: CBC News. (2017). New Arctic coast highway opens up remote Tuktoyaktuk. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/new-arctic-coast-highway-opens-up-remote-tuktoyaktuk-1.4363029. 
 
 
31 
 
A broad, community-based vulnerability assessment that sought to benefit from local knowledge to identify 
hazards in Tuktoyaktuk found that coastal erosion and permafrost degradation were threatening infrastructure, 
municipal services, the local economy, and the health and well-being of the population (Andrachuk & Smit, 2012). 
Tuktoyaktuk appears to be particularly vulnerable to coastal erosion as a result of the shoreline characteristics, 
relative sea-level rise, temperatures and intensity of storms (Manson & Solomon, 2007). 
Storms blowing in from the northwest across the Beaufort Sea are eroding the land of the original permanent 
settlement, which was established in 1934 and affected by rapid erosion early in its history. Systematic 
investigations of shoreline erosion in Tuktoyaktuk started in 1974 and continued for 20 years before effective 
adaptation measures were identified. During this time, several experimental adaptation options were tested with 
little success. Tuktoyaktuk received funding from the territorial government to import large boulders, placing them 
along the northwest shoreline to limit erosion (Andrachuk & Smit, 2012). 
In 2003, researchers projected that coastal erosion would cause the tip of the peninsula to disappear within 
10 years, damaging or destroying 15 buildings within 25 years (Atkinson, 2005). However, shoreline protection 
measures appear to have slowed erosion rates. Moving forward, it is unclear how these protection measures—
combined with increasing frequency of fall storm events accelerating erosion—may affect erosion (Johnson et al., 
2003). It remains clear, however, that the northern tip of the community is particularly vulnerable to the 
consequences of erosion (Andrachuk & Smit, 2012).  
Erosion protection works were also implemented between 1998 and 2001, yet coastal erosion remains an ongoing 
concern for the community, as sea level continues to rise as well as rates of erosion. In addition, over the years, 
the Hamlet has been relocating and/or removing infrastructure that was particularly at high risk. Gradual 
relocation of the community was the most inexpensive option identified and, since that time, sporadic relocations 
have gradually moved some residents further inland or to areas less threatened by erosion. 
There remain, however, pervasive challenges for the relocation of residents and buildings. Costs are high and 
resources are limited, as individuals, families and the municipal government lack the resources required to protect 
or relocate properties. As such, the community is reliant on funding from the territorial and federal government. 
Limited financial resources have been identified as a primary roadblock to climate change adaptation in the ISR 
(Pearce et al., 2020). 
Although the Hamlet of Tuktoyaktuk has received federal funding over the last decade, the funds are limited 
compared to the substantial costs needed to develop and implement the adaptation measures. The Northwest 
Territories Government received federal funding of $240,000 through Public Safety Canada’s National Disaster 
Mitigation Program to develop a coastal erosion mitigation plan, including enhancement of public safety and 
reduction of future erosion damage through the identification of coastal erosion hazards. Various stakeholders 
were involved, including the territorial government, indigenous government, local authorities and the public. The 
resulting class I engineering report titled “Tuktoyaktuk Coastal Erosion Study” was completed by W.F. Baird & 
Associates Coastal Engineers Ltd. in March 2019. 
This report pointed to the need for the inclusion of planned retreat in Tuktoyaktuk’s adaptation plan, an option 
that had long been discussed but began in earnest only recently, given that the community has an all-weather 
road, the Inuvik–Tuktoyaktuk Highway, that was officially opened in 2017. It allows year-round movement of traffic 
inland and eliminates reliance on winter roads, which was the former means of overland access. The all-weather 
road expands the range of options available for retreat and relocation (CBC News, 2020b). The Inuvialuit 
Settlement Region, which includes Tuktoyaktuk, is a well-researched area in the context of environmental and 
climate vulnerability. The impacts of projected climate change to physical infrastructure in Tuktoyaktuk are well 
documented and understood. This contributes to proactive adaptation, which required an understanding of risks, 
vulnerabilities, hazards and adaptive capacity (Pearce et al., 2010). 
Recently, the Northwest Territories Government and Hamlet of Tuktoyatuk received a combined funding of 
$892,000 from Crown-Indigenous Relation and Northern Affairs’ Climate Change Preparedness in the North 
 
 
32 
 
Program to support the relocation of four homes at highest risk on the peninsula to a different subdivision located 
in the community that has higher elevation (CBC News, 2020b). However, this major endeavour experienced 
challenges in identifying suitable destinations for relocation, particularly for affected elderly individuals at risk of 
being relocated away from easy access to community services. This has led to some resistance among the affected 
population, and improvements in early planning and consultation processes could have helped build consensus on 
a pathway forward. 
The Hamlet of Tuktoyaktuk is now entering its next phase, the preliminary results of which have helped the 
community to decide on a hybrid structural option to mitigate the coastal erosion of the peninsula. The current 
funding of $2.84 million by the Climate Preparedness in the North Program will assist the Hamlet and the 
Government of Northwest Territories to establish the final coastal design conditions, develop the preliminary 
design, complete physical model testing, undertake required field work, complete the final design, provide opinion 
of probable cost, preparation of construction drawings and specifications, prepare permit applications, 
development of a monitoring program, assist with tendering and provide on-site construction services for this 
proposed hybrid option. 
The local community has been involved in the discussions from the outset through town hall meetings at which 
risks and relocation plans are presented. More broadly, the process has been owned and led by the community 
leaders, in adherence with the 1984 Inuvialuit Final Agreement and 2008 United Nations Declaration on the Rights 
of Indigenous Peoples. There are also challenges in preparing the “receiving” lands to which individuals are meant 
to relocate. In the case of Tuktoyaktuk, access roads and bridges, in addition to construction of community 
infrastructure, is needed. Political, emotional and funding challenges have resulted in the migration process being 
extended over a long period of time. 
Despite some progress in Tuktoyaktuk, persistent challenges—particularly those related to funding availability, 
relocation destination planning and timelines, as well as the lack of technical (e.g. engineering) expertise in the 
community—have been identified as important issues. It has been noted that planned retreat in Indigenous 
communities must take into account the risk of irreplaceable cultural loss, suggesting that cultural sites and social 
networks should be preserved to the extent possible (Pearce et al., 2010). Long-term and proactive adaptation 
planning that supports preservation of Inuvialuit culture as well as traditional/local livelihood is essential for a 
successful and sustainable planned retreat. 
 
Figure 11. Makeshift coastal barriers to protect from erosion in Tuktoyaktuk9 
 
                                                 
9 Image source: CBC News. (2019). “They’re trying to rush us”: Tuktoyaktuk relocating homes too soon, says resident. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/tuktoyaktuk-relocating-homes-erosion-1.5239765. 
 
 
33 
 
3.6. 
Truro, NS 
Nova Scotia’s coastal areas have long been a site of human occupation and modification, from pre-colonial 
Mi’kmaq settlement, to Acadian French settlers in the 1600s, to later settlers and modern-day communities and 
farmers (Sherren et al., 2019). The Acadian settlers in particular used extensive dyking and one-way drains 
(aboiteau) to block seawater intrusion and allow freshwater drainage, enabling coastal riverine and tidal wetlands 
to be used for farming (Graham et al., 2018; Sherren et al., 2019). Dyking of this nature near Truro, NS has recently 
been the focus of a managed realignment project called the “Onslow-North River Dyke Realignment and Tidal 
Wetland Restoration Project” (referred to hereafter as the “Truro-Onslow Dyke project”). This project was 
designed to widen the artificially constricted tidal/riverine floodplain, reduce flood risks for the Town of Truro and 
surrounding regions, reduce dyke maintenance costs, and as much as possible, regain the benefits of the wetland 
ecosystems that existed before dyking through nature-based adaptation (CBWES 2020; Graham et al., 2018; 
Sherren et al., 2019). 
The Town of Truro, now a regional centre of approximately 12,000 residents, has faced flooding on an almost 
annual basis since records have been kept, with one flood documented as far back as 1792 and up to five floods 
recorded in one single year (1979) (CBCL, 2017). Located largely within the Salmon River floodplain at the 
confluence of the Salmon and North rivers, the Town faces ongoing and increasing flood risks due to the combined 
effect of its floodplain location, loss of floodplain due to past dyking, upstream land use change, exposure to both 
riverine and tidal flooding, periodic ice jam flooding, and a combination of regional tectonic subsidence and 
climate change-related sea-level rise (CBCL, 2017; Sherren et al., 2019). A Truro flood risk study commissioned in 
2017 suggested that past flooding historically did not appear to trigger significant flood risk reduction efforts: 
“…development within the floodplain has historically increased following large flooding events. Memories of the 
events fade, other priorities arise, and budgets are focused on other more immediate needs” (CBCL, 2017). This 
changed significantly following major flooding in 2012 caused by a storm associated with remnants of tropical 
Storm Leslie (Sherren et al., 2019); suddenly, Truro had its policy window for change. 
With a policy window for change now open, the Joint Flood Advisory Committee (comprised of the Town of Truro, 
County of Colchester, and Millbrook First Nation) commissioned a comprehensive flood risk study for the region 
(CBCL, 2017; Sherren et al., 2019). Funding for the $400,000 study was provided jointly by the Nova Scotia 
Environment Climate Change groups’ Flood Assessment Fund, Town of Truro and County of Colchester. The main 
goals of the study were: “reviewing historic data and reports, developing models of current and future events, 
identifying potential flood mitigation projects, proposing changes to existing policies and bylaws, and identifying 
short/long-term maintenance plans” (Municipality of Colchester, 2020). The study explicitly incorporated climate 
change projections to 2100 into modelling (Sherren et al., 2019), so although the impetus for the study and its 
recommendations can be interpreted as being reactive to the 2012 flood disaster, there was a proactive, forward-
looking element as well. The study incorporated a limited public engagement process (i.e. a meeting with 
councillors from the County of Colchester and Town of Truro, one public open house, and a stakeholder 
consultation meeting which included Millbrook First Nation) which identified public “flood protection priorities” 
(CBCL, 2017). These ranged from aspects related to human health and safety, to land use, and infrastructure 
services. A ranked list of the public priorities identified through this process is found in Figure 12 below, with 
protection of existing dyke/marshland infrastructure identified in red as “low priority.”  
 
 
34 
 
 
Figure 12. Summary of public consultation results (CBCL 2017) 
The study examined a wide range of PARA flood risk reduction options, ultimately finding that no one “magic 
bullet” would solve Truro’s flood problem (CBCL, 2017; Sherren et al., 2019). One of the most cost-effective partial 
solutions was identified as the managed realignment and habitat restoration of a portion of the Truro-Onslow 
Dyke (see Figure 13), the protection of which had been assigned a low priority in the public consultation process. 
This was referred to in the report as “widening the dykes to restore some of the river floodplain” (CBCL, 2017). 
Additional details on the flood risk study are contained in the 106-page final report (CBCL, 2017). 
 
Figure 13. Truro-Onslow map10  
                                                 
10 Provided by Danika Van Proosdij, Saint Mary’s University. 
 
 
35 
 
The Truro-Onslow Dyke project emerged out of the Flood Risk Study as a project which would not only add 
floodplain capacity but would also reduce dyke maintenance costs and add to a bank of salt marsh “habitat 
credits” available for future Nova Scotia Department of Transportation and Infrastructure Renewal (NSTIR) 
infrastructure projects (Sherren et al., 2019). On NSTIR projects where salt marsh damage was unavoidable, NSTIR 
could draw on the Truro-Onslow Dyke project credits already “banked” to neutralize the overall impact of the new 
project. Dyke realignment and restoration design work for a 135-ha wetland site was carried out by CB Wetlands & 
Environmental Specialists (CBWES) consultants in partnership with Saint Mary’s and Queen’s University 
researchers (Graham et al., 2018; Sherren et al., 2019). Design work included determining the location of the 
newly aligned dyke (approximately 1.5 km over two sections), designing the size and location of dyke breaches in 
the old dyke, and designing a restoration plan for the soon-to-be unprotected former agricultural lands (Sherren et 
al., 2019). Dyke managed realignment ($1.66 million estimated cost) rather than dyke reconstruction and 
maintenance to 2055 ($2.18 million estimated cost) was estimated to save CAD 520,000 in 2018 dollars and those 
savings are only calculated for the actual site itself (Sherren et al., 2019). Funding for the project was split between 
NSTIR (50%), NDMP (National Disaster Mitigation Program, 25%) and NSDA (Nova Scotia Department of 
Agriculture, 25%) (Sherren et al., 2019). A full cost-benefit analysis has not been conducted, but it is plausible to 
also assume additional savings from reduced future flood damages in the Town of Truro and from less tangible 
wider ecosystem benefits and carbon sequestration.11 
Once design work was complete, a complex public engagement process was again entered into. Under Nova 
Scotia’s Marshland Act, proposed marshland changes must involve consultations with the local Marsh Body, 
bordering landowners, and companies with infrastructure on the site (for the Truro-Onslow Dyke project, Nova 
Scotia Power and CN Rail) (Sherren et al., 2019). A series of meetings ranging from town hall-style meetings to 
individual stakeholder meetings were organized by project staff in an effort to arrive at a consensus on the final 
project parameters. One significant concern was that the newly flooded/formal agricultural lands would become a 
mosquito breeding ground, but this concern was eventually addressed through a specialized mosquito 
management plan (ibid.). Under the Marshland Act, marshland owners were required to vote on the proposed 
realignment plan, a vote which carried unanimously (Sherren et al., 2019). 
The Truro-Onslow Dyke project idea first emerged after the 2012 flood event, became more organized as a project 
under the 2014–2017 Flood Risk Study, was modified and further refined to incorporate additional benefits in the 
post-2017 period, and is currently under construction with an expected 5-year post-construction monitoring 
period (CBCL, 2017; Graham et al., 2018; Sherren et al., 2019). The timeline from idea to implementation and then 
monitoring and possibly fine-tuning is therefore approximately 15 years. As mentioned, the 2012 Truro floods 
galvanized action for this project and created the policy “window of opportunity” that allowed the project to be 
implemented and to contribute to both flood risk reduction and climate change adaptation. The land that will be 
left unprotected once the old dyke is breached will return to floodplain status and will form new riverine and salt 
marsh habitats, albeit still physically modified in places by existing infrastructure (power/rail) and remnants of the 
old dyke. 
The project is an example of almost purely voluntary managed realignment. Potentially affected landowners were 
consulted, the wider public was engaged in the Flood Risk Study that raised the realignment possibility, and other 
than compensation for landowner land purchases, no overt incentives or coercive elements were seen in the 
ultimate decision to realign the dyke. Landowners were free to reject purchase offers or to vote against the dyke 
realignment plan. As such, this project represents an excellent model for voluntary, community-engaged disaster 
risk reduction and climate change adaptation. With benefits for the community, environment and government, it 
has been described as a “win-win-win project” (CBWES, 2020). 
                                                 
11 It is worth noting that, unlike the other five cases studies profiled in this report, the Truro-Onslow Dyke project is labelled differently—neither 
homes nor infrastructure threatened by flooding were relocated as part of the project, so, in keeping with international terminology it is a 
“managed realignment” rather than “planned retreat” project. 
 
 
36 
 
4. Key Findings 
The subsections below explore the common triggers for 
planned retreat (4.1), sources of resistance (4.2), 
considerations and approaches (4.3), and enablers and 
barriers (4.4). 
4.1. 
Triggers for Planned Retreat 
By far the most common trigger for planned retreat—both in 
Canada and internationally—is experience with disaster. The 
majority of disasters that trigger retreat are rapid onset 
disasters. As mentioned previously, the physical hazards most 
commonly associated with rapid onset disasters and related 
retreat include riverine flooding, ice jam flooding, 
pluvial/urban flash flooding, coastal storm surge/king tide flooding, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, wildfires, and 
mass movements (i.e. landslide, mud/debris flow). Less frequently, planned retreat is associated with more 
gradual onset hazards such as lake flooding, coastal inundation and erosion, soil erosion, and drought. 
When compared to “normal conditions,” the post-disaster time period often contains a combination of factors that 
triggers a highly supportive environment or “policy window” for planned retreat. Political attention is suddenly 
focused on the affected community or infrastructure, and there may be significant political benefits to being seen 
to take decisive action. The declaration of a “State of Emergency” may further facilitate action. As the scale of the 
disaster is revealed and initial damage assessments are generated, there are often multiple agencies and 
constituencies calling for an end to the costly cycle of disaster/rebuild/disaster/rebuild, especially if the disaster-
affected area has had similar past disasters. If a cost-benefit analysis shows that a one-time buyout or retreat 
program is significantly cheaper than additional rebuild/disaster cycles, this may lead to the announcement of a 
formal buyout “package” or program, with an associated budget dedicated solely to funding buyouts or retreat 
actions. Homeowners and sometimes infrastructure owners are often critical voices during the post-disaster 
phase, lobbying for financial assistance and government support during their time of need. Overall, this 
combination of sudden political attention, desire for cost-effective disaster response, multiple voices in disaster-
affected communities calling out for assistance, and a dedicated funding “pot,” is often enough to trigger planned 
retreat in disaster-affected communities. 
Calls for planned retreat for disaster-affected communities/infrastructure are increasingly being influenced by a 
combination of disaster experience and concerns about hazards affected by climate change, so the planned retreat 
“triggers” in these cases are expectations of greater numbers or costs of future disasters. Even when a location has 
not had experience with repeat disasters, there are often calls to think about the changing nature of hazard 
exposure under climate change (e.g. increased disaster severity, costs, or frequency). Perhaps the clearest example 
of this relates to sea-level rise and the associated hazards of storm-related coastal inundation and coastal erosion. 
Multiple communities worldwide are now actively considering planned retreat even though they may have only 
had “modest disasters” or a single disaster experience. 
In Canada and internationally, there are also a relatively smaller number of planned retreat cases where retreat 
discussions did not emerge in direct response to a disaster experience, but rather as one option among others in a 
proactive climate change adaptation strategy. For example, Squamish, BC leveraged local 2050 climate change 
projections from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (2013) to inform the development and execution of their 
adaptation plan, which incorporated recommendations for elements of planned retreat (Picketts & Hamilton, 
2016). The District produced a new Integrated Flood Hazard Management Plan—incorporating input from 
technical experts, the Squamish Nation and community stakeholders—recommending over 100 specific strategies 
for mitigating flood risk spread across the four elements of the PARA framework; this included retreating 
vulnerable development from areas where current risks are not acceptable, with particular application to critical 
Key Messages 
 
By far the most common trigger for planned 
retreat is experience with rapid-onset disaster. 
 
Post-disaster “policy windows” create supportive 
conditions for planned retreat. 
 
Planned retreat is now often included as an option 
in proactive climate change adaptation strategies. 
 
Planned retreat may be triggered by 
understanding the broader societal benefits of 
retreat—everything from the creation of 
additional green space to the avoided costs of 
multiple future disasters. 
 
 
37 
 
facilities (District of Squamish, 2017). Under the PARA framework, retreat forms one of the four core options 
(protect, accommodate, retreat and avoid) that climate change adaptation practitioners often consider when 
initiating climate change adaptation planning for communities and regions, especially for flood and sea-level rise-
related hazards. In the cases reviewed for this report, a common challenge when considering retreat for climate 
change adaptation purposes is that local community members may not all be on the same page when it comes to 
understanding the implications of climate change on hazards, and so may want to proceed with a “wait-and-see” 
attitude rather than decide to retreat now. 
In some cases, planned retreat was triggered in part by expected “broader society benefits” rather than solely the 
benefits accruing to the households or infrastructure being relocated (Hino et al., 2017). These include 
expectations of retreated lands being turned into community space, parks or green infrastructure (e.g. wetlands), 
acknowledgement that relocation may reduce the community burden of disaster and disaster response/recovery, 
and recognition of the wider societal benefits provided in the new location (e.g. better services, infrastructure, and 
housing in the new location). As shown in Figure 14, cases where there is likely to be the most acceptance and 
buy-in for planned retreat are those where the affected residents initiate the move, but where broader benefits of 
retreat are accrued by the broader community or population. Land left vacant following the buyout programs in 
Pointe Gatineau, for example, is currently envisaged as primarily green space and recreational space as well as 
space for future floodwaters to expand onto, and so retreated lands will eventually confer broad recreational and 
risk reduction benefits to the community as a whole. 
There are significant community and higher-level costs to responding to repeat disasters (e.g. the costs to deploy 
first responders, the military, and mental health staff to disaster sites) as well as direct and indirect costs to 
disaster recovery. As such, the desire to avoid these societal costs can trigger planned retreat. When moving 
people and infrastructure out of harm’s way, such “avoided costs” spread broadly across many levels of society 
and multiply with every future disaster avoided (Figure 15). In cases of planned retreat where large portions of or 
even entire communities are moved, both those in imminent danger and those who might only be inconvenienced 
by the next disaster may benefit from the new community and its service and infrastructure. One example of this is 
the 900-resident town of Valmeyer, Illinois which relocated to a higher elevation site following the Mississippi 1993 
floods: relocation removed the floodplain building restrictions holding back developers, and the new Valmeyer 
boomed with new development (Koslov, 2016). In the more specialized case of the planned retreat of 
infrastructure, avoiding service interruptions by retreating infrastructure to a safer location provides broad societal 
benefits that go far beyond the safety of the infrastructure itself. 
 
Figure 14. Benefits to the broader community as a trigger for planned retreat (Hino et al., 2017) 
 
 
38 
 
4.2. 
Sources of Resistance to Retreat 
Planned retreat efforts are strongly resisted in many instances, but the sources of resistance vary widely. 
Understanding the specific causes of this resistance supports efforts to address these openly, transparently and 
consistently. It should also be recognized that many of these sources of resistance and concern may eventually be 
present even if planned retreat is not pursued and disaster ensues. For example, it might be decided that planned 
retreat of a 250-year-old riverside heritage community will not be pursued due to significant place-based 
significance and concerns about cost, and then the following year that community is destroyed by a major flood. 
Some sources of resistance are outlined below. 
 
Psychological resistance to “retreat as 
failure”: Perhaps one of the most powerful 
sources of resistance to planned retreat comes 
from the very notion that retreat is, in and of 
itself, an admission of human failure. Phrases 
like “retreat is like defeat” were commonly 
used by individuals opposed to the planned 
retreat of coastal communities post Hurricane-
Sandy (Koslov, 2016). The idea of disaster-
affected communities “rising from the ashes” is 
a powerful disaster response metaphor. 
Politicians, local officials and community 
leaders alike have used this psychological 
framing to great effect when trying to polarize 
and disrupt discussions about whether to 
retreat or not. Retreat is likened to “giving up,” 
“backing down,” or “surrendering” to the 
forces of nature. Often, the idea of “building 
back better” becomes conflated with the idea 
of not retreating in the face of a challenge, and 
this then leads to discussions of protecting communities from a hazard via engineered/structural 
approaches rather than retreating from that hazard. 
 
 
Financial & taxation resistance: Financial concerns related to planned retreat are common and create 
significant resistance, spanning a range from concerns from “who pays what” to the benefit/cost ratio of 
planned retreat, to localized concerns about the loss of municipal revenues from property taxes. Planned 
retreat is not normally funded through a single, regularized retreat program (i.e. a program that has an 
annual budget and has been expressly set up to fund retreat projects). As a result, most examples of 
retreat have been funded opportunistically and often through multiple sources and levels of funding 
(e.g. some combination of federal, provincial or municipal post-disaster assistance funding, hazard 
mitigation funding, infrastructure funding or climate change adaptation funding). Resistance to planned 
retreat based on cost-benefit ratio concerns is often driven by a lack of full cost accounting (i.e. not 
factoring in the wider societal costs of disasters and disaster response and recovery, or the possibility of 
future repeat disasters and higher magnitude disasters under climate change). Figure 15 provides a 
succinct overview of the main benefits and costs associated with planned retreat of buildings, from a 
more complete cost accounting perspective. Resistance to retreat is also linked to concerns about loss of 
municipal tax revenues, especially for “hands off/free market” forms of retreat that provide little 
guidance or support to homeowners as they search for affordable properties under limited retreat 
compensation packages. 
Key Messages 
 
There are multiple sources of resistance to planned retreat. 
 
Not retreating in the face of disaster is a powerful 
psychological and political post-disaster framing. 
 
Concerns about the costs of retreat create significant 
resistance, but full cost accounting of expected future 
disaster/rebuild cycles and climate change effects can 
reduce concerns. 
 
Loss of municipal tax revenue is a significant concern but 
can be allayed if residents are supported to find 
appropriate housing in the original community. 
 
Unless done carefully, planned retreat can disturb 
community cohesion, social networks and residents’ place 
attachment. 
 
Planned retreat is often resisted due to concerns about 
planning and decision-making processes (including 
concerns about coercion, rights, and degrees of community 
involvement). 
 
Planned retreat is often politically contentious or unpopular 
and may not line up with political timelines. 
 
 
 
39 
 
Figure 15. Costs and benefits of planned retreat12 
 
Community cohesion resistance: Concerns related to the possibility that planned retreat will disrupt or 
destroy community cohesion are common and are often based on associated concerns about disturbing 
residents’ place attachment or social bonds and networks. The importance of place attachment, identity 
and dependence may vary within and across communities being considered for planned retreat, but there 
are often concerns that these place-based attachments will be destroyed or significantly degraded by a 
move to a new location, especially if the original place is strongly tied to a person’s identity or livelihood. 
Most members of a community form social bonds over time, and these bonds are sometimes hyper-local 
(e.g. strong ties to a particular environment, neighbourhood, social network, house, or even the plot of 
land on which a home is standing). Unless planned retreat practitioners pay careful attention to 
preserving these place-based bonds, significant disruption and emotional anguish may result. Globally, a 
lengthy history of highly unsuccessful relocations involving First Nations and other Indigenous peoples 
suggests that place matters, potentially in a multitude of ways, and that retreating from one place to 
another can trigger significant community problems. Several examples of planned retreat also show the 
links between infrastructure relocation (e.g. a bridge, lighthouse or road) and disturbances to social bonds 
and community cohesion, suggesting that it is not just the planned retreat of residents and their homes 
that should be of concern. These sources of resistance to planned retreat have been addressed to some 
extent in cases where communities have been moved en masse to a new location that approximates the 
previous location, and where there has been support in helping communities maintain their social 
networks and establish new place-based ties. 
 
 
Planning and decision-making process resistance: This dimension encapsulates issues associated with 
“arbitrary” decisions (whether real or perceived) about who receives buyouts and who does not. It also 
includes the issues associated with more coercive approaches to planned retreat. The agencies and 
political institutions normally responsible for planned retreat are justifiably resistant to the idea of retreat 
                                                 
12 Image source: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. (2016). Buy-In for Buyouts: The Case for Managed Retreat from Flood Zones. Available at 
https://www.lincolninst.edu/sites/default/files/pubfiles/buy-in-for-buyouts-full.pdf. 
 
 
40 
 
for a number of procedural, rights-based and legal reasons. Procedurally, it is often difficult to decide who 
should initiate the discussion about planned retreat, especially when a disaster has not created a 
“window of opportunity.” In democratic countries like Canada, there are also significant concerns about 
the rights of property owners and taxpayers relative to the government, and these concerns can lead to 
approaches where individual homeowners are given retreat “offers,” but there is no attempt to relocate 
entire neighbourhoods or communities involuntarily due to rights concerns. Similarly, planned retreat is 
often fraught with legal concerns over expropriation, compensation levels, land ownership, land zoning 
changes, and the rights of and obligations to those who choose not to retreat. There are many additional 
procedural questions that often have no clear answers and may encourage resistance to planned retreat. 
These include:  
o 
At what point should the community be involved, and how significantly? 
o 
Which agency(ies) should take the lead? 
o 
Should a voluntary, involuntary or hybrid process be pursued? 
o 
What happens if different levels of government disagree on the use of planned retreat? 
 
 
Concerns for individual well-being: Retreat can be an extremely stressful and painful process for those 
affected. This is especially true for those with a particularly strong attachment to place or for areas with 
strong cultural heritage. Retreat in Indigenous communities may be particularly difficult, given powerful 
attachment to the current location (which may include subsistence hunting) and a cultural history of 
forced relocation and colonization. There are also economic concerns associated with retreat; individuals 
considering retreat may have concerns about being able to maintain their livelihoods (whether because of 
reliance on subsistence hunting or proximity to work location) or lack the financial resources to retreat to 
a location of equal quality as their existing home. These issues can compound and result in both physical 
and mental health impacts for those either considering or undergoing retreat. These impacts are 
discussed in greater detail in Section 5 but are likely to contribute to resistance to planned retreat. 
 
 
Political concerns: Planned retreat is often contentious or unpopular. The affected population may not 
want to move and local politicians may be concerned about losing support or tax revenue (discussed 
above). Furthermore, the process of retreat is expensive, time-consuming and complex, and municipal 
governments likely lack the financial and institutional capacity to undertake this effort in isolation (Bronen 
& Chapin, 2013). Taking this in conjunction with the long-time horizons of both the retreat process and 
the risks driving the retreat discussions, politicians may opt for more short-term protective actions 
intended to “stall” rather than “solve” the issue. This repeatedly surfaced in key informant interviews—
including in discussion of planned retreat in the United States and the Ontario Great Lakes region—where 
respondents discussed a “political dissonance” or “political mismatch” between federal and provincial 
agencies responsible for responding to disasters (pro-retreat) and local politicians seeking to maintain 
support and tax revenue (anti-retreat). Even within municipal governments, turnover of politicians often 
resulted in previous decisions being reopened and, sometimes, reversed. 
 
 
The special challenge of industrial retreat: There are examples worldwide where large industries are 
faced with encroaching hazards that threaten their ability to continue operations (e.g. a water treatment 
plant located next to a flood-prone river, or a petrochemical plant or nuclear power plant sited on a 
coastline affected by sea-level rise). A recent report examining sea-level rise in the United States found 
that a 30 cm sea-level rise would threaten 60 wastewater treatment plants across the country, and in 
California alone, a 75 cm sea-level rise would flood wastewater treatment plants in Silicon Valley, 
Palo Alto, San Mateo, and Union City, while a 125 cm rise would flood an additional five plants including 
the plant sited at San Francisco International Airport (Hummel et. al. 2018). Similarly, analysis of US 
nuclear power plants located within two miles of a seacoast found that five out of nine plants were at 
“high” or “very high” risk of inundation from future projected sea-level rise (Kopytko 2015). For these 
examples, it would be exceedingly difficult to contemplate actual retreat of the plants without 
interrupting operations for long periods of time. More likely, additional protection in the form of seawalls 
or dykes would be added in an attempt to squeeze out another decade or two of operations before plant 
 
 
41 
 
closure, or new plants would be developed concurrently in safer locations and old plants gradually retired 
and decommissioned as new plants began operations. In some cases, industrial plants also have a legacy 
of toxic or hazardous wastes on site (e.g. old settling ponds, or waste dumps) and these wastes would also 
have to be treated in situ or retreated to another location. During Hurricane Sandy, eight toxic superfund 
sites were inundated by storm surge floodwaters, contaminating surrounding neighbourhoods with PCBs 
and heavy metals (Marcantonio et. al. 2019). 
4.3. 
Common Considerations and Approaches  
Analysis of findings from an environmental scan and key informant interviews identified a broad range of 
considerations and approaches that are likely to be common across contexts. These are summarized below:  
 
Decision-making models/processes: 
Examples of planned retreat from 
Canada and internationally have 
revealed an array of different 
decision-making models used to 
initiate and facilitate retreat 
(Figure 16). At the simplest end of the 
spectrum, a “bottom-up” model has 
been used, whereby the community 
itself—after many years of repetitive 
disaster or environmental degradation 
(e.g. repeat flooding, coastal erosion, 
shoreline retreat)—makes an appeal 
for assistance in planned retreat. 
Government agencies then facilitate 
the community’s request through 
funding or logistical support, but for 
the most part, the community 
coordinates the retreat process. The 
opposite of that process is the classic 
“top-down” model, wherein a 
government authority makes the 
planned retreat decision(s) and then implements that decision through its authority, funding, and power 
over lower-level implementing agencies or community partners. A third model, referred to here as a 
“collaborative model,” reaches a planned retreat decision and maps out the mechanics of the retreat 
process through a collaborative and iterative process involving several different levels of government, the 
private sector, community-based organizations, and community stakeholders. Especially complex or 
multi-jurisdictional planned retreat programs are often hyper-collaborative (tens or hundreds of entities 
involved), a model sometimes referred to as “polycentric decision-making.” In this model, a multitude of 
government agencies at multiple levels may collaborate with a similar multitude of private sector, non-
governmental and community-based organizations, developers, homeowners and the general public, 
without any one agency seeming to be strongly in charge of the process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Messages 
 
Planned retreat decision-making models include bottom-up, 
top-down, and collaborative approaches. 
 
Retreat ranges from voluntary to involuntary, with grey areas 
and some elements with different degrees of community 
choice. 
 
Planned retreat efforts benefit from a sensitive consideration 
of the geographical and cultural context. 
 
A fair, transparent and feasible framework for home buyouts, 
including fair home valuation, is beneficial. 
 
Localized flood plain maps, decision-support tools and 
visualizations help communities move from risk assessment 
to adaptation. 
 
Poor governmental coordination and layers of bureaucracy 
hinder retreat, and more effort is required to address this 
issue. 
 
Identifying a successful retreat is difficult, as every 
community sets different goals. 
 
Time horizons for retreat range from 5 years or less for 
disasters to > 30 years for climate change adaptation. 
 
Perspectives on retreat range from it being just another 
option in the PARA toolkit to it being an extreme last resort. 
 
 
42 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Models of decision-making for planned retreat13 
 
Degrees of individual/community choice: Throughout this report, we have referred to two ends of a 
continuum of choice that ranges from “voluntary planned retreat” to “involuntary” or “forced” planned 
retreat. However, the reality is that there is often a large grey zone in the middle where the choice to 
retreat may fall somewhere between purely voluntary and purely involuntary. Similarly, there may be 
different stages or elements of retreat that have different degrees of choice. For example, it is common 
for individual homeowners to be offered the choice to move or not (i.e. by accepting a buyout offer or 
rejecting that offer), but often the offer itself will have no negotiability or element of choice to it (e.g. the 
homeowner is offered the tax assessment value of their home). Similarly, in some cases, homeowners are 
forced to retreat, either by a decision to expropriate or by deteriorated environmental conditions, but will 
then have almost total choice over where to retreat. Generally, greater choice is viewed more positively 
by the affected public and leads to more satisfactory outcomes for the individual or community being 
relocated, compared to options with lesser choice. However, there is a trade-off for retreat program 
managers who may find that too much choice in the hands of those facing retreat may lead to partial or 
incomplete retreat. There are many examples where retreat is envisaged for perhaps several hundred 
homes in a community, but because individuals have the choice to say “no” to buyout offers, an 
incomplete checkerboard or “Swiss-cheese” pattern of retreat ensues. 
 
 
Context specificity in retreat design: Planned retreat efforts benefit from consideration of the context in 
which they are to occur. For example, in an interview with a planned retreat expert from New Brunswick, 
it was noted that planned retreat for many at-risk homes has been done by simply moving houses inland 
on the same lot. This approach was especially impactful when coupled with protected measures to 
elevate their houses, therefore moving houses in and up from the floodplain without disrupting 
community cohesion or attachment to place. Meanwhile, it was also noted that 50% of New Brunswick is 
owned by the Crown, so more aggressive retreat efforts could benefit from easier coordination of 
                                                 
13 Image source: Doberstein, B., Rutledge, A., and Tadgell, A. 2019. Managed retreat in the coastal zone: who decides when enough is enough? 
Presentation at the “At What Point Managed Retreat? Resilience Building in the Coastal Zone” conference, June 19–21, 2019. Columbia 
University, New York. 
 
 
 
43 
 
property trades, potentially with conditions such as the owner retaining some privileges for the existing 
property for a certain period (e.g. until flooding or death). Programs designed to be appropriate within 
and responsive to their context will improve the positive impacts of planned retreat efforts. 
 
 
Economic considerations: As mentioned above, populations undergoing retreat discussions or processes 
may have already undergone significant economic hardship. A challenge noted in the discussion of retreat 
due to flooding hazards in the City of Grand Forks, British Columbia, was that there was insufficient 
attention to the socioeconomic impacts of buyouts or the vulnerability of the affected group. Local 
governments likely have insufficient resources to deal with these challenges. In the North Ruckle 
neighbourhood, for example, people are either there because it is a good place for a starter home, they 
are renting and vulnerable to homelessness, or they are seniors with a limited income. Grand Forks did 
not have the tools necessary to navigate these conversations. Additional guidance on pragmatic ways to 
minimize the economic impact on affected populations in assessing the value of homes to be bought out 
(particularly their ability to obtain a viable replacement home) is needed. This challenge in developing a 
fair, transparent and feasible framework for home valuation was noted by several experts interviewed. 
 
 
Decision-support tools: Informants repeatedly spoke to the importance of local decision-support tools, 
whether this was in the context of community-based environmental monitoring (noted as being 
particularly essential in Indigenous communities) or multi-criteria decision-support tools. Communities 
should have access to strong hazard mapping capabilities (e.g. floodplain mapping) and adaptable 
decision-support tools or processes to move from risk assessment to adaptation planning. As small rural 
communities may not have the capacity to develop these tools, more generalizable tools that can be 
adapted and applied in local contexts hold significant value. 
 
 
Political coherence: As mentioned above, different priorities across government levels and jurisdictions 
can impede progress on retreat. Decision support from senior levels of government is often lacking. This is 
often overlooked at higher/federal levels, which tend to push all responsibility to municipalities (that may 
be reluctant to undertake retreat efforts). Municipal, provincial/territorial and federal governments must 
work to foster collaboration and coherence in both their messaging and approach to planned retreat. 
There have been encouraging signs that this is underway, including the activity identified in Ontario’s 
recent Flood Strategy to “support the development of federal flood insurance and relocation programs,” 
including working to support development of “a national action plan to assist homeowners with potential 
relocation for those at highest risk of repeat flooding” (Government of Ontario, 2020). However, more 
effort is required to outline how such cross-jurisdictional collaborations can be developed and advanced. 
 
 
Framing the discussion: In discussion with an adaptation expert from Nova Scotia, it was emphasized that 
the way in which conversations are framed will have an important impact on the community perception 
and degree of collective action. There is ongoing debate regarding whether retreat should be framed 
primarily or only in a positive lens (e.g. opportunity-oriented) or more negatively (such as the wartime 
mobilization language used in the context of COVID-19). It is likely that both hold value, and practitioners 
may want to consider what framings have worked in their community in the past. 
 
 
Transparency: The topic of transparency in planned retreat discussions and processes was a recurrent 
theme in key informant interviews. Experts mentioned the lack of trust that affected communities may 
feel, either towards the government officials or scientific processes suggesting that there is a risk. It was 
also mentioned that affected and unaffected populations may be distrustful of each other, having 
differing views of the level of risk and fair compensation for relocation (as one informant put it, “no one 
wants to end up being the schmuck”). Even in situations such as Surrey, BC, where all relevant resources 
were made available online in a single space, the affected population sought less transparency, via 
“behind closed doors” discussions. A transparent process is essential to fostering public trust and buy-in, 
and resources should be made available in a format that is accessible and understandable for the broader 
community (whether this is online, in a local newspaper, or via other means). However, a two-stage 
 
 
44 
 
process may be more appropriate, whereby draft materials go to the affected community for comment 
before being distributed more broadly. This is a very time-consuming process, but one likely to be 
important in promoting public trust. 
 
 
Defining success: It became clear that there is not—and should not be—a single definition of “success” 
for planned retreat. One criterion that has been used to evaluate success in the United States is whether 
it created a checkerboard (failure) or continuous plot of land (success): this is a good metric in some cases 
and not a good metric in others. For example, the work of the Nature Conservancy in Houston specifically 
pursues “clusters” to create habitat pockets rather than completely continuous land for wetland 
restoration. Success depends on the goals of a particular project, which will in turn determine what 
actions are needed. Planned retreat can be viewed as an opportunity to consider and pursue a broader 
range of goals about what individuals want their community to be 50 to 100 years in the future. 
 
 
Time horizon: A commonly observed challenge or weakness was short-sightedness in adaptation planning 
efforts, which sometimes only planned 5 years ahead. This is likely to be insufficient and risks undertaking 
actions that will be insufficient or obsolete in the near future. In the context of retreat, individuals could 
go through a painful relocation process only to find themselves in an area at equal or greater risk in the 
future. The common refrain was that adaptation discussions should consider a minimum time horizon of 
30 years (i.e. at least covering the duration of a home mortgage). 
 
 
Cascading adaptations: Retreat was characterized by some as a “last resort” to be undertaken when 
other adaptation options were insufficient or infeasible (e.g. cost-prohibitive). Others viewed it as a useful 
tool that could be implemented in conjunction with other elements of the PARA framework. One 
important consideration is to pair retreat efforts with “avoid” processes, such as zoning bylaws to prohibit 
new builds in at-risk areas (Siders, 2013). This was noted in several key informant interviews, where 
experts suggested that new developments were occurring in at-risk areas faster than retreat efforts could 
be implemented. This is problematic for a number of reasons, as it may increase resistance to retreat and 
decrease the protective impacts. Retreat should, at the least, be paired with “avoid” adaptations, which 
can be seen as an extension of proactive retreat efforts. 
4.4. 
Enablers and Barriers 
The complexity of most planned retreat initiatives 
requires that numerous enabling conditions exist 
at a variety of levels. 
 
Funding: One key enabler, funding to 
support planned retreat, has already 
been discussed in several of the 
Canadian case studies as emerging from 
a number of sources and levels. Ideally, if 
funding is available through one or more 
government programs that facilitate 
community disaster recovery, risk 
reduction or climate change adaptation 
(e.g. Canada’s federal Disaster Mitigation 
and Adaptation Fund, Alberta’s Floodway 
Relocation Fund, or Nova Scotia’s 
Disaster Financial Assistance program), then planned retreat is enabled as a feasible option. 
 
Policy window: A second key enabler, discussed in Section 4.1, is the presence of a policy window. Policy 
windows can be opened due to direct experience with disaster, convincing climate change projections 
Key Messages 
 
Funding to support planned retreat, ideally through an 
ongoing program rather than one-time support, is a key 
enabler. 
 
The emergence of a policy window often facilitates retreat 
where this may have been impossible previously. 
 
Modern communications networks enable planned retreat 
community members to navigate program bureaucracy and 
may help maintain (somewhat) pre-retreat community ties. 
 
Planned retreat of infrastructure and communities is enabled 
by availability of appropriate land and/or equivalent homes. 
 
Planned retreat will not succeed unless possible barriers 
(e.g. distorted risk perceptions, desire to perpetuate the 
status quo, lack of political will) can be identified and 
reduced/eliminated. 
 
 
 
45 
 
about imminent hazards that could affect communities or infrastructure, a new political priority 
(e.g. climate change adaptation) or funding program, or occasionally, requests for retreat coming directly 
from a community experiencing a hazard. 
 
Communications: A third key enabler which has become important recently is that of modern 
communications (e.g. internet, social media) that allow community members to maintain their social 
networks post-retreat without necessarily having to be physically close to former community members 
and enables them to navigate retreat bureaucracy remotely. Although planned retreat can disrupt social 
networks, especially when retreat is done piecemeal or through voluntary buyout programs, modern 
communications options still allow existing social networks to be maintained to some degree, even if 
community members end up dispersed to different locations. 
 
Alternative locations: Another key enabler, the presence of a viable retreat location or alternative, is 
perhaps most evident when considering the planned retreat of infrastructure. Taking the example of a 
coastal highway or railway line, there must be a viable alternative route (i.e. land available for purchase or 
acquisition) that can be connected to the existing network for planned retreat to even be an option. 
Similarly, when considering the planned retreat of an entire community threatened by coastal erosion or 
flooding, alternative land of roughly equivalent size, amenity and, sometimes, cultural and spiritual 
significance must be available. Although funding for planned retreat is a key enabler, land-rich 
jurisdictions may be able to compensate for program funding shortfalls by providing land at no cost to 
homeowners considering a buyout at less-than-market prices or to infrastructure owners. 
 
Support: Lastly, a key enabler that has been identified in several Canadian case studies is the presence of 
a support or guidance system for planned retreat: the case workers, technical staff, community-based 
organizations and sometimes political champions who assist homeowners and communities in navigating 
the often complex, time-consuming and bureaucratic retreat process. These support systems can also 
enable retreat through efforts to reduce bureaucracy, shorten timelines and simplify retreat processes. 
In addition to the sources of resistance to planned retreat discussed in Section 4.2, there are several other barriers 
to planned retreat that are worth mentioning. It is very common to find distorted perceptions about the true 
nature of hazard risks, both currently and under climate change. For example, the public consultation process 
which followed Peterborough’s two consecutive 1:100-year and 1:290-year floods (2002 and 2004 respectively) 
revealed significant confusion about these two events, “which were ‘supposed’ to occur only once in a lifetime or 
more” (Oulahen & Doberstein, 2012), happening within two years of each other. Effectively communicating 
climate change information and long-term risk to communities is key. Research suggests that coastal community 
residents often perceive sea-level rise as being a minimal or far-off concern because the levels of rise 
(e.g. 30–40 mm by 2050) sounds inconsequential, but these perceptions fail to incorporate understanding of non-
linear change. Additionally, the combined effects of sea level rise, rising water tables, and coastal erosion and 
storm events leading to a “wait and see” attitude can trap communities in cycles of ineffective “protect” measures 
instead of fostering buy-in for retreat (Treuer, 2018). 
There is also a common desire among community members and political leaders alike to perpetuate the status 
quo (i.e. not retreat even in the face of hazards). Planned retreat is a complex and disruptive event with often 
uncertain outcomes, and this forms a powerful barrier to action, particularly for proactive forms of retreat where a 
“disaster” has not yet happened. Linked to this, there is often a lack of political will to uproot communities or 
move infrastructure until a clear danger has been established, often through the experience of one or more 
disasters. 
One final barrier, particularly evident in densely populated urban centres and on First Nations reserves, is that 
there may not be available land to retreat to that is safer and equivalent in amenity, size and cultural significance, 
while also being affordable. Constraints on land availability are thus a powerful barrier to planned retreat 
(Doberstein et al., 2020). 
 
 
46 
 
5. Planned Retreat and Health 
The health impacts of climate change are complex and are the subject of intensive research efforts. Less well 
understood, however, are the potential health consequences and impacts that can be associated with adaptation 
efforts meant to protect populations from these impacts. This is in part because relatively little research has been 
done to assess the health status of populations before and after retreat, making it difficult to monitor changes 
relative to an established baseline (Siders, 2019). 
The physical and mental well-being of communities undergoing discussions about—and the action of—planned 
retreat is an important consideration. Often, both physical and mental health are degraded prior to any discussion 
of retreat due to disasters that ultimately prompt such discussions. This can make individuals and communities 
vulnerable to exacerbating health impacts, potentially occurring in parallel with impacts on—and disruption of—
health and healthcare infrastructure and services. Discussing the possibility of retreat is very challenging and 
painful, especially for communities with multi-generational family and community ties and strong emotional 
bonds. Stress-related mental health issues arise, and communities must be supported throughout this process. 
Many people in areas where retreat is possible or necessary are in lower socioeconomic classes. These populations 
may be more vulnerable to physical and mental health impacts and have less access to both the financial resources 
to adapt individually and the political voice to advocate on their own behalf. Many rural communities are 
addressing pressing issues related to substance abuse, aging populations and rural economic decline, leading to 
challenges in addressing slower-moving issues such as climate change or slow-onset disasters. 
This section seeks to explore these potential health consequences in additional detail. The subsections below 
outline the potential adverse health outcomes that can be associated with planned retreat, especially when 
insufficient time or effort is dedicated to active and prolonged community engagement. 
5.1. 
Direct Health Impacts 
The direct (i.e. short-term and immediate) impacts of planned retreat have been assumed to be similar to those 
observed for displacement or relocation in other contexts, such as post-disaster relocation or forced relocation 
due to conflict (Dannenberg et al., 2019). This may overestimate the direct health burden associated with planned 
retreat given that—when done well—retreat should afford affected populations more time to process the change 
and a greater degree of choice and agency than those in disaster or conflict settings. However, the general 
patterns are likely similar. 
People usually do not want to retreat, either because they enjoy living in the area, depend on the location for their 
livelihood, or have emotional ties to the home or location (Siders, 2019). It is well established that attachment to 
place can be a key factor in personal identity (Costas et al., 2015). Conversely, the inability to retreat or relocate 
among those desiring to do so—but who may lack the financial resources or support necessary—is also likely to 
cause important health impacts. 
Direct health impacts of planned retreat may include mental health consequences, loss of social capital, increased 
exposure to environmental hazards, food insecurity (particularly in cases where there was a previous reliance on 
subsistence foods), and health service disruption (McMichael et al., 2010). Displacement from locations and social 
networks to which individuals are deeply attached can be quite stressful and painful, leading to issues such as 
substance abuse and suicide (Asugeni et al., 2015; Tores and Casey, 2017; Uscher-Pines, 2009). Meanwhile, 
relocation that does not take sufficient account of the location to which individuals are moving can result in 
increased exposure to environmental hazards (such as unsafe drinking water), injury and drowning during the 
relocation process, with issues being compounded by disruptions in health services that may be either unfamiliar 
or unavailable to affected individuals (Dannenberg et al., 2019). 
 
 
47 
 
Efforts to counter these risks must incorporate substantial community engagement well in advance of retreat 
implementation (ideally from the outset) and sophisticated planning to consider how risks can be minimized during 
and after relocation. One success story was the roll-out of case-based psychosocial support services in the City of 
Grand Forks prior to and during the retreat process. While funding and on-the-ground capacity may inhibit the 
ability to provide case management, especially outside of immediate emergency or crisis situations, proactive 
planned retreat efforts are still likely to occur within the context of compounding vulnerabilities; this should be 
considered in planning efforts. 
5.2. 
Long-Term Individual Impacts 
Many of the health impacts of planned retreat persist over the longer term. When done well, retreat can result in a 
long-term, sustained, protective effect as affected populations are moved out of at-risk areas. When retreat is 
done improperly, however, i.e. with insufficient attention to proper processes or the area to which populations are 
to be relocated, adverse consequences can persist for years, and even across generations. 
Many of the long-term health impacts are tied to social determinants of health (Office of Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion, 2018). These include housing, earning potential, social capital and access to essential services 
(including education and health) (Dannenberg et al., 2019). When one or more of these are not in place, the results 
can be very problematic. For example, housing insecurity or quality issues can compound existing stress and 
mental health vulnerabilities, leading to a wide range of negative health outcomes. Similarly, protracted 
interruptions in school attendance or work disruptions can increase vulnerability and impact future earning 
potential. 
When considering planned retreat, there is often insufficient attention to the area designated for relocation. For 
example, in a study of a home buyout program in Staten Island, New York, it was found that 98% of relocating 
households were moving to an area with a higher poverty rate (McGhee, 2017). Relocation to lower-income areas 
has been found to impact the economic well-being of both the affected and subsequent generations (Chetty and 
Hendren, 2018). It is also important to consider the hazard context of the areas designated as relocation sites. The 
evaluation of the Staten Island home buyout program, for example, concluded that 20% of the affected population 
moved to an area at equal or higher risk of future flooding (Chetty and Hendren, 2018). Such oversights can, at 
best, limit the positive impact of planned retreat programs and, at worst, expose affected populations to increased 
health risks associated with climate hazards and social determinants of health. 
5.3. 
Long-Term Community Impacts 
In considering the long-term community impacts of planned retreat, it is appropriate to consider the impacts of 
decision-making both for land being retreated from and land being retreated to. For land from which buildings or 
populations are being retreated, land made available following retreat can be redesigned to both protect the 
community from the impacts of climate change and build community cohesion (e.g. parks, playgrounds, gardens) 
(Siders, 2019). As shown in the Truro case study, this land can be restored to natural habitats that provide wider 
ecosystem benefits (e.g. wetlands providing aquatic habitat and water filtration benefits) and flood risk reduction 
benefits (i.e. by becoming additional tidal or riverine floodplain). However, missed opportunities in this regard 
result in wasted space going unused and uncared for; in situations where the result is a run-down empty lot, this 
can further damage social cohesion and housing values. There is likely to be an economic component to which 
neighbourhoods convert retreated lands into public spaces and which do not. 
For land being retreated to, it is important to consider what efforts might support the maintenance of social capital 
and community cohesion. In situations where retreat is done piecemeal—thereby breaking the community up 
entirely there can be a very painful loss of community identity. Conversely, if the affected community moves as a 
group, social capital and cohesion can more easily be preserved (Albert et al., 2017). Meanwhile, selecting a new 
area that is close (e.g. walking distance) to the old area may also preserve place attachment and reduce the long-
term impacts on the individual and broader community (Dannenberg et al., 2019). 
 
 
48 
 
In ideal scenarios, retreat processes and land use planning will take into consideration how community cohesion 
can be supported both in the initial and destination locations. Such efforts can support positive community 
impacts in both environments. 
6. Good Practices and Considerations for Proactive Planned Retreat 
Adapting to climate change risks requires collaboration and the use of multidisciplinary approaches. Municipal, 
provincial and federal leaders and champions need to work together over an extended period of time to ensure 
that necessary programs, discussions and action are seen through. The following section highlights good practices 
gathered from Canadian and international examples of planned retreat, some more broadly applicable to 
adaptation but worth repeating, and others specific to planned retreat. Some are the results of painful lessons and 
cautionary tales rather than successes to be celebrated and copied. These practices are summarized by theme in 
Tables 3–5, then discussed more broadly in terms of how they relate to municipal, provincial and federal leaders. 
 
 
Table 3. Communication good practices 
Practice 
Considerations 
Communicate early 
and often  
Establish a list of stakeholders and title and rights holders early on in the process. Update it 
as necessary. Communicate regularly both individually and in appropriate groups. 
Include planned 
retreat as an option 
Over the past five years, awareness and acceptance of the need for planned retreat to be 
considered have grown substantially. 
Choose terminology 
carefully 
Planned retreat can be referred to as, amongst other options, planned relocation or 
proactive retreat. Decide with trusted advisors what the right language is for the 
community. 
Put planned retreat 
in context of 
adaptation 
Planned retreat is not a separate discussion, but part of a long-term assessment of options 
to deal with climate vulnerability and risks which must include consideration of social, 
environmental and economic factors; this includes building awareness and capacity, 
mobilizing resources, and assessing and implementing adaptation actions.  
Consider culture 
Where a community’s culture is tied to place—most notably in the case of Indigenous 
communities—this must be taken into consideration during planning, consultation and 
implementation of adaptation. 
Leave time for 
planned retreat 
discussions 
Planned retreat consensus-building takes time and may be longer than other adaptation 
options. 
Computer graphics 
are persuasive 
Good visualizations, often animated, have helped communities to understand and 
internalize the challenges they face in a way that spreadsheets and maps may not. Try to 
include them in the adaptation process. 
 
 
Table 4. Governance good practices 
Practice 
Considerations 
Communities decide 
Decisions for planned retreat of residences or infrastructure need to be made with and 
preferably by the community, for the community. 
Pick leader(s) and 
champion(s) carefully 
The people who take on the mantle of leading the long and sometimes contentious 
process of adaptation, resilience building and retreat are taking an important role; as 
such, the continuity and traits of such people are key. 
 
 
49 
 
Practice 
Considerations 
Establish and fund a 
program and roles 
Adaptation processes often last longer than municipal, provincial, territorial and federal 
governments. Establish approaches and funding processes that support programs able to 
sustain activities for years. 
Start funding efforts 
early 
There is currently no established Canadian budget and funding model for planned 
retreat. Each instance assembles provincial and federal funding for municipalities.  
Manage the tax base 
Losing high-value waterfront properties and residents can be mitigated through 
proactive planning and rezoning. 
 
 
Table 5. Process good practices 
Practice 
Considerations 
Adaptation and building 
resiliency are a cyclical 
process 
Retreat may feel unavoidable but not be accepted at present. There will likely be an 
opportunity to re-introduce it as an option later. 
Start early 
Risk analysis and planning takes time and effort. If adaptation assessments and 
discussions have not yet started, start soon. Key resources are often booked in 
advance. 
Protect and promote 
physical and mental 
health 
Many engaging in retreat discussions or affected by retreat have suffered through 
disasters and have physical and mental health concerns. Regardless, this process is 
sure to be stressful. 
Plan a future for the 
retreated properties 
In the best case, create a community green space with memorials of the community 
and citizens affected. At minimum, demolish buildings and return the property to 
nature. Do not resell to developers. 
Get universities and 
granting agencies to 
help 
Many areas where there is a need for expert assessment have university programs 
specifically focused on the topic. Contact them and see if research grants will pay for 
grad students and PhDs to provide value for the community.  
Get professional 
assistance 
There are Canadian firms in landscape architecture and planning industries that have 
expertise in adaptation, resilience building and planned retreat. There are also 
agencies and consultants that specialize in public consultation and engagement that 
can support communities through the public consultation process.  
Be creative in retreat 
solutions 
Land swaps, buy and leaseback and shifting service costs to residents and businesses 
that choose to remain in place have all been used by different communities. 
Be inclusive and use an 
all-hazards approach 
when identifying and 
monitoring hazards. 
Use an all-hazards approach that assesses all potential risks, e.g. sea-level rise, coastal 
erosion, landslides, tsunami, any of which may be affected by climate change. 
Consider overlapping 
disasters as a risk 
Wildfires followed immediately by flooding is occurring. Pandemics preventing 
emergency shelters and cooling stations are a reality. Do not assess risks in isolation, 
but likely in combinations. 
Plan for municipal, 
provincial, territorial and 
federal elections 
Changes in governments are mostly scheduled, and with them can come changes in 
priorities. Tailor the plan to avoid, where possible, critical decision points or funding 
lapses directly before or after elections. 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
6.1. 
Good Practices for Municipal and Community Leaders 
For municipal leaders, urban planners or climate adaptation practitioners, planned retreat can be one of the most 
challenging subjects to address. The intent of this section is to provide plain-language guidance about how planned 
retreat fits into adaptation planning, about how to effectively talk about it, and about key techniques and guidance 
that can facilitate the process. 
Let’s start with a clear definition: 
Planned retreat is the purposeful movement of people and/or infrastructure and land uses from areas 
at high risk of flooding, slope destabilization and other risks made worse by climate change to areas 
that are at lower risk and/or more resilient. 
If the community has spent any time considering planned retreat, some will notice that this report does not use 
“managed retreat” as the language of choice. There is a reason for this. It is deeply emotional for people to 
consider leaving their homes, which may have been in their families for generations. Given this, beginning 
community engagement and communications as neutrally as possible is worthwhile. 
One of the early steps is to choose the phrase that is right for the community. For this report, we have settled on 
“planned retreat,” but other choices include “planned relocation” or “adaptive retreat.” “Relocation” is more 
neutral than “retreat,” but carries a negative connotation for some communities. Think about the community, 
think about the community groups, and pick the language that makes most sense locally. We recommend having a 
discussion with a few key leaders of the groups in question to ensure that there are not sensitivities that are 
overlooked and may be stumbled over later. 
Some will also notice that we are focusing on planned retreat in the context of climate change and its associated 
hazards. There are many reasons why the community might choose to relocate people and infrastructure, but this 
guidance is more narrowly focused on climate change. However, some lessons learned and good practices are 
likely to be more broadly generalizable across planned retreat endeavours. 
There are many people who represent different and often competing interests and who need to be given the 
opportunity to be part of the discussion about the choices the community makes. One of the key ongoing activities 
is to establish and update a complete list of local groups, community organizations, Indigenous people, businesses 
and governmental organizations that should be engaged in discussions of climate change adaptation processes, 
options, decisions and plans. These stakeholders are likely to include: 
 
Town council and Mayor 
 
Chamber of Commerce 
 
Residency associations 
 
Indigenous people 
 
Major employers 
 
Faith group leaders 
 
Recreational organizations  
 
Provincial program leaders 
 
Neighbouring municipal adaptation leaders 
 
Potentially affected property owners 
A good practice is to establish a complete list, plan a communication agenda that gets to all of them on a regular 
schedule, and update the list annually (at minimum). Another good practice is to spend time privately with the 
leaders of these communities to understand their values and perspectives, to identify pitfalls early, and to be able 
to test and discuss different options and risks as they emerge. Regular, active communication is essential to the 
success of planned retreat activities. 
 
 
51 
 
To be done well, adaptation planning and practices require long time horizons (Bush and Lemmen, 2014). This is 
especially true for planned retreat, given the added complexity of relocating individuals and infrastructure. It is 
important to account for this in scheduling. Planned retreat efforts in the past have been compromised by two 
biases—the planning fallacy and optimism fallacy—that push planners and practitioners to underestimate the time 
and money required to complete tasks. 
Pick the accountable leader(s) and champion(s) in the community carefully. Continuity of leadership over an 
extended period of time is very useful. One existing leader to consider would be an emergency services leader, 
such as the fire chief. The longstanding role of fire services in communities has been one of prevention, rezoning, 
education and inspections to avoid being only responsive to fires, and the traits of the individuals are often 
complementary with those needed for someone to discuss adaptation planning (including retreat). For smaller 
communities that share services, perhaps the shared organization leader might be the right choice. 
In terms of understanding climate impacts, while climate change is global, every impact is local. Sometimes 
knowledge is better, sometimes worse (Warren and Lemmen, 2014). Locally specific and current risk assessments 
are essential to informing adaptation discussions. Get expert localized assessments of what is going to change and 
how. Do not depend on global data sets for coastal elevation, for example, as they are only approximations. This 
can take months or years, and the expert resources who know how to do this are often booked well in advance. 
Get started on these assessments now, if they have not been started already. 
Community-based monitoring of identified risks and hazards is crucial, as is local knowledge in understanding 
vulnerabilities (Andrachuk and Smit, 2012). Community stakeholders will be able to identify vulnerable and 
resilience areas, but it is important to remember that climate change is likely to shift and expand at-risk zones and 
the types of hazards being faced. For example, just because a portion of road did not get washed out in the last 
flood does not necessarily mean that it is safe from the next, while homes that have never flooded could fall within 
an expanding floodplain. Community knowledge should be integrated with scientific evidence and community-
based monitoring to understand how risk profiles may be shifting over time. 
Be broad in what is considered for risks and vulnerabilities. Landslides can increase in frequency and severity with 
more precipitation, so homes and infrastructure on or at the bottom of less stable slopes should be considered for 
adaptation planning. Similarly, in areas subject to increased drought, look at homes and infrastructure that might 
be more vulnerable to wildfires. Coastal erosion might increase due to increased freshwater levels or sea-level rise, 
so consider areas that have experienced erosion and assess increases in vulnerability (Doberstein et al., 2019). 
Homes and infrastructure on permafrost are also at risk and impacts are likely already being felt. 
Identification and selection of adaptation options require difficult discussions with the affected population. 
Figuring out what is at risk is different than deciding what to do about it. Community stakeholders should receive 
clear communications—in the formats most accessible and digestible to them—to explain both the risks being 
faced and their adaptation choices. Depending on the situation, this could include retreat, alongside other 
elements of the PARA framework (Protect, Accommodate, Retreat or Avoid) of adaptation options. In the most 
serious situations, it may be the case that retreat is truly the only sustainable option; this should also be 
communicated clearly. In the past five years, there has been an increasing recognition and acceptance of the 
importance and, sometimes, inevitability of planned retreat. 
Do not be afraid to introduce planned retreat as one of the options to consider, and do not be surprised if 
communities choose it over other options. Practitioners in Surrey, BC were surprised to discover that planned 
retreat was the preferred choice among the broader community, and even directly impacted residents ranked it 
highly among other adaptation options (City of Surrey, 2019). 
Remember that adaptation and building resiliency is a cyclical process. There are going to be areas where planned 
retreat appears to be an inevitable endpoint, but it may not be accepted immediately. Work to ensure that health 
risks and economic costs are fully explained and remember that if the community does not accept retreat 
immediately, that does not mean that it will not accept it in the next cycle. That being said, there has been a strong 
 
 
52 
 
pattern globally of only retreating after multiple disasters have driven home the inevitability, and efforts should be 
taken to avoid this as much as possible (Hino et al., 2017). 
Graphic visualizations of the impacts of climate change can be important tools in helping people understand what 
raw data may not. One strong example is the Delta-RAC Sea Level Risk Adaptation Visioning Study, developed by 
the University of British Columbia Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning (2020). The tool leverages 
adaptation scenarios—including retreat—and 3D landscape visualizations to assess adaptation options and 
support decision-making in response to sea level rise. Data visualization tools are increasingly affordable (or free) 
and user-friendly, and organizations have had good results by providing local animations of water-level rise 
(including before and after imagery). 
Expect difficulties and delays in getting funding. Most municipalities do not have the financial resources necessary 
to cover the costs of retreat but are equally unable to deal with the costs of disasters to homes and other 
infrastructure. While some countries have clear federal programs for funding proactive retreat (which have their 
own challenges), Canada does not (Siders, 2013). Work with the appropriate provincial agency to identify funding 
opportunities and expect them to work with federal counterparts. These efforts will require time and energy to 
navigate. 
Planned retreat can negatively impact the physical and mental health of those affected (Dannenberg et al., 2019). 
It is important to be aware of these risks and, as feasible, put in place programs that protect and promote the 
health of those affected; this may include case officers to provide individual counselling to those affected. The 
subject itself is stressful for many of the residents who will need to leave their homes. In many cases, they will 
have been previously exposed to disaster events and already experiencing the effects of chronic stress. In some 
cases, those disasters left them with additional physical health issues, either directly due to the impacts or due to 
mould and mildew that developed following the event. Consider the municipal and provincial physical and mental 
health resources and helplines that may help provide the financial or program resources to support the affected 
community. 
There are many ways to implement planned retreat for homes. Some communities are buying the properties in 
advance and leasing them back to the homeowners until new locations are prepared or retreat is essential. Others 
slowly shift the burden of costs to residents and businesses that choose to remain in place, reducing municipal 
services for sewage and road repair as they become economically non-viable. Some communities are doing land 
swaps, trading municipally owned land elsewhere in the community for the retreated land. Many are creating 
rolling easement zoning, where property lines automatically adapt to changing coastlines as sea level progresses, 
reducing administrative overhead in redrawing property lines. The most appropriate solutions will be dependent 
on context and will likely require both critical and creative thinking. 
Consider where residents will go. Many planned retreat programs in the United States found that—without careful 
attention and guidance—many people end up in areas at equal or greater risk than those they just left. 
Furthermore, the new location must be able to support the livelihoods of those affected as well as the 
maintenance of essential services (such as access to healthcare and education). Plan for where the people will go 
and ensure that the destination is resilient. 
Avoid losing the community’s tax base, if at all possible. One of the persistent challenges of shoreline retreat 
programs is that municipalities pay for many services for the community as a whole based on expensive 
recreational or part-year properties on the waterfront. Another is that if people receive a buyout package, they 
choose to relocate to another community entirely. When planning retreat, consider creating a new high value area 
and work to establish zoning for new residential properties within the community boundaries. 
Plan for what happens to the properties that are retreated from. Globally, people have shown themselves willing 
to give up properties for the sake of the larger community (Koslov, 2016). Some communities chose simply to allow 
developers to buy the properties and develop new, raised homes. For community cohesion, the properties should 
remain, at a minimum, vacant. Plan for and ensure demolition of buildings on the properties and at least minimal 
 
 
53 
 
restoration. Retreated lands also present opportunities for new shared community amenities and memorials. The 
best cases globally were those in which the properties were turned into public, resilient, green spaces with walking 
paths and often memorial signage about the residences and buildings that had been there before. Highlighting 
individual sacrifices can help create a shared good that improves overall community cohesion and well-being (in 
addition to resilience). 
Expect changes of government during the planned retreat process. The process of adaptation and resilience 
building is likely to exceed election cycles. Federal, provincial and municipal elections will all bring changes of 
priorities, programs and funding. For communities in the process of retreat, this can be disruptive, but can be 
managed if such changes are expected and understood. Create specific long-lasting programs and roles with 
committed funding. Assess the risks of provincial and federal government elections on the community’s adaptation 
process. Do not expect to get anything approved in the months leading up to or immediately following an election. 
Take advantage of universities and research grants. For many of the assessments and options, there are graduate 
students looking to establish expertise and granting agencies willing to fund them. Contact nearby (and even 
distant) universities to see if they would be interested in a research effort that would align with local needs. There 
are also several Canadian professional firms with expertise in adaptation assessments and planned retreat efforts. 
However, this should not be at the expense of local knowledge, community ownership or action (i.e. “analysis 
paralysis”). 
Expect concerns about inequity. Community members in areas not being considered for retreat may not be 
sympathetic to those facing retreat, as they are receiving buyouts that may be above the value of the rest of the 
properties within community. Neighbouring communities within the same province or just across provincial 
boundaries often receive different treatment. Expect this challenge and deal with it proactively whenever possible. 
6.2. 
Good Practices for Provincial and Regional Leaders 
There are a number of key considerations for decision makers at the regional or provincial level. Some of these are 
outlined below. 
There may be many municipalities and infrastructure sites facing potential planned retreat 
within a larger geographic area. They could be in the middle of sometimes multi-decade 
processes of transformation and relocation. They will each be at a different stage in the 
process, will have made different choices and, in many cases, use different language to 
describe the same realities. They may have engaged different university and professional 
services firms to enable them to assess what risks they face and what to do about them. Lastly, 
they may have insufficient funding to undertake the full scope of adaptation options desired or needed. 
To help navigate this complexity, consider creating a common portfolio framework for the status of adaptation 
initiatives within the jurisdiction, if one does not already exist. Establish a regular reporting schedule. The 
framework could include a common regional or provincial set of terminology so that the organization and others 
can understand and discuss the risks faced by the community or infrastructure, the stages and current state of 
adaptation processes as well as the associated cost so that funding decisions are made more consistently. Broader 
guidance on adaptation planning is outside the scope of this report—which focused more specifically on planned 
retreat—but a concerted effort is likely required to track ongoing efforts at various stages of maturity and urgency. 
Adaptation planning should consider the appropriate geographic scale (e.g. managing water quantity and quality is 
best done at a watershed scale) and may require the coordination of multiple adjacent jurisdictions. 
Whenever possible, work to align this portfolio framework with neighbouring regions, provinces and the federal 
government. This may require iterative discussions and, perhaps, an annual review process, but offers a useful 
collaboration opportunity to align and mainstream adaptation planning across government jurisdictions. 
 
 
54 
 
Establish a regular status and reporting schedule with each municipality considering or undertaking significant 
adaptation efforts. Topics could include communication plans (especially those which the organization can support 
or in which it can participate), funding requirements and status, and key upcoming risk periods that could require 
attention or present an opportunity to unlock prioritized funding and transformation. 
Establish regular communications, whenever possible, with all of the federal departments concerned with the 
planned retreat of communities and infrastructure (e.g. Infrastructure Canada). This will vary over time as the 
federal government changes and as funding programs come and go from different departments. Most planned 
retreat efforts involve federal funding and it may be necessary to spend significant time lobbying for funding for 
the provincial portfolio. 
Proactive retreat is meant to adapt and mitigate risks before disasters occur. However, policy windows most 
commonly open following a disaster. At the very least, try to have plans in place in advance of any disaster, such 
that funding can be obtained in the immediate aftermath and adaptation efforts can hit the ground running. 
There is currently no Canadian federal funding program that consistently funds planned retreat. In the 
United States, FEMA does have a flooding buyout program, but this has its own challenges as it is an individual 
owner-focused buyout program (Siders, 2013). This has led to the slow dissolution of some communities as they 
are hollowed out lot-by-lot. As the organization works to gain funding for the adaptation portfolio, consider 
targeting funding that is sufficient for larger adaptation rather than one-off buyout programs. 
Canadian land ownership varies within Canada. The primary systems are the Common-Law system used outside of 
Quebec, the Civil Law property rights structure within Quebec and Indigenous rights and titles and Land Claim 
Agreements. The potential complexity for this is high—and not the focus of this report. Suffice it to say that, for 
communities bordering Quebec or overlapping with Indigenous land—whether ceded or unceded—there will likely 
be variances in funding and timelines as well as feelings of inequity within the different neighbouring and 
overlapping communities. Be aware of these situations and sensitive to them. At present, for example, 
homeowners on the Quebec side of the Ottawa River have received buyout packages at market value, while there 
have been no buyouts for Ontario homeowners affected by the same flooding (CBC News, 2017). This can lead to 
political concerns that in some cases can be avoided through attention and awareness. 
While provinces are one of the primary funders of adaptation and resilience, this does not mean that provincial 
leaders should consider themselves decision makers, especially in the context of planned retreat. This is a process 
that should be owned and led by the community. It can be very useful for the provincial or territorial government 
to facilitate cross-municipal and cross-provincial discussions and joint planning. Similarly, it is key to provide clarity 
to municipalities about funding programs that they could access, the likely limitations, as well as potential 
destinations for relocation. Work on having an engaged role in discussions of adaptation options but respect the 
importance of community decision-making in the process. 
With each annual budget cycle, work to gain provincial commitment for increased adaptation and resilience 
funding, including planned retreat. Specify programs and initiatives surrounding the portfolio for investment. Work 
with municipal leaders to establish funding needs. 
If a leader is taking over a long-running adaptation portfolio, be aware that attitudes and awareness can (and have) 
changed substantially over time. Options, such as planned retreat that were considered contentious or off the 
table at one time may experience renewed enthusiasm or acceptance as values or contexts shift. As awareness of 
climate change risks increases, so does the acceptance of the need for adaptation actions. 
6.3. 
Good Practices for National Leaders  
The focus of this study was on planned retreat within local contexts. As such, relatively little analysis was dedicated 
to good practices at the national level. However, a few themes and insights emerged that are of relevance to 
national leaders considering planned retreat. 
 
 
55 
 
The first was the need for significant federal funding available under a clear program for supporting local planned 
retreat initiatives, with budgets that span extended time frames. The goal of the study 
was not to quantify or define what that funding and its governance would look like. 
Rather, a gap was identified with regard to funding for proactive (pre-disaster) retreat, 
which could limit implementing adaptation actions moving forward. It was also 
suggested that tailored funding and approaches would be required for retreat in 
Indigenous communities. More research is needed to better understand the resources and needs of Indigenous 
communities with respect to planned retreat. 
Second, it was recognized that the federal government could play an important role in coordinating broader 
stakeholder groups to advance planned retreat such as developing guidance, adopting good practices and ensuring 
a sound scientific bases for strategic and effective policies, regulations and programs. However, planned retreat 
leadership and ownership should remain with more local levels. 
The third was that there is a need for guidance on a legal framework that could guide communities considering or 
dealing with relocation of properties and land uses such as the potential expropriation of land, forced buyouts and 
similar legally complex situations. Furthermore, this would involve a collaborative approach with all levels of 
government and Indigenous organizations. This would consider the multiple title and rights holder legal situations 
in different jurisdictions. The role for a legal framework became evident after reviewing substantial U.S. guidance 
and positions related to addressing retreat. 
7. Conclusion 
This project sought to build upon a scan of the current state of planned retreat in Canada and relevant 
international contexts to begin a discussion of some of the key enablers, challenges and opportunities for local 
proactive planned retreat. As the impacts of climate change are expected to increase in the coming decades, 
communities need long-term adaptation plans designed to promote resilience to key risks in a changing climate. In 
some cases, planned retreat may surface as the preferred sustainable solution and it may be part of a broader plan 
with multiple actions implemented incrementally over a longer time frame. Although the road may be long and 
winding, it is important to initiate these efforts proactively and well in advance of—rather than directly after—a 
natural disaster. 
 
 
 
 
56 
 
8. References 
Albert, S., Bronen, R., Tooler, N., Leon, J., Yee, D., Ash, J., Boseto, D. and Grinham, A. (2017) Heading for the hills: climate-driven 
community relocations in the Solomon Islands and Alaska provide insight for a 1.5 °C future. Regional Environmental Change, 
18(8), 1–12. 
Alberta WaterPortal Society (2020). Flood Mitigation: Relocation. Available at https://albertawater.com/flood-
mitigation/relocation. 
Amec Foster Wheeler and Advisian (2017). Scoping Study – Flood-Related Areas of Concern on the Highwood River and Little 
Bow River within the Municipal District of Foothills. Worley Parsons: Calgary, AB. Available at 
https://www.mdfoothills.com/media/files/upload/Final-Hghwd%20Ltl%20Bow%20Rvs%20Scoping%20Study_Part2.pdf. 
Andrachuk, M. and Smit, B. (2012). Community-based vulnerability assessment of Tuktoyaktuk, NWT, Canada to environmental 
and socio-economic changes. Regional Environmental Change, 12, 867–85. 
Asugeni, J., MacLaren, D., Massey, P.D. and Speare, R. (2015). Mental health issues from rising sea level in a remote coastal 
region of the Solomon Islands: current and future. Australasian Psychiatry, 23(6 Suppl.), 22–25. 
Atkinson, D.E. (2005). Observed storminess patterns and trends in the circum-Arctic coastal regime. Geo-Marine Letters, 25, 
98–109. 
Berkes, F. and Jolly, D. (2001) Adapting to climate change: social-ecological resilience in a Canadian western Arctic community. 
Conservation Ecology, 5, 18. 
Binder, S.B. and Greer, A. (2016). The Devil is in the Details: Linking Home Buyout Policy, Practice, and Experience After 
Hurricane Sandy. Politics and Governance, 4(4), 97–106. 
Birkmann, J., Buckle, P., Jaeger, J., Pelling, M., Setiadi, N., Garschagen, M., Fernando, N. and Kropp, J. (2010). Extreme events 
and disasters: a window of opportunity for change? Analysis of organizational, institutional and political changes, formal and 
informal responses after mega-disasters. Natural Hazards, 55, 637–655. 
Birkland, T. and Warnement, M.K. (2014). Focusing Events in Disasters and Development: Examining Global Issues and Cases, 
(Eds.) N. Kapucu and K.Liou. Springer. Available at https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-04468-2.pdf. 
Bogdan, E. and McDonald-Harker, C. “Family functioning and well-being in the aftermath of Disaster: One year after the 2013 
High River, Alberta flood.” International Sociological Association, Toronto, Ontario. July 15–21, 2018. 
British Columbia Ministry of Environment (2013). Sea level rise adaptation primer: a toolkit to build adaptive capacity on 
Canada’s South Coasts. The Arlington Group et al.: Victoria. Retrieved from 
https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/environment/climate-change/adaptation/resources/slr-primer.pdf. 
Bronen, R. (2015). Climate-induced community relocations: using integrated social-ecological assessments to foster adaptation 
and resilience. Ecology and Society, 20(3), 36. 
Bronen, R. and Chapin III, F.S. (2013). Adaptive governance and institutional strategies for climate-induced community 
relocations in Alaska. PNAS, 110(23), 9320–25. 
BT Engineering (2020). Study Design Report, Revision 1 – Talbot Trail Municipal Class Environmental Assessment. BT 
Engineering: London. Available at 
https://www.chathamkent.ca/Transportation/Documents/Draft%20Talbot%20Trail%20Study%20Design.pdf. 
Bush and Lemmen (Eds.) (2019). Canada’s Changing Climate Report; Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 343–423. 
Canadian Council of Academies (2019). Canada’s Top Climate Change Risks. Available at https://cca-
reports.ca/reports/prioritizing-climate-change-risks/. 
 
 
57 
 
Canadian Institute of Landscape Architects, https://www.csla-aapc.ca/climate-change/resources-climate-adaptation. 
Canadian Underwriter (2017). Quebec announces increase in financial assistance for flood victims. Available at 
https://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/insurance/quebec-announces-increase- financial-assistance-flood-victims-1004113818/. 
CBC (2013a). 254 Alberta flood victims to get government home buyouts. CBC News, Aug. 22, 2013. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/254-alberta-flood-victims-to-get-government-home-buyouts-1.1414403. 
CBC News (2013b). Wallaceville flood victims unhappy with buyout offer. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/wallaceville-flood-victims-unhappy-with-buyout-offer-1.2477258. 
CBC News (2013c). Old CP Railway bridge in High River to be dismantled. Sept. 25, 2013. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/old-cp-railway-bridge-in-high-river-to-be-dismantled-1.1868034. 
CBC News (2017). Some Gatineau homeowners in flood zone will not be allowed to rebuild. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/gatineau-homeowners-flooding-rebuild-1.4128613. 
CBC News (2019a). High River wants to buy flood homes back from the province. 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/high-river-homes-flood-mitigation-buy-back-1.4972863. 
CBC News. (2019b). I’m watching it disappear: Residents along Lake Erie reckoning with worsening shoreline erosion. Available 
at https://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/shoreline-erosion-laek-erie-1.5384007. 
CBC News. (2019c). Quebec hopes to nudge homeowners out of flood zones with disaster relief program. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/montreal/quebec-hopes-to-nudge-homeowners-out-of-flood-zones-with-disaster-relief-
program-1.5098819. 
CBC News. (2020a). Erieau would become an island if Lake Erie washes only access road. Mar. 10, 2020. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/windsor/erieau-islanded-erie-shore-drive-1.5492109. 
CBC News. (2020b). Don’t like moving? Try relocating your sinking house during a pandemic. Available at 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/tuktoyaktuk-homes-relocated-pandemic-1.5542057. 
CBCL (2017). Flood Risk Study. CBCL Limited Consulting Engineers: Halifax. Available at https://www.truro.ca/adm/708-truro-
flood-risk-study/file.html. 
CBWES (2020). Maximizing the Benefits of Creating Tidal Wetlands in Truro. Available at https://www.cbwes.com/work/project-
truro. 
Chatham Daily News (2019). Talbot Trail becomes the latest road closed because of Lake Erie erosion. Available at 
https://www.chathamdailynews.ca/news/local-news/talbot-trail-becomes-the-latest-road-closed-because-of-lake-erie-erosion. 
Chetty, R. and Hendren, N. (2018). The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility I: childhood exposure effects. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 1107–1162. 
City of Surrey. (2018). Coastal Flood Adaptation Strategy (CFAS) – Project Engagement Summary. Available at: 
https://www.surrey.ca/files/CFAS_Engagement Report_05092018.pdf. 
City of Surrey. (2019). Coastal Flooding Adaptation Strategy. Available at 
https://www.surrey.ca/files/CFASFinalReportNov2019.pdf. 
City of Surrey. (2020). About Surrey, B.C. City of Surrey: Surrey, B.C. Available at https://www.surrey.ca/3547.aspx. 
City of Surrey/Northwest Hydraulic Consultants/EPI (2019). Surrey Coastal Flood Adaptation Strategy and  
Disaster Mitigation 
Adaptation Fund Update: February 11, 2019 CIC Presentation. Available at 
https://www.surrey.ca/files/CFAS_DMAFCouncil_20190211.pdf. 
 
 
58 
 
CTV News (2019). Erosion closes stretch of Talbot Trail near Wheatley. Aug. 2, 2019. Available at 
https://windsor.ctvnews.ca/erosion-closes-stretch-of-talbot-trail-near-wheatley-1.4534477. 
CoastAdapt (2020). What is a pathways approach to adaptation? Available at https://coastadapt.com.au/pathways-approach. 
Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning. Delta-RAC Sea Level Rise Adaptation Visioning Study (Delta-RAC). Available at 
https://calp.forestry.ubc.ca/home/delta-rac/. 
Costas, S., Ferreira, O. and Martinez, G. (2015). Why do we decide to live with risk at the coast? Ocean Coast Management, 118, 
1–11. 
CP24 (2019). Provinces asking feds for $138 million to help buy out flooded properties. May 16, 2019. Available at 
https://www.cp24.com/news/provinces-asking-feds-for-138-million-to-help-buy-out-flooded-properties-1.4424626. 
Dannenberg, A., Frumkin, H., Hess, J. and Ebi, K. (2019). Managed retreat as a strategy for climate change adaptation in small 
communities: public health implications. Climatic Change, 153, 1–14. 
Darwish, L. (2018). High River: Investing in flood defense infrastructure. ICLR: Toronto. Available at https://www.iclr.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/12/3-High-River.pdf. 
Derksen, C., Burgess, D., Duguay, C., Howell, S., Mudryk, L., Smith, S., Thackeray, C. and Kirchmeier-Young, M. (2018). Changes 
in snow, ice, and permafrost across Canada; Chapter 5 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D.S. Lemmen; 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 194–260. 
District of Squamish. (2017). Integrated Flood Hazard Management Plan: Final Report. Report #463-278-300. Available at 
https://squamish.ca/assets/IFHMP/1117/5dbb51bad9/20171031-FINAL_IFHMP_FinalReport-compressed.pdf. 
Doberstein, B., Fitzgibbons, J. and Mitchell, C. (2019). Protect, accommodate, retreat or avoid (PARA): Canadian community 
options for flood disaster risk reduction and flood resilience. Natural Hazards, 98, 31–50. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-018-
3529-z. 
Doberstein, B., Tadgell, A. and Rutledge, A. (2020). Managed retreat for climate change adaptation in coastal megacities: A 
comparison of policy and practice in Manila and Vancouver. Journal of Environmental Management, 253, 109753. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.109753. 
Dreser, C. and Phillips, A.S. (2014). Projecting North American Climate over the Next 50 Years: Uncertainty due to Internal 
Variability, Journal of Climate, March 2014, https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-13-00451.1. 
Dronkers, J., Gilbert, T.E., Butler, L.W., Carey, J.J., Campbell, J., James, E., McKenzie, C., Misdorp, R., Quin, N., Ries, K.L., 
Schroder, P.C., Spradley, J.R., Titus, J.G., Vallianos, L. and von Dadelszen, J. (1990). Strategies for adaptation to sea level rise. 
Report of the IPCC coastal zone management subgroup: intergovernmental panel on climate change. Geneva: 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Eichhorst, U., Bongardt, D. and Miramontes, M. (2011). Climate-proofing urban transport planning: opportunities and 
challenges in developing cities, in Resilient cities: cities and adaptation to climate change (proceedings of the global 
forum 2010), (Ed.) Otto-Zimmerman, Springer, Germany. 
Fenech, A. (2014). Yes, Mr. Premier, Your Province Is Shrinking. UPEI: Charlottetown. Available at 
http://projects.upei.ca/climate/2014/02/16/yes-mr-premier-your-province-is-shrinking/. 
Flato, G., Gillett, N., Arora, V., Cannon, A. and Anstey, J. (2019). Modelling Future Climate Change; Chapter 3 in Canada’s 
Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 74–111. 
Forbes, D.L. (Ed.) (2011). State of the Arctic Coast 2010 – scientific review and outlook. International Arctic Science Committee, 
Land—Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone, Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme, International Permafrost 
Association. Helmholtz-Zentrum, Geesthacht. 
 
 
59 
 
Global Commission on Adaptation (2019). Adapt Now: A Global Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience. Washington, DC: 
World Resources Institute. © Global Commission on Adaptation. Available at 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32362. 
Golnaraghi, M., Thistlethwaite, J., Henstra, D. and Stewart, C. (2020): Flood Risk Management in Canada: Building flood 
resilience in a changing climate. The Geneva Association. 64 p. 
Government of Ontario (2020). Protecting People and Property: Ontario’s Flooding Strategy (p. 36). Available at 
https://files.ontario.ca/mnrf-2020-flood-strategy-en-2020-03-07.pdf. 
Government of Prince Edward Island. Progress Report: A Climate Change Action Plan for Prince Edward Island. 2019. Available 
at https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/sites/default/files/publications/climate_change_action_plan_progressreport_2019.pdf. 
Graham, J.M., Bowron, T., van Proosdij, D., Mulligan, R., Pett, R. and Bekkers, K. (2018). Building on Ten Years of Experience: 
Designing the Truro-Onslow Dyke Realignment and Tidal Wetland Restoration  Project. Presentation at 2018 CLRA National 
Conference & AGM/Atlantic Reclamation Conference (ARC2018). Oct. 15–18, 2018. Miramichi, New Brunswick. Available at 
http://atlanticclra.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/GrahamJ-CLRA-2018.pdf. 
Harford, D. (2016). Climate change adaptation: the big picture. Presented at Metro Vancouver community sustainability 
breakfast. 
High River Online (2013). Wallaceville Residents Now Included In Provincial Buyout. Available at 
https://www.highriveronline.com/local/wallaceville-residents-now-included-in-provincial-buyout. 
Hino, M., Field, C.B. and Mach, K.J. (2017). Managed retreat as a response to natural hazard risk. Nature Climate Change, 7(5), 
364–369. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3252. 
Hummel, M. A., Berry, M. S. and Stacey, M. T. (2018). Sea level rise impacts on wastewater treatment systems along the U.S. 
coasts. Earth’s Future, 6, 622–633. 
IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (Eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 151 p. 
Johnson, K., Solomon, S., Berry D. and Graham P (2003). Erosion progression and adaptation strategy in a northern coastal 
community, in 8th International Conference on Permafrost. 
Kopytko, N. (2015) Uncertain seas, uncertain future for nuclear power. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 71(2), 29–38. 
Koslov, L. (2016). The case for retreat. Public Culture, 28(79):359–87. 
Lemke, P., Ren, J., Alley, R.B., Allison, I., Carrasco, J., Flato, G. Fujii, Y., Kaser, G., Mote, P., Thomas, R.H. and Zhang, T. (2007). 
Observations: changes in snow, ice and frozen ground, in Climate change 2007: the physical science basis, (Eds.) S. Solomon, D. 
Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, Averyt KB et al. Contribution of working group I to the fourth assessment report of the 
intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 337–383. 
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., James, T.S. and Mercer Clarke, C.S.L. (Eds.) (2016). Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. 
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J. and Bush, E. (Eds.) (2008): From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 448 p. 
Manson GK, Solomon SM (2007) Past and future forcing of Beaufort Sea coastal change. Atmos Ocean 45:107–122  
Marcantonio, R.A., Field, S. and Regan, P.M. (2020) Toxic trajectories under future climate conditions. PLOS ONE, 15(3), 
e0230094 
 
 
60 
 
Maxwell, B., Mayer, N. and Street, R. (Eds.) (1997). Canada Country Study: Climate Impacts and Adaptation. National summary 
for policy makers; Environment Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. 
McGhee, D. (2017). Were the Post-Sandy Staten Island Buyouts Successful in Reducing National Vulnerability? (Duke 
University). 
McMichael, A.J., McMichael, C.E., Berry, H.L. and Bowen, K. (2010). Climate-related displacement: health risks and responses, in 
Climate Change and Displacement. Multidisciplinary Perspectives, (Ed.) McAdam, J. Hart publishing, Oxford and Portland, 
Oregon, 191–219. 
Moyson, S., Scholten, P. and Weible, C.M. (2017). Policy learning and policy change: theorizing their relations from different 
perspectives. Policy and Society. 36(2):161–177. 
Municipality of Colchester (2020). Flood Management. Available at https://www.colchester.ca/flood-management. 
National Post (2017). Million-dollar homes on High River flood plain auctioned for a pittance by Alberta Infrastructure. 
Feb. 22, 2017. Available at https://nationalpost.com/news/canada/million-dollar-homes-on-high-river-alberta-flood-plain-
auctioned-for-pittance-by-province-still-better-than-expected. 
NRCan. (2016). Adaptation planning. Available at https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/resources/publications/impacts-
adaptation/tools-guides/11080. 
NRCan, Building Regional Adaptation Capacity and Expertise (BRACE). Available at https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-
change/impacts-adaptations/building-regional-adaptation- capacity-and-expertise-brace-program/21324. 
OECD (2019), Responding to Rising Seas: OECD Country Approaches to Tackling Coastal Risks, OECD. Publishing, Paris, 
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264312487-en. 
Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (ODPHP). Social determinants of health. U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. 2018. Available at https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/social- determinants-of-
health. 
Oulahen, G. and Doberstein, B. (2012). Citizen participation in post-disaster flood hazard mitigation planning in Peterborough, 
Canada. Risk, Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy, 3(1), Article 4, 1–26, https://doi.org/10.1515/1944-4079.1098. 
PCIC (Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium) (2013). Climate Summary for: South Coast Region. Available from: 
https://www.pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/Climate_Summary-South_Coast.pdf. 
Pearce, T., Ford, J., Duerden, F., Smit, B., Andrachuk, M., Berrang-Ford, L., Smith, T. (2010). Advancing adaptation planning for 
climate change in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region (ISR): A review and critique. Regional Environmental Change, 11:1–17. 
Picketts, I.M and Hamilton, B. (2016). Adapting to Climate Change in Squamish: Backgrounder Report. Available at 
https://squamish.ca/assets/OCP-Review/Public-Hearing/Backgrounders-and-Policy-Guides/013932c74e/Adapting-to-Climate-
Change-in-Squamish-Nov-2016.pdf. 
Province of Alberta (2020). Municipal Government Act: Revised Statutes of Alberta 2000. Alberta Queen’s Printer: Edmonton. 
Available at https://www.qp.alberta.ca/1266.cfm?page=m26.cfm&leg_type=Acts&isbncln=9780779745739. 
Public Safety Canada (2017). 2016–2017Evaluation of the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements. Available at 
https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/vltn-dsstr-fnncl-ssstnc-2016-17/index-en.aspx. 
Rijke J, Herk SV, Zevenbergen C, Ashley R (2012) Room for the River: delivering integrated river basin management in the 
Netherlands. International Journal of River Basin Management, 10(4), 369–382. 
Sapat, A,. and Esnard, Y.L.C.M.A (2011). Policy Learning and Policy Change: Katrina, Ike and Post-Disaster Housing. International 
Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters, 29(1), 26–56. 
 
 
61 
 
Seebauer, S., and Winkler, C. (2020). Should I Stay or Should I go? Factors in Household Decisions For or Against Relocation. 
Global Environmental Change, 60(102018),1–14. 
Sherren, K., Bowron, T., Graham, J. M., Rahman, H. M. T., and van Proosdij, D. 2019. Coastal infrastructure realignment and salt 
marsh restoration in Nova Scotia, Canada. Chapter 5 in Responding to Rising Seas: OECD Country Approaches to Tackling 
Coastal Risks, OECD Publishing, Paris, France. 
Siders, A.R. (2013). Managed coastal retreat: a legal handbook on shifting development away from vulnerable areas. Columbia 
Center for Climate Change Law, Columbia Law School, New York, NY. 
Siders, A.R. (2018). Social justice implications of U.S. managed retreat buyout programs. Climatic Change. 152, 239–257. 
Siders, A.R. (2019). Managed retreat in the United States. One Earth, 1, 216–225. 
Siders, A.R., Hino, M. and Mach. K.J. (2019). The case for strategic and managed climate retreat. Science, 365(6455), 761–763 
Smith, K. (2013). Environmental Hazards: Assessing Risk and Reducing Disaster, 6th ed. Routledge, New York. 
Sou, T. and Flato, G. (2009). Sea ice in the Canadian Arctic archipelago: modeling the past (1950–2004) and the future 
(2041–60). Journal of Climate, 22, 2181–2198. 
Statistics Canada. (2019). Census Profile, 2016 Census: Tuktoyaktuk, Hamlet [Census subdivision], Northwest Territories and 
Canada [Country]. 
Statistics Canada (2020). Census Profile, 2016 Census. Government of Canada. Available at https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census 
recensement/2016/dppd/prof/details/page.cfm?Lang=E&Geo1=POPC&Code1=0373&Geo2=PR&Code2=48&SearchText=High%
20River&SearchType=Begins&SearchPR=01&B1=All&GeoLevel=PR&GeoCode=0373&TABID=1&type=0. 
The French-Canadian Genealogist (n.d.). Pointe-Gatineau, Quebec. Available at https://www.tfcg.ca/history-of-pointe-gatineau. 
Torres, J.M. and Casey, J.A. (2017). The centrality of social ties to climate migration and mental health. BMC Public Health, 17, 
600. 
Town of High River. (2016). High River: Historical Context paper. Town of High River: High River. Available at 
https://highriver.ca/app/uploads/2017/06/High_River_Historical_Context_Paper_March_2016_compressed_file.pdf. 
Town of High River (2020). Return Beachwood to undeveloped state. Available at https://highriver.ca/beachwood. 
Treuer, G.A. (2018). The psychology of Miami’s struggle to adapt to sea-level rise, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 74(3), 
155–159. Available at https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.2018.1461970. 
Uscher-Pines, L. (2009). Health effects of relocation following disaster: a systematic review of the literature. Disasters, 33(1), 
1–22. 
Ville de Gatineau (2020). Infoterritoire. Available at 
http://www3.gatineau.ca/Infoterritoire/WebInterface/views/mapviewer.aspx?SujetId=bdcf4845- 9e11-4c4f-928f-
b44e3ec511e2&ThemeId=5988acc1-79a2-422e-a37d-0b9cffdd4026. 
Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S. (2014): Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation; 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 286 p. 
Welsh, M. (2019). The Siege of PEI. The Star. Available at https://projects.thestar.com/climate-change-canada/prince-edward-
island/. 
Willis, K.F., Natalier, K. and Revie, M. (2011). Understanding Risk, Choice and Amenity in an Urban Area at Risk of Flooding, 
Housing Studies, 26(2), 225–239. 
 
 
62 
 
Zandvoort, M., Campos, I. S., Vizinho, A., Penha-Lopes, G., Lorencová, E. K., van der Brugge, R., van der Vlist., M.J., van den 
Brink, A. and Jeuken, A. B. M. (2017). Adaptation pathways in planning for uncertain climate change: Applications in Portugal, 
the Czech Republic and the Netherlands. Environmental Science & Policy, 78, 18–26. 
Zuzek, P. and Mortsch, L. (2020). Chatham-Kent Lake Erie Shoreline Study. Available at https://portal.chatham-
kent.ca/downloads/es/CKLakeErieSS_HR.pdf. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
Appendix 1: Glossary 
 
Term 
Definition 
All-hazards approach 
The process of identifying and monitoring all hazards present in a particular location. 
Climate Change  
Climate change is a long-term shift in the average weather conditions of a region, 
such as its typical temperature, precipitation, and windiness. 
Climate Change 
Adaptation 
Actions that reduce the negative impact of climate change, while taking advantage of 
potential new opportunities. 
Climate Change Impact 
The positive or negative effects of a changing climate on built, natural, and human 
systems.  
Critical Infrastructure 
Processes, systems, facilities, technologies, networks, assets and services essential to 
the health, safety, security or economic well-being of society. 
Coastal 
Land and marine/lake areas bordering a shoreline. 
Disaster 
An event caused by a naturally or human induced hazard (e.g. flood, landslide) 
resulting in loss and damage. 
Displacement 
An event when people are forced to leave their homes or communities due to 
sudden-onset events (such as tsunamis, landslides, and flood events), or slow-onset 
processes (such as desertification and sea-level rise). 
Drought 
A shortage of precipitation (or sometimes, available moisture) over an extended 
period, usually a season or more.  
Easement 
Legal limits to development placed on a portion of a plot of land (sometimes called a 
“negative easement”).  
Erosion 
The geological process in which soil, sand, sediment or rock are worn away and 
transported by natural forces such as wind, water or gravity.  
Hazard 
A hazard is any source of potential damage, harm or adverse health effects to 
something or someone. 
Home buyouts 
The process whereby homeowners are offered incentives (usually tied to the tax or 
market value of the home) to sell and move, usually by a government agency which 
then takes possession of the home for its own purposes.  
Infrastructure 
The fundamental services, facilities and systems serving a community. In planned 
retreat, often meaning physical infrastructure (e.g. roads, bridges, dykes, etc.).  
Inundation 
Temporary or permanent flooding of a location.  
Managed retreat 
The purposeful movement of people and/or infrastructure or land uses from areas at 
high risk of flooding, slope destabilization and other risks made worse by climate 
change to areas that are at lower risk and/or more resilient. Synonyms included 
planned relocation, planned retreat and proactive relocation. 
Managed realignment 
Movement or removal of river, estuary or coastal defences. Managed realignment 
may be associated with planned retreat if the removal or movement of defences also 
triggers the relocation of a community, infrastructure, or other land uses. 
Memorial 
A recognition of past disaster events or communities which no longer exist. 
Disaster Mitigation 
Disaster mitigation measures are those that eliminate or reduce the impacts and risks 
of hazards through proactive measures taken before an emergency or disaster occurs. 
Permafrost 
Permafrost is soil or rock that remains frozen for two or more consecutive years and 
is an important component of the northern Canadian landscape. 
Planned relocation 
The purposeful movement of people and/or infrastructure from areas at high risk of 
flooding, wildfire, slope destabilization and other risks made worse by climate change 
to areas that are at lower risk and/or more resilient. Synonyms included “managed 
retreat,” “planned retreat” and “proactive relocation.” 
Pluvial flooding 
Surface flooding produced by intense, localized rainfall and independent from an 
overflowing water body (lake, river), often linked to “hardened” urban environments. 
 
 
64 
 
Term 
Definition 
Policy window 
Forces and events that combine to allow for a “window of opportunity” for policy 
change. 
Public engagement 
The process by which public input is solicited and incorporated into hazard risk 
reduction and climate change adaptation plans. Engagement can range from limited 
public education and consultation, to partnerships, delegated decision-making and 
citizen control. 
Proactive retreat 
The purposeful movement of people, infrastructure and land uses from areas at high 
risk of flooding, wildfire, slope destabilization and other risks made worse by climate 
change to areas that are at lower risk and/or more resilient. Synonyms included 
planned relocation, planned retreat and managed retreat. 
Reactive retreat 
The movement of people, infrastructure and land uses following major hazard events 
and their associated damage.  
Relocate 
To move from one location to another, either voluntarily or as a result of incentives or 
force. 
Relocation 
The process of changing the location of a residence, business or infrastructure, or land 
use. 
Resilience/Resiliency 
The capacity of social, economic and environmental systems to cope with a hazardous 
event or trend or disturbance, responding or reorganizing in ways that maintain their 
essential function, identity and structure, while also maintaining the capacity for 
adaptation, learning and transformation. 
Risk 
The combination of the likelihood of an event occurring and its negative 
consequences. 
Risk Assessment 
Appraisal and analysis of hazard or climate change vulnerabilities, exposure, 
likelihood and consequences. 
Seiche effect 
Local, repetitive fluctuations in water levels of semi- or fully enclosed water bodies 
(i.e. lakes) caused by wind and storms. 
Subsidence 
Downward motion of the land surface caused by human drivers (e.g. loading, 
drainage, mining activities) or natural processes as land once under and around a 
continental ice sheet is still falling (or rising) in reaction to its ice-age burden. 
Subsistence 
An activity such as hunting or food gathering that meets day-to-day household or 
community food requirements but does not produce a surplus for commercial sale.  
Sustainable 
Capable of persisting over the long term in a manner that meets community needs.  
Trigger 
The event or condition which initiates an action or process. 
Tsunami 
An extremely long frequency sea wave usually resulting from an undersea earthquake 
or landslide. Capable of rapid, destructive coastal flooding. 
Vulnerability 
The degree to which a system or jurisdiction is susceptible to harm arising from 
hazards or climate change, as a function of a community’s hazard sensitivity and 
capacity to adapt. 
 
