OPINION
OPINION
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1302536110	
	
	
	
	
PNAS   |    March 19, 2013   |   vol. 110   |   no. 12   |   4435–4436
Climate change as an intergenerational problem
Carl Wunscha,1, Raymond W. Schmittb, and D. James Bakerc
aHarvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; bWoods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 
Woods Hole, MA 02543; and cThe William J. Clinton Foundation, Washington, DC 20008
Predicting climate change is a high prior-
ity for society, but such forecasts are no-
toriously uncertain. Why? Even should 
climate prove theoretically predictable—by 
no means certain—the near-absence of ad-
equate observations will preclude its under-
standing, and hence even the hope of use-
ful predictions. Geological and cryospheric 
records of climate change and our brief 
recent record of instrumental observations 
show that the climate system is changeable 
on all time scales—from a few years out to 
the age of the earth. Major physical, chemi-
cal, and biological processes influence the 
climate system on decades, centuries, and 
millennia. Glaciers fluctuate on time scales 
of years to centuries and beyond. Since the 
Industrial Revolution, carbon dioxide has 
been emitted through fossil fuel burning, 
and it will be absorbed, recycled, and trans-
ferred amongst the atmosphere, ocean, and 
biosphere over decades to thousands of 
years. 
As in most scientific problems, no sub-
stitute exists for adequate observations. 
Without sufficient observations, useful pre-
diction will likely never be possible. Models 
will evolve and improve, but, without data, 
will be untestable, and observations not 
taken today are lost forever. The great dif-
ficulty facing scientists trying to understand 
and predict the system is the extremely lim-
ited duration over which even marginally 
adequate observations of the climate system 
exist.
The thermometer was not invented until 
the early 17th century. Atmospheric obser-
vations did not approach global coverage 
until the end of the Second World War. 
Oceanic observations became marginally 
adequate on a global scale only in the early 
1990s. Mass-balance data for the Greenland 
and Antarctic glaciers began in the early 
21st century. Paleo data do provide records 
for some variables (e.g., global average CO2 
concentrations from ice cores), but are 
rough proxies having only limited precision 
and spatial coverage for the space and time 
scales of interest.
Few scientists would expect to under-
stand any but the most trivial physical 
phenomenon without having observed its 
variation on all-important time scales. Oce-
anic surface waves have dominant periods 
not much different than one second. A sug-
gestion that such a phenomenon could be 
understood from one second or less of ob-
servations would be greeted with ridicule. 
Scientists trying to understand the climate 
system are faced with the difficult problem 
of making sense of physical phenomena 
whose time scale exceeds both professional 
and human life spans. Proposals for geo-
engineering must include an understand-
ing of their influence on a system that re-
tains memories of induced disturbances for 
thousands of years. Who would claim to 
understand the impact of a major pertur-
bation to the climate system based upon 10 
years of data?
Understanding of climate change is a 
problem for multiple generations. One gen-
eration of scientists has to make provisions 
for the needs of successor generations, rath-
er than focusing solely on its own immedi-
ate scientific productivity. Today’s climate 
models will likely prove of little interest in 
100 years. But adequately sampled, carefully 
calibrated, quality controlled, and archived 
data for key elements of the climate system 
will be useful indefinitely.
This intergenerational problem must be 
faced by any entity—government or oth-
erwise—hoping to eventually provide ac-
curate forecasts of climate change. Weather 
forecasting and national weather services 
are often invoked as the analogue for cli-
mate problems. But long-duration obser-
vations require a very different approach 
than do those of near-term interest, such 
as in weather prediction. Many examples 
exist where attempts to use weather data as 
records of climate have proved ambiguous 
at best and useless at worst, because of in-
adequate calibration, poor documentation 
of calibrations, temporal gaps, and undocu-
mented and/or poorly understood technol-
ogy changes. The use of radiosonde humid-
ity sensors is a case in point: Technology 
changes and differences among nations se-
riously compromise the use of such weather 
data for climate studies (1). Thompson et al. 
(2) show how difficult the interpretation is 
of such a seemingly simple data set as sea 
surface temperature.
Government agencies can do a reason-
able job in satisfying the immediate needs 
of the public, e.g., in forecasting hurricane 
trajectories. But governments have not 
Author contributions: C.W., R.W.S., and D.J.B. wrote the paper. 
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
1E-mail: cwunsch@fas.harvard.edu.
©iStockphoto.com/subtik.
Remote weather station in Iceland.
4436   |   PNAS   |    March 19, 2013   |   vol. 110   |   no. 12	
Wunsch et al.
done well in sustaining long-term observa-
tions. For example, the iconic time series of 
CO2 observations at Mauna Loa, HI, was 
funded in 2-year increments for decades 
and was nearly terminated many times by 
shortsighted program managers (3).
Designing, maintaining, and coping with 
the technical evolution of climate observa-
tions is an extremely difficult problem re-
quiring deep insight into the nature of the 
problem, and of the available and poten-
tially available technologies. It cannot be 
sensibly done within a system funded year-
by-year; it requires an agency with a long 
view—decades and beyond—a requirement 
that is alien to governments. Yearly budget 
battles put all programs at risk: Having a 
climate observing system started by one ad-
ministration and disassembled by another, 
one political cycle later, is fatal.
In many cases—describing and under-
standing decadal variability in the ocean, 
for example—an honest scientific assess-
ment would acknowledge the need for far 
longer observational records than are now 
available or obtainable by any individual. 
In today’s institutions with their short-term 
time horizons, young scientists interested 
in such phenomena cannot take on long-
term problems. But if society does not find 
ways to support scientific careers directed 
at such problems, then we will never under-
stand the fundamentals of this critical sub-
ject. What to do?
A few examples exist of comparatively 
long-lived, nominally focused organiza-
tions (universities, a few banks, some re-
ligious foundations). Although their true 
intellectual continuity is highly debatable, 
they do suggest the possibilities for the cre-
ation of a useful intergenerational climate-
study infrastructure. Some components 
of astronomy and perhaps, uniquely, the 
Rothamsted Research agricultural station 
in the United Kingdom, are conceivable 
analogues. Elsewhere (4), we have outlined 
a possible approach, one that requires a 
private endowment to sustain the best sci-
entists and engineers willing to devote a 
portion of their time to overseeing the data 
streams that future generations of scien-
tists will need. Other means may exist to 
sustain scientifically and technically com-
petent organizations over decades and lon-
ger. Methods must be found—perhaps in 
public, private, national, and international 
institutional partnerships—that can isolate 
core observations from the vagaries of year-
to-year government funding decisions and 
that can provide oversight of calibrations, 
management of shifting technologies, and 
understanding so as to avoid obsolescence 
and quality loss.
Without confronting the problem as an 
intergenerational one, climate forecasts and 
our ability to mitigate and adapt to climate 
change will remain rudimentary and inad-
equate for the challenges that lie ahead.
1 Elliott WP, Gaffen DJ (1991) On the utility of radiosonde 
humidity archives for climate studies. Bull Amer Meteor Soc 
72(10):1507–1520.
2 Thompson DW, Kennedy JJ, Wallace JM, Jones PD (2008) A 
large discontinuity in the mid-twentieth century in observed 
global-mean surface temperature. Nature 453(7195):646–649. 
3 Keeling CD (1998) Rewards and penalties of monitoring the 
earth. Annu Rev Energy Environ 23:25–82. 
4 Baker DJ, Schmitt RW, Wunsch C (2007) Endowments and 
new institutions for long-term observation. Oceanography 
20(4):10–14.
