NATALIA MOUDRAK AND DR. BLAIR FELTMATE  |  INTACT CENTRE ON CLIMATE ADAPTATION  |  SEPTEMBER 2017
SUPPORTED BY:
shutterstock_636580526
ABOUT THE INTACT CENTRE ON CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is an applied research centre at the University of Waterloo.  
The Intact Centre was founded in 2015 with a gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s largest property and casualty 
insurer. The Intact Centre helps homeowners, communities and businesses to reduce risks associated with climate change  
and extreme weather events. For additional information, visit: www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca.
ABOUT THE UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO
The University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation university. With more than 36,000 students, the university is  
home to the world’s largest co-operative education system of its kind. The university’s unmatched entrepreneurial  
culture, combined with an intensive focus on research, powers one of the top innovation hubs in the world.  
For additional information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca.
ABOUT THE STANDARDS COUNCIL OF CANADA 
The Standards Council of Canada (SCC) is a Crown corporation and part of the Innovation, Science and Economic  
Development Canada portfolio that leads and facilitates the development and use of national and international  
standards and accreditation services in order to enhance Canada’s competitiveness and well-being.  
For additional information, visit: www.scc.ca. 
ABOUT INTACT FINANCIAL CORPORATION
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX:IFC) is the largest provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in Canada with  
over $8.0 billion in annual premiums. Supported by over 12,000 employees, the Company insures more than five million 
 individuals and businesses through its insurance subsidiaries and is the largest private sector provider of P&C insurance in 
British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia and Newfoundland & Labrador. The Company distributes insurance 
under the Intact Insurance brand through a wide network of brokers, including its wholly owned subsidiary, BrokerLink, and 
directly to consumers through belairdirect. For additional information, visit: https://www.intactfc.com. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Intact Centre thanks the SCC and IFC for their funding support of the report. We also thank stakeholders across  
Canada for their time and advice throughout the report development.
CITATION
Moudrak, N.; Feltmate, B. 2017. Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes: Developing a Canadian Standard for New  
Flood-Resilient Residential Communities. Prepared for Standards Council of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, 
University of Waterloo.
For information about this report, contact Natalia Moudrak: nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca
DISCLAIMER
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible.  
The Intact Centre cannot make any guarantees of any kind, as to the completeness, accuracy, suitability or reliability of the  
data provided in the report. This report has been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only and does not  
constitute professional advice. You should not act upon the information contained in this publication without obtaining  
specific professional advice. No representation or warranty (express or implied) is given as to the accuracy or completeness  
of the information contained in this publication, and Intact Centre employees and affiliates do not accept or assume any  
liability, responsibility or duty of care for any consequences to you or anyone else acting, or refraining to act, in reliance  
on the information contained in this report or for any decision based upon it.
shutterstock_359391389
Executive Summary................................................................................................................................................................ii
1. Introduction........................................................................................................................................................................1
1.1 Rising Economic Costs of Natural Disasters and Extreme Weather..................................................................................1
	
1.2 There Is No Going Back on Climate Change: Canada Must Adapt.................................................................................3
1.3 Flooding Stresses Canada’s Mortgage Market.................................................................................................................3
	
1.4 Flooding Gives Rise to Lawsuits.......................................................................................................................................4
1.5 Flooding Impacts Municipal Insurance Costs and Municipal Bond Ratings.....................................................................6
 
1.6 The Definitions of Regulatory Floods, Floodways and Flood Fringes Differ in Canada...................................................6
1.7 Benefits of a National Standard for Flood-Resilient Residential Community Design.......................................................9
2. Flood-Resilient Residential Community Design: Scope and Draft Best Practices............................................................10
	
2.1 Scope of the Flood-Resilient Residential Community Design Best Practices.................................................................10
2.2 Method to Develop Draft Flood-Resilient Residential Community Design Best Practices............................................12 
	
2.3 Draft Flood-Resilient Community Design Best Practices................................................................................................14
Category 1: Design for Resilience	.......................................................................................................................................15
      
Category 2: Storm Sewer Design.........................................................................................................................................17
	
Category 3: Sanitary Sewer Design......................................................................................................................................18
      
Category 4: Street Design....................................................................................................................................................19
	
Category 5: Wastewater Pumping Station Design...............................................................................................................21
    
Category 6: Preservation of Natural Features......................................................................................................................21
3. National Standard for Flood-Resilient Residential Community Design: Enabling Environment......................................22
4. Conclusion and Next Steps..............................................................................................................................................23
Appendix A: Defining Regulatory Flood, Floodway and Flood Fringe in Canada (Sources)...............................................24
Appendix B: Examples of Provincial Guidelines, Acts and Policies and Municipal By-Laws for Flood Management.........25
Appendix C: Further Literature Review................................................................................................................................41
Appendix D: Organizations Included in the Flood-Resilient Community Design Consultation Process.............................44
Appendix E: Participant Profiles for March 24, 2017, Working Session “Flood-Resilient Community Design: 
Developing a National Standard for New Residential Subdivisions in Canada”.................................................................45
Endnotes.......................................	......................................................................................................................................50
TABLE OF CONTENTS
i
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
ii
This report profiles 20 best practices to be incorporated into 
the design and construction of new flood-resilient residential 
communities in Canada. Ensuring that new communities are 
built under the direction of these practices is necessary to 
combat ever-worsening extreme weather that, if not ad-
dressed, will result in costly and unremitting flood damage. 
Examples of the need to address current and future residen-
tial flood damages are many:
• Financial and Mental Health Stress: Flooding is the most 
frequent and costliest natural disaster in Canada. Thou-
sands of homeowners across the country experience prop-
erty damages, loss of personal belongings, and the conse-
quent financial and emotional distress that follows floods.
• Insurable Risk: In communities across Canada that expe-
rience repeated basement flooding, insurance premiums 
are increasing in concert with growing flood risk - in cases 
where risk is excessive, flood insurance coverage may be 
reduced or withdrawn altogether.
• Mortgage Defaults: With limited flood insurance cov-
erage, some homeowners in Canada may not be able to 
pay for flood damages. Due to limited liquidity to redress 
flooding, some homeowners may default on their mortgage 
(as homes with sewer water in the basement are generally 
uninhabitable).
• Legal Risks: Homeowners, developers, municipalities, 
provinces and insurance companies are increasingly facing 
lawsuits for flood-related damages. 
• Municipal Credit Ratings: Credit rating agencies (e.g., 
DBRS, Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s) are beginning to 
examine the potential for communities to be impacted by 
substantial flood recovery costs which, in turn, could cause 
a municipality to default on a bond. If the probability of a 
weather-induced default is material, the municipality may 
receive a downgraded credit rating.
To address the evolving drivers outlined above, and in an 
effort to “get ahead of storms,” newly built communities in 
Canada must incorporate best flood risk reduction practices 
into their design. 
Accordingly, the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact 
Centre) engaged with municipal stormwater and flood 
management experts, engineering consultants, developers, 
homebuilders and other stakeholders across Canada to iden-
tify best practices for flood-resilient residential community 
design (Table 1). 
The Standards Council of Canada supported this effort, with 
the objective that the report will inform the development of a 
flood-resilient community design standard for new residential 
subdivisions in Canada.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
shutterstock_636100307
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
iii
The scope of the draft best practices in this report is specific 
to greenfield community development only (i.e., not infill  
or redevelopment) and the following building types:
• detached homes
• semi-detached homes
• row houses (including stacked and back-to-back townhomes)
The types of flood hazards considered by the draft best  
practices include:
• riverine flooding
• overland flooding
• storm and sanitary sewer surcharge
• drainage system failures
• groundwater seepage
The types of flood hazards not addressed by the draft  
best practices include:
• coastal flood hazards
• unique flood hazards (e.g., dam failures)
To develop the draft best practices profiled in this report,  
the following selection criteria were used:
FLOOD-RESILIENT COMMUNITY DESIGN:  
INTRODUCING BEST PRACTICES
• National applicability: stakeholders from every province  
in Canada confirmed that best practices proposed in this 
report are generally relevant and applicable for community 
design and construction. However, since each community 
may have unique flood management challenges (e.g.,  
a combination of impermeable soil, flat terrain and high 
water tables), best practices to address unique and 
area-specific challenges were not included in the report.
• Effectiveness in reducing flood damages from severe 
rain events: the focus of the proposed best practices was 
on reducing flood damages from severe rain events (e.g.,  
a months’ worth of rain falling in a city within 24 hours).
• Technical feasibility for implementation: best practices  
in the report reflect technology and skill sets that are  
broadly available in Canada.
• Cost-effectiveness: the cost of implementing the  
proposed best practices over their lifecycle was compara-
ble, or better than alternative methods to address flood  
risk reduction.
While the proposed best practices are expected to be rele-
vant across Canada, their application may be limited in the 
areas with permafrost, such as Yukon, Northwest Territories 
and Nunavut, as well as in coastal areas of Canada, where 
sea level rise and storm surge pose additional flood risk.
shutterstock_654913045
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
iv
Table 1: Draft Best Practices for Flood-Resilient Residential Community Design in Canada (Low-Rise, Greenfield Development)
CATEGORY 1: DESIGN FOR RESILIENCE (DR)
DR1. New homes should not be built in the floodway. New homes should also not be built in the flood fringe,  
unless flood-proofing addresses flood risks in the flood fringe.
DR2. “Safety Factors” should be used in new community design to account for potentially more frequent and severe rainfalls  
and stormwater system failures. (e.g. locating buildings further distance away from the edge of the floodplain).
DR3. New development should not increase the risk of flooding for existing communities.
DR4. New development should be designed to minimize the risk of basement flooding from groundwater infiltration.
DR5. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), fuel and electrical systems should be well-elevated  
from the basement floor or located above grade.
CATEGORY 2: STORM SEWER DESIGN (STO)
STO1. If the home foundation drainage system connects to a storm sewer*:
• the water level in the storm sewer should stay at least 30 cm lower than the foundation drainage system during  
a major design flood event (e.g., 1-in-100 year flood event) AND
• a backwater valve should be installed on the storm sewer lateral to prevent stormwater from backing up into  
   the basement if the storm sewer is overloaded; this backwater valve should be accessible for maintenance.
STO2. If the home foundation drainage system does not connect to the storm sewer*:
• sump pumps should be installed and equipped with one or more backup power systems.
STO3. Inlet control devices (ICDs) should be used to restrict the flow of stormwater from the street into storm sewers.
*Alternatively, a separate foundation drain collector system should be provided with no risk of backing up to basement levels 
during design flood events.
CATEGORY 3: SANITARY SEWER DESIGN (SAN)
SAN1. Basements connected to sanitary sewers should have a backwater valve to mitigate sewage backup  
into the basement, if the sanitary sewer is overloaded (e.g., during heavy rain).
SAN2. Downspout, foundation drain and sump pump discharge should not be directed to the sanitary sewers.
SAN3. Design of sanitary sewers should have a factor for “normal” infiltration of rainwater during typical rain events  
and a higher “Safety Factor” for infiltration and inflow during extreme rain events.
CATEGORY 4: STREET DESIGN (SD)
SD1. Roads and public spaces should be designed to convey excess runoff so that it does not flow through  
homeowner property.  
SD2. Road design and lot grading should be such that the water on the road remains at least 30 cm below  
the lowest building openings (e.g., basement windows) during design flood conditions. 
SD3. Roads should be designed so that the maximum depth of water during the extreme design condition  
does not exceed 30 cm at the curb.
SD4. Driveways should be built to slope away from homes or garages (i.e., reverse-slope driveways should not be permitted).
SD5. Sanitary sewer manholes should not be located in low-lying areas. If sanitary sewer manholes need to be located  
in low-lying areas, manhole covers should be sealed to minimize inflow of accumulated runoff into the sanitary sewer.
CATEGORY 5: WASTEWATER PUMPING STATION DESIGN (WP)
WP1. Wastewater pumping stations should be located in areas where they will remain fully-operational and 
 fully-accessible during extreme rain events and riverine flood events. 
WP2. Wastewater pumping stations should have backup power to allow for a minimum of 48 hours of uninterrupted  
service and an overflow in case of catastrophic failure.
CATEGORY 6: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES (PNF)
PNF1. New development should not encroach on riparian buffers (land and natural vegetation adjacent to waterbodies),  
and sufficient setbacks should be maintained along waterbodies to reduce the risk of flooding due to stream movement  
and bank erosion.
PNF2. New development should aim to minimize runoff from impervious areas.
shutterstock_106967741
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
v
NOTE ON ISSUANCE OF REPORT
With issuance of this report, the Intact Centre shares a list of 20 best 
practices for flood-resilient residential community design. These best 
practices constitute elements of residential community design and 
construction that, if implemented together, should achieve significant 
flood risk reduction.
The Intact Centre welcomes feedback from key stakeholders (including 
government representatives, industry associations, developers and 
homebuilders, engineering consultants and other organizations  
involved in flood risk management), as well as the general public. 
Feedback sought includes: 
• Comments on the effectiveness of best practices to reduce  
flood risk and their practicality for implementation; 
• Suggestions on additional best practices that can lead to  
flood risk reduction for new residential communities in Canada; 
• Discussion of barriers to implementation, which may hinder  
the uptake of best practices; and
• Feedback on the discussion questions, included in Chapter 2 
of the report (questions are specific to each of the best practices 
listed below).
The stakeholder consultation period ends October 31, 2017.  
Feedback received will further inform the development of a  
new National Standard of Canada for flood-resilient residential  
community design.
shutterstock_143130163
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
vi
Backwater valve: a device that mitigates against storm or 
sanitary sewage in an overloaded main sewer line from back-
ing up into a basement. The valve automatically closes, if the 
flow from storm or sanitary sewage attempts to back up into 
a basement from the main sewer.
Coastal Flooding: flooding associated with a defined shore-
line along an ocean. Can occur due to a combination of high 
tides, storm surges, waves, rising sea levels.
Combined Sewer: sewer that carries both wastewater and 
stormwater.
Design Flood: a flood elevation or peak flow used for plan-
ning, infrastructure design or floodplain management investi-
gations. It is typically defined by its probability of occurrence, 
or estimated using a selected design storm.
Floodplain: an area adjacent to a lake, river or coast, which 
can be expected to be regularly inundated or covered with 
water. It typically includes two zones: 
• Floodway: the channel of the river or stream and the adja-
cent land that must remain free from obstruction so that the 
regulatory flood can be safely conveyed downstream. 
• Flood Fringe: the remaining portion of the floodplain, 
where flood depths, flow velocities, or wave energies are 
relatively low and some development may be permitted,  
if adequate levels of flood protection are provided.
Flood Mitigation: a sustained action taken to reduce or 
eliminate long-term risk to people and property from flood 
hazards and their effects. Mitigation distinguishes actions that 
have a long-term impact from those that are more closely as-
sociated with preparedness for, immediate response to, and 
short-term recovery from specific events.
Flood Risk Map: maps that contain the flood hazard or 
inundation delineations along with additional socio-economic 
values, such as potential loss or property vulnerability levels. 
These maps serve to identify the social, economic and envi-
ronmental consequences to communities during a potential 
flood event.
Floodproofing: any combination of structural or non-struc-
tural measures that reduce or prevent flood damage to the 
structure and/or its contents. 
Flood Protection: any combination of structural and 
non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to struc-
tures, which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real 
estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facili-
ties, or structures with their contents.
Flood Risk: flood risk is a combination of the likelihood of 
occurrence of a flood event (flood frequency) and the social 
or economic consequences of that event when it occurs 
(through exposure to the flood hazard).
Flow: the rate of flow of water measured in volume per unit 
time (e.g., cubic metres per second). 
Freeboard: the height added to a design flood elevation to 
account for the many unknown factors and uncertainties in 
estimates that could lead to the underestimation of predict-
ed water surface elevations or inaccuracies associated with 
construction practice. 
Hydraulic Analysis: an engineering analysis of flow scenarios 
carried out to provide estimates of the water surface eleva-
tions and velocity for selected recurrence intervals.
Hydrologic Analysis: estimation of food magnitudes as a 
function of precipitation.
Hydraulic Grade Line (HGL): a level to which the water 
would rise in an open channel system or road. In addition, 
the level to which the water would rise in a pipe system 
which, when compared to the level of the basement, will 
indicate a risk of basement backup. The HGL is determined 
by subtracting the velocity head (V2/2g) from the energy 
gradient.
Hydrograph: a graph showing the discharge of a river in 
cubic meters per second at a given point over a period of time.
Hyetograph: a graph showing rainfall intensity (e.g.,  
in millimeters per hour) with respect to time (e.g., hour).
Groundwater Seepage: groundwater that enters through 
cracks, pores or gaps in foundation walls, cracked pipes or 
other openings.
Infiltration (Sewer): the water entering a sewer system, 
including building sewers, from the ground through defective 
pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
Extraneous Sewer Inflow: the water discharged to a 
sanitary sewer system, including service connections, from 
roof leaders; cellar, yard or area drains; foundation drains; 
drainage from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers; 
interconnections from storm sewers; combined sewers and 
catch basins; storm waters; surface runoff; street wash waters 
or drainage.
Invert: the lowest point of the internal cross section of  
a pipe or sewer.
Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF) curve: a graphical 
representation of the probability that a given depth of rainfall 
will occur, shown in rainfall intensity (e.g., in millimeters per 
hour) with respect to rainfall duration (e.g., hour).
Lateral: any pipe from a building connected to  
the main sewer. 
DEFINITIONSi
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
vii
Lake Flooding: flooding associated with defined land area 
along a lake. Can occur due to a combination of high water 
levels, waves, and storm surges.
Minor Drainage System: storm sewers, catch basins, inlets, 
inlet control devices, street and roadway gutters, ditches and 
swales designed to convey runoff from frequent storms.
Major Drainage System: streets, channels, ponds, natural 
streams and valleys that accommodate runoff, including ex-
cess runoff from storms over and beyond the minor drainage 
system capacity. 
Overland Flooding: flooding that occurs when runoff water 
flows from the streets onto properties causing flood damag-
es. It can happen anywhere in the community, independent 
of an overflowing water body.
Peak Flow: the maximum flow rate occurring during a flood 
event measured at a given point in a river, street, or pipe 
system.
Regulatory Flood: the defined flood event used to delin-
eate areas prone to flooding for the purposes of regulating 
land use. The minimum regulatory flood criteria standard in 
Canada is the 100-year return period flood, which is the peak 
flood flow with a one percent chance of occurring in any giv-
en year. Some regions, provinces, and territories implement 
standards that are more stringent.
Riverine Flooding: excess of stream flow in a watercourse, 
such that land outside the normal banks is submerged or  
inundated. Can be caused by extreme rainfall or snowmelt, 
or physical conditions (such as ice jams and undersized wa-
tercourse crossings) associated with a watercourse.
Roof leader: a drainpipe that conveys storm water from  
the roof of a structure to a sewer for disposal onto the 
ground and removal from the property.
Runoff: the amount of water deriving from precipitation/
snowmelt, not otherwise evapotranspirated or stored, that 
flows across the landscape.
Sanitary sewer: part of the public sewage works for the 
transmission of sanitary sewage (includes human and  
industrial waste, and septic waste, but not stormwater).
Standardization: the development and application of stan-
dards that establish accepted practices, technical require-
ments, and terminologies for products, services, and systems. 
Storm Surge: the increase in coastal water levels above 
predicted astronomical tide levels (i.e. tidal anomaly) result-
ing from a range of location-dependent factors including low 
atmospheric pressure, wind and wave set-up and astronomi-
cal tidal waves, together with any other factors that increase 
tidal water levels.
Stormwater: rain, melting snow and ice that washes  
off driveways, parking lots, roads, yards, rooftops, and  
other surfaces.
Stormwater Management: the planning, design and imple-
mentation of systems that mitigate and control the impacts 
of man-made changes to runoff and other components of 
the hydrologic cycle. Stormwater management is better 
known as “rainwater management” in much of the world.
Storm sewer: a sewer, the purpose of which is to carry 
stormwater (including surface and rainwater, melted  
snow and ice) and water in underground pipes and 
foundation drains. 
Sub-watershed: a part of a larger watershed, which drains  
to one point within a watershed.
Surcharge: flow condition when the sewer flow exceeds  
the hydraulic capacity of the sewer.
Velocity of Floodwater: the speed at which floodwaters  
are moving, typically measured in metres per second (m/s).
Watershed (or an “Area Structure Plan” in Alberta): an area 
delineated by topography where all precipitation drains to 
one point or outlet. 
Wastewater (Sanitary Sewage): blackwater (used water 
from sanitary appliances that contains human fecal matter or 
human urine); greywater (used water, other than blackwater, 
from sanitary appliances or from other appliances in a kitch-
en or laundry) that is mixed with blackwater; used water from 
an industrial, commercial or institutional facility that is mixed 
with blackwater and surface runoff; as well as stormwater that 
is mixed with blackwater.
Wet weather flow (WWF): flow observed in sanitary and 
combined sewers during rainy and snow melt periods caused 
by precipitation or snow melt-derived infiltration/inflow.
1
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
1. INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this report is twofold:
1. To highlight the imperatives for flood risk reduction in Canada; and
2. To identify priority areas of focus and associated best practices for building new residential communities that are more  
resilient to flooding.
Chapter 1 describes the rising economic costs of natural disasters, including flooding, in Canada; profiles emerging mortgage 
market risks for areas of the country where repeated flooding has occurred; outlines the rise in flood-related lawsuits; and  
explains key benefits of establishing a new National Standard of Canada for flood-resilient residential community design.
Chapter 2 describes the method used to derive flood-resilient residential community design best practices. It profiles the  
draft best practices and features specific questions for the stakeholders and public reviewing this report. 
Chapter 3 describes a range of initiatives to complement the uptake of flood-resilient community design best practices;  
and it outlines the benefits to be realized with the development of a national flood-resilient residential community design  
standard for Canada.
Chapter 4 contains concluding remarks and provides details on how stakeholders can share their feedback on the report.
  
1.1 RISING ECONOMIC COSTS OF NATURAL DISASTERS AND EXTREME WEATHER 
Natural catastrophes and severe weather are raising costs to governments and, by extension, to all Canadians.ii According  
to Public Safety Canada, the number of natural disasters for which provinces and territories required and obtained federal 
assistance under the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) increased dramatically between 1970 and 2015 
(Figure 1), well in excess of population growth.iii According to the Office of the Auditor General of Canada, from  
2009 to 2015, the DFAA’s spending was more than in the previous 39 fiscal years combined.iv The DFAA’s spending on  
floods was highest, representing 75 percent of all weather-related expenditures.v 
Figure 1: Number of Natural Disasters in Canada Requiring Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements for Provinces  
and Territories (1970 to 2015)
Source: Public Safety Canada. 2016-2017 Evaluation of the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements.
1970
1973
1976
1979
1982
1985
1988
1991
1994
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
0
2
4
6
Number of Events
8
10
12
14
16
2
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Catastrophic insurable losses in Canada are also on the rise. According to the Insurance Bureau of Canada, “property and  
casualty insurance payouts from extreme weather have more than doubled every five to 10 years since the 1980s.”vi While 
insurable payouts averaged $400 million per year over the period of 1980 to 2008, for the last seven of eight years leading  
up to 2016, extreme insurance payouts exceeded $1 billion in Canada. As shown in Figure 2, the insurance gap in Canada  
is significant: denoted in pink are the uninsured catastrophic losses, in billion US$, which are borne by government, home and 
business owners.
Figure 2: Catastrophic Insured Losses in Canada (1980 –2016): Overall and Insured, 2016 US$ 
Source: 2017 Munich Re, Geo Risks Research, NatCatSERVICE. As of February 2017.
2
4
6
8
US$ bn
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
Inflation adjusted via country-specific consumer price index and consideration 
of exchange rate fluctuations between local currency and US$.
* costliest event(s) in the respective year 
Uninsured Losses
(in 2016 values)
Insured Losses
(in 2016 values)
Winter 
damage*
Floods*
Ice 
storm*
Severe storm,
tornadoes, floods*
Wildfire,
floods*
Floods*
Wildfire*
shutterstock_637588831
3
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
1.2 THERE IS NO GOING BACK ON  
CLIMATE CHANGE: CANADA MUST ADAPT
Natural catastrophes and associated economic losses are 
expected to increase in the coming years.vii The Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projects substantial 
warming and increased frequency of heavy precipitation 
events globally in the 21st century.viii Furthermore, according 
to the International Energy Association, “while countries  
are generally on track to achieve many of the targets set  
in their Paris Agreement pledges to reduce global warming, 
this is not nearly enough to limit warming to less than 2°C.”ix 
Therefore, despite global commitments to reduce global 
warming, the climate will continue to change, and the 
associated extreme weather catastrophes, such as floods, 
will ensue.
Recognizing the pressing need to adapt to a changing  
climate, the Government of Canada established the  
Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate 
Change. Chapter four of the framework is entirely dedicated 
to climate adaptation and improving Canada’s climate resil-
iency. Specifically, the Government of Canada made commit-
ments to 1) invest in infrastructure that strengthens resilience 
and 2) to develop climate-resilient codes and standards: 
Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will work  
collaboratively to integrate climate resilience into build-
ing design guides and codes. The development of revised 
national building codes for residential, institutional, commer-
cial, and industrial facilities and guidance for the design and 
rehabilitation of climate-resilient public infrastructure by  
2020 will be supported by federal investments.x 
The National Research Council of Canada (NRC), which sets 
“model codes” for buildings, announced its commitment 
to update most of its codes to reflect climate change and 
extreme weather impacts. The NRC also funded the develop-
ment of a Guideline on Flood Proofing and Flood Prevention 
Measures to Protect Basement Flooding by the Canadian 
Standards Association Group (CSA Group).xi This is one of 
six projects launched by CSA Group to incorporate climate 
change into standards development processes. These include 
the development of climate change adaptation solutions 
within the framework of the Canadian Electrical Codes 1, 2 
and 3, climate change adaptation provisions for the Canadian 
Highway Bridge Design Code and creation of new standards  
for green infrastructure to support flood mitigation and surface 
water protection.xii Concurrently, the Standards Council of  
Canada (SCC) identified existing standards referenced in 
National Model Construction Codes, Provincial and Territorial 
Regulations and Master Building Specification that need to 
be updated to include climate change considerations.
1.3 FLOODING STRESSES CANADA’S  
MORTGAGE MARKET 
According to the Insurance Bureau of Canada, 1.7 million  
Canadian households (19 percent of Canada’s population) 
are at risk of riverine and overland flooding.xii For areas  
where flood insurance coverage is limited or not available, 
and where Canadians are at high risk of flooding, this  
conveys a significant economic concern. 
More specifically, according to the National Flood Insurance 
Program in the United States, a 15-centimeter flood in a 
2,000-square-foot home is likely to cause about $40,000 in 
damage.xiv Similar flood damage costs have been reported 
in Canada, as well. In 2016, the Canadian Payroll Association 
reported that almost half of working Canadians are living 
paycheque to paycheque, and one in four Canadians would 
not be able to “scrape together $2,000 if an emergency 
arose next month.”xv 
With limited flood insurance coverage, some homeowners  
in Canada may not be able to pay for flood damages  
when the next flood strikes - given limited liquidity to  
redress flooding, some home owners may default on their 
mortgage (as homes with sewer water in the basement  
are generally uninhabitable).
canada.ca
4
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
1.4 FLOODING GIVES RISE TO LAWSUITS
Flood-related lawsuits, particularly in the form of negligence lawsuits, are on the rise across Canada. Homeowners, developers, 
local governments, conservation authorities, Indigenous peoples, provinces and private businesses may initiate these lawsuits. 
Table 2 provides examples of flood-related lawsuits, demonstrating the need for flood-resilience, at all levels,  
to limit culpability.
 
The law of negligence refers to careless conduct that causes loss to another. It is the most common, and arguably the most 
important, field of tort law, as it governs most activities of modern society. To be found negligent, a plaintiff must establish 
 that the defendant owed it a duty of care and breached the relevant standard of care. The plaintiff must also show that 
 the defendant’s act or omission caused or contributed to the harm suffered, resulting in damages to the plaintiff.
The most significant aspect of the negligence test in many cases is whether the defendant breached the standard of care.  
The standard of care considers whether the conduct of the defendant was reasonable in the circumstances. A court will  
consider a number of factors when determining the appropriate standard of care, including but not limited to: 
•  Relevant statutory requirements and related guidance 
•  Industry codes of practice  
•  General industry/sector custom and practice 
•  Actions of other, similarly situated, plaintiffs
While any of these factors may help determine the applicable standard of care, no one factor alone is determinative. 
Rather, in each instance, a court will consider the facts and circumstances of the case.
CASE NAME 
(YEAR)
DESCRIPTION 
 (damages, cost and settlement amounts included where identified)
DEFENDANTS
Anderson et al v 
Manitoba et al, 
2017 MBCA 14 
(CanLII) (ongoing)
Manitoba
A $950 M class action lawsuit was brought forward by 4,000 residents of four First 
Nations following severe flooding in the spring of 2011. A flood resulted in damage to 
property and the evacuation of many people from their homes. Plaintiffs brought claims 
of negligence, nuisance and breach of treaty rights, alleging that the Government of 
Manitoba contributed to the flooding through its operation of flood control measures 
and water control works that affected the water levels around the four First Nations.  
The class action lawsuit was certified in January 2017 and is moving forward.
Province, Manitoba 
Association of Native 
Fire Fighters Inc.
Wight v Peel 
Insurance, 2016 
ONSC 6904 
(CanLII)
Ontario
A plaintiff sued their insurance company in contract for denying her coverage after 
a section of a nearby dam burst on a neighbour’s property, causing a flash flood and 
damage to the plaintiff’s home. The insurer initially denied the plaintiff’s claim, but in a 
decision on the plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment, the court found that the dam 
was a “water management system” and that the plaintiff’s policy provided coverage for 
the accidental escape of water from a sewer or drain.
Insurance company
Muskoka Class 
Action, 2016 
(ongoing)
Ontario
A $900 M class action was launched by Muskoka residents, cottage owners and busi-
ness owners against the Province of Ontario after damages were caused by flooding 
and high water levels. Plaintiffs allege that the Ministry of Natural Resources was 
negligent for failure to draw down the water levels and/or effectively manage the water 
levels. The claim is ongoing.
Province
Cerra et al. v. The 
Corporation of 
the City of Thun-
der Bay, 2012 
(ongoing)
Ontario
Floods in May 2012 resulted in severe damage in Thunder Bay. Plaintiffs allege neg-
ligence in repair, inspection and maintenance of the water pollution control plant, as 
well as lack of diligent operation and supervision at the time of the flood (including an 
allegation that alarms were ignored). The $300M claim is ongoing. The court certified 
action on consent in 2013.
Municipality
Vancouver Public 
Library Lawsuit, 
20121 (ongoing)
British Columbia
The City of Vancouver sued the developer, construction company, professional services/
design consulting firm and contractor company for damage caused by an October 2010 
flood at the Kensington branch of Vancouver Public Library. The City claims that the 
catch basins were not constructed in accordance with the construction design details 
prepared by the civil engineer, that defendants were aware the library entrance was 
prone to flooding, and that defendants failed to take action even after the plaintiff noti-
fied them of the issue. This action is ongoing.
Developer, construc-
tion company, profes-
sional services/design 
consulting firm, 
contractor company
Table 2: Examples of Stormwater Management and Flood-Related Lawsuits in Canada
5
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Maple Ridge 
Class Action.  
20102 (ongoing)
British Columbia
Fifteen households filed a class action lawsuit against a developer and contractor, two 
engineering firms, and the City of Maple Ridge after a 2010 flood. Plaintiffs allege 
that defendants were negligent, arguing construction failure, faulty workmanship and 
design, failure to inspect basements for leaks and failure to repair leaks as requested. 
Plaintiffs also argue that the houses were not waterproofed to code, despite the munic-
ipality’s inspection, review and issuance of permits. The trial was scheduled to begin in 
2016. The claim is ongoing.
Municipality, de-
veloper, contractor, 
engineering firms
Panza et al v. The 
Corporation of 
the City of Missis-
sauga et al., 2012 
Ontario 
Upper and lower tier municipalities, the province and the conservation authority were 
all named as defendants in a negligence claim related to systemic flooding over several 
years in the Lisgar area of Mississauga. The $200M action was withdrawn before trial. 
However, this case shows the potential for systemic flooding to give rise to class action 
lawsuits.
Province, munici-
pality, conservation 
authority
Dankiewicz v. Sul-
livan, 2011 ONSC 
3485 (CanLII)
Ontario
A property owner sued her neighbour, alleging negligence and nuisance after her 
neighbour’s alteration of land caused a reversal of drainage flow and subsequent flood-
ing. The court held that the flooding resulting from the defendant neighbour’s actions 
constituted a nuisance. The court awarded the plaintiff $5,000 in recognition of the 
distress, inconvenience and interference with her enjoyment of her land, caused by the 
flooding, as well as $4,257 for replacement trees, a sump pump installation and other 
expenses related to the damage in her yard.
Homeowner
Dicaire v. Cham-
bly, 2008 (QueCA)
Quebec
The Quebec Court of Appeal dismissed a class action by owners of 1,723 homes that 
flooded in 1997 when sewers backed up following heavy rains. The court ruled that the 
sewers were designed, as provincial guidelines required; to cope with a “5-year storm,” 
and the town was not obliged to do more. However, the court noted that current design 
standards might not protect municipalities in future lawsuits, in light of “recent climate 
phenomena” and other scientific advances.
Municipality
Lissack v Toronto, 
2008 OJ No 5563 
Ontario
The City of Toronto’s storm sewer backed up following a heavy storm and flooded the 
plaintiff’s basement. The plaintiff brought an action in negligence for damages against 
the city. The court found that the city breached its duty of care by failing to maintain 
and improve stormwater management systems.
Municipality
McLaren v. Strat-
ford (City),
2005 CanLII 
19801
Ontario
A major flood in the City of Stratford after severe rainfall in 2002 left many with sewage 
in their basement. Plaintiffs claimed negligence in design, construction operation and 
maintenance of the system. The class was certified by the court in 2005, and the case 
was settled in 2010, eight years after the flood. Stratford settled for $7.7M after already 
spending $1.3M in emergency relief and costly improvements to its system thereafter.
Municipality
Ingles v Tutkaluk 
Construction Ltd., 
2000 1 SCR 298, 
2000 SCC 12 
Ontario
The appellant hired a contractor to renovate his basement. The required building 
permit was not obtained prior to construction. The inspector relied on the contractor’s 
assurances that the underpinnings were properly constructed, without properly verifying 
this information, except for an examination of the concrete. The appellant began to 
experience flooding and hired another contractor, who determined that the underpin-
nings were completely inadequate and failed to meet the standard prescribed in the 
Building Code Act. The appellant sued the first contractor for a contractual breach and 
the city for negligence. Even though the owner consented to the construction without a 
permit, the City was also found negligent for failing to conduct an adequate inspection 
and ended up paying $185,000 in costs and rewards.
Municipality, con-
tractor
Oosthoek v. Thun-
der Bay (1996)
1996 CanLII 1530 
(ONCA)
Ontario
After a storm in Thunder Bay, multiple homeowners’ basements flooded. The plaintiffs 
brought an action alleging that the city knew of problems and acted negligently. The 
City was found liable for the flooding caused by the overloaded combined sewers. 
The city’s negligence was based on its failure to enforce the by-law it passed requiring 
downspout disconnection from the sewage system.
Municipality
Source: Adapted from Zizzo Strategy. Legal Risks and Requirements to Address Flood Resilience.  
Prepared for the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation. April 2017.
1 http://www.vancourier.com/news/city-of-vancouver-suing-aquilini-over-library-flood-1.381734
2 http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/british-columbia/leaky-basement-lawsuit-drags-on-in-maple-ridge/article25051951/
6
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
1.5 FLOODING IMPACTS MUNICIPAL  
INSURANCE COSTS AND MUNICIPAL  
BOND RATINGS 
In Canada, flood risk mitigation is typically a responsibility 
of local governments (municipalities, regional governments, 
specialized agencies, boards and commissions). Local 
governments review and approve new developments and 
maintain stormwater management systems.xvi Local govern-
ments can leverage land-use regulations to guide the devel-
opment away from high flood risk areas and can encourage 
the adoption of flood-resilient residential community design 
standards. A combination of these efforts can help local 
governments reduce lawsuits (Table 2) by mitigating risks 
to communities and demonstrating that they acted in ways 
consistent with what courts might find as an appropriate 
standard of care. 
Failure to reduce flood-related lawsuits may increase future 
insurance costs to local governments. In 2011, the Associa-
tion of Municipalities of Ontario (AMO) issued a Municipal 
Insurance Survey, which revealed that, since 2007, municipal 
liability premiums have increased by 22.2 percent. The AMO 
projected that insurance costs for municipalities in Ontario 
will rise to $214 million annually by 2020, not including legal 
fees, self-insurance costs, settlements, risk management 
expenses or court mandated awards.xvii The AMO noted that 
the rise in insurance costs is partly due to joint and several 
liability in the provincial Negligence Act. Joint and several 
liability is “a form of liability that is used in civil cases where 
two or more people are found liable for damages. If any 
of the defendants do not have enough money or assets to 
pay an equal share of the award, the other defendants must 
make up the difference.”xviii As per AMO, joint and several 
liability may lead to significant costs for municipalities:
The insurance premiums paid by municipalities reflect the 
legal reality that municipalities are ‘deep pocket’ defendants, 
often targeted for litigation because the law has established 
such a low threshold of responsibility. Just a fraction of fault 
can cost a municipality millions of dollars. The premiums 
charged by insurance companies, non-profit insurance recip-
rocals and pools reflect, in part, this legal risk.xix
1.6 THE DEFINITIONS OF REGULATORY FLOODS, FLOODWAYS  
AND FLOOD FRINGES DIFFER IN CANADA
Communities throughout Canada use different approaches to address flood management. As noted in the Federal Floodplain 
Mapping Framework, “flood management is inherently multi-faceted and involves a wide range of authorities and stakeholders, 
both within and outside of government.”xxiv 
A range of provincial and territorial policies and regulations govern flood management in Canada, with many responsibilities, 
as noted earlier, delegated down to local governments and water utilities. Moreover, provinces and territories adopted different 
target “levels of service” or “levels of risk” to guide flood management. Table 3 provides a summary of definitions for flood-
way and flood fringe adopted by provinces and territories. The notable differences in these definitions and in regulatory flood 
standards throughout Canada can add to uncertainty about acceptable flood risks in the country and can hinder national efforts 
to streamline flood management in Canada.
With the expected rise in flood-related lawsuits across  
Canada,xx the AMO’s municipal insurance cost projections 
can be expected to rise in the future. 
Municipal bond ratings may also be affected by how well 
municipalities manage flood risks and disclose their efforts. 
According to the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), “munici-
pal bond analysts evaluating the likelihood of repayment for 
municipal bonds would be remiss to ignore an issuer’s expo-
sure to risks posed by climate change impacts.”xxi The CDP 
finds that tax base, debt levels and management quality are 
the three main areas that municipal bond analysis will start 
assessing to determine how well municipalities are address-
ing climate and extreme weather risks. Robert Fernandez of 
Breckinridge Capital Advisors notes the questions, which are 
part of the municipal bond analysis:
Given the widespread impacts of climate change, an analyst 
might ask: which city governments are aware of climate 
risks to businesses and which are not? Are cities adequately 
preparing for these risks? And if they are not, does this lack 
of preparation suggest that the city government might be 
falling short in other, more immediate management priori-
ties?xxii 
In Canada, where flooding is the most common extreme 
weather risk facing municipalities, the focus of municipal 
bond analysis will undoubtedly reflect the initiatives put in 
place by local governments to improve their flood resiliency. 
Credit rating agencies including DBRS, Moody’s and Stan-
dard & Poor’s are beginning to examine climate change risks 
and potential impacts on ratings of tradable assets, including 
municipal bonds. Therefore, to maintain higher credit ratings 
for municipal bonds, local governments must pursue both 
flood mitigation in older communities, where flood risk is  
the highest;xxiii and make every effort to ensure that new 
developments are flood-resilient.
7
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
PROVINCES/  
TERRITORIES
REGULATORY 
FLOOD
DEFINITION  
OF FLOODWAY
DEFINITION OF  
FLOOD FRINGE
British Columbia
1-in-200 years
Plus an additional 
freeboard for hydro-
logic and hydraulic 
uncertainties or 1894 
Flood of Record for 
Lower Fraser River
The channel of the watercourse and those portions of 
the floodplain, which are reasonably required to convey 
the designated flood. At minimum, the floodway is equal 
to the width of the channel within the natural boundary 
plus a minimum setback of 30 metres from the natural 
boundary on each side of the channel, or unless other-
wise approved.
The portion of the floodplain not in  
the floodway to which flood-proofing 
requirements apply.
Alberta
1-in-100 years
The floodway includes areas where the water is one metre 
deep or greater, the local velocities are one metre per 
second or faster and if the river were encroached upon, 
the water level rise would be 0.3 metres or more.
The flood fringe is the land along the 
edges of the flood hazard area that has 
relatively shallow water (less than one  
metre deep) with lower velocities  
(less than one metre per second).
Saskatchewan
1-in-500 years 
Plus additional free-
board for hydrologic 
and hydraulic uncer-
tainties
The portion of the floodplain adjoining the channel where 
the waters in the 1:500 year flood are projected to meet 
or exceed a depth of one metre or a velocity of one 
metre per second.
The portion of the floodplain where the 
waters in the 1:500 year flood are project-
ed to be less than one metre deep, with 
velocity less than one metre per second.
Manitoba
1-in-100 years
1:700 for the  
City of Winnipeg
The portion of the floodplain where the depth of flooding 
is greater than one metre.
The remainder of the floodplain beyond 
the floodway.
Ontario
1-in-100 years 
OR Regional 
Storms (Hurricane 
Hazel or Timmins 
Storm), whichever is 
greater
Where the one zone concept is applied, the floodway 
is the entire floodplain. Where the two-zone concept is 
applied, the floodway is the inner portion of the flood-
plain, representing that area required for the safe passage 
of flood flow and/or that area where flood depths and/
or velocities are considered to be such that they pose a 
potential threat to life and/or property damage.
The outer portion of the floodplain 
between the floodway and the flooding 
hazard limit.
Quebec
1-in-100 years
Part of the floodplain that may be flooded during a 20-
year flood event.
Part of the floodplain beyond the 
high-velocity zone that may be flooded 
during a 1:100 year flood.
New Brunswick
1-in-100 years
Part of the floodplain that may be flooded during a 20-
year flood event.
Part of the floodplain between the floodway 
and the outer limit of the flood risk area, 
whether it is the 1:100 year flood line or  
a higher historic flood line.
Nova Scotia
1-in-100 years
The inner portion of a flood risk area where the risk of 
flooding is greatest, on average once in 20 years and 
where flood depths and velocities are greatest.
The outer portion of a flood risk area, 
between the floodway and the outer 
boundary of the flood risk area, where  
the risk of flooding is lower or average  
1:100 year, and floodwaters are shallower 
and slower flowing.
Newfoundland and 
Labrador
1-in-100 years, ad-
justed for Climate 
Change
The inner portion of a flood risk area where the risk of 
flooding is greatest, on average once in 20 years and 
where flood depths and velocities are greatest.
The outer portion of a flood risk area, 
between the floodway and the outer 
boundary of the flood risk area, where the 
risk of flooding is lower or average 1:100 
year, and floodwaters are shallower and 
slower flowing.
North West  
Territories
1-in-100 years
The floodway includes areas where the water is one metre 
deep or greater, the local velocities are one metre per 
second or faster and if the river were encroached upon, 
the water level rise would be 0.3 metres or more.
The flood fringe is the land along the 
edges of the flood hazard area that has 
relatively shallow water (less than one me-
tre deep) with lower velocities (less than 
one metre per second).
Nunavut
1-in-100 years
The floodway includes areas where the water is one metre 
deep or greater, the local velocities are one metre per 
second or faster, and if the river were encroached upon, 
the water level rise would be 0.3 metres or more.
The flood fringe is the land along the 
edges of the flood hazard area that has 
relatively shallow water (less than one  
metre deep) with lower velocities  
(less than one metre per second).
Table 3: Defining Regulator Flood, Floodway and Flood Fringe for Riverine Flooding in Canada*
*See Appendix A for sources. Prince Edward Island and Yukon did not participate in Canada’s Flood Damage Reduction Program.
8
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Flood Return Period and Risk Analysis
A statistical technique called frequency analysis is used to estimate the probability of the occurrence of a given precipitation 
event. The recurrence interval is based on the probability that the given event will be equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
The term “100-year flood” is used to simplify the definition of a flood that statistically has a one percent chance of occurring in 
any given year. Likewise, the term “100-year storm” is used to define a rainfall event that statistically has a one percent chance 
of occurring.xxv
Recurrence Intervals and Probabilities of Occurrences
Source: U.S. Geological Survey. December 2016.
Notably, a 100-year flood is not always caused by a 100-year storm. The level of soil saturation before the storm, the size 
 of the drainage area contributing to the stream, the duration of the storm and various changes in development over time  
(e.g., increased impervious areas) all play a role in whether or not a 100-year storm will produce a 100-year flood.xxvi 
Moreover, since return periods are computed using past data, as more updated climatological data becomes available, what 
was understood as a 100-year flood in the past may change. For instance, 100-year floods could become 50-year floods due  
to increased severity and frequency of rain events.
From the standpoint of risk analysis, the probability that a 100-year flood will happen more than once in a given 100-years  
period is a representation of the risk. The following equation relates the return period to flood risk: 
R = 1 – (1 – P)N
Where R is the risk that an event with a probability P be reached or exceeded at least once in N years.xxvii For example,  
the risk that a 100-year flood will happen at least once during a 25-year period is not 1% but 22% (or 40% for a 50-year  
period). The relationship between return period and the mean probability of occurrence per year is illustrated below.
Flood Risk Associated with Different Return Periods and Mean Probability of Occurrence per Year
Source: Adapted from Stormwater Management Guide, Ministry of Environment, Quebec, 2011.
The design of drainage systems should take into account flood risk (for example, a typical duration of a mortgage is 25 years), 
as it is not economically feasible to have protection against very rare events.
Notwithstanding the range of definitions and flood management approaches adopted across Canada, some common  
elements and broadly applicable best practices for flood-resilient community design can be identified from coast to coast  
to coast. These best practices can serve as a foundation for a national standard for flood-resilient residential community  
design and are noted in the following chapter.
RETURN PERIOD,  
IN YEARS
PROBABILITY OF OCCURRENCE  
IN ANY GIVEN YEAR
PERCENT CHANCE OF OCCURRENCE 
IN ANY GIVEN YEAR
100
1 in 100
1
50
1 in 50
2
25
1 in 25
4
10
1 in 10
10
5
1 in 5
20
2
1 in 2
50
RETURN PERIOD 
(YEARS)
MEAN PROBABILITY OF 
OCCURRENCE PER YEAR
FLOOD RISK FOR A GIVEN PERIOD OF N YEARS
N = 100           N = 50              N = 25             N = 10             N = 1
100
1%
64%
40%
22%
10%
1%
50
2%
87%
64%
40%
18%
2%
25
4%
98%
87%
64%
34%
4%
10
10%
100%
99%
93%
65%
10%
5
20%
100%
100%
100%
89%
20%
9
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
1.7 BENEFITS OF A NATIONAL STANDARD FOR  
FLOOD-RESILIENT RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY DESIGN
A national standard for flood-resilient residential community design can help local  
governments, developers, homebuilders, design professionals and contractors to better 
understand the minimum expected design and construction requirements for building 
new residential subdivisions that are less prone to flooding. This would lead to multiple 
benefits, including: 
• Reduced liability: Demonstrating compliance with a flood-resilient residential commu-
nity design standard (and with existing legislative requirements) can help local govern-
ments, developers and homebuilders reduce the potential for flood-related negligence 
lawsuits. Applying agreed-upon industry standards could help to demonstrate that an 
applicable standard of care was met and proper due diligence was exercised in the 
design, construction and approval of new residential communities.
• Improved local coordination and planning: Communities located within the  
same watershed may have different requirements for stormwater and floodplain 
management. This may create conflicts and duplications, as developers, homebuilders, 
design professionals and contractors comply with different sets of design guidelines  
for nearby lands. Having a standard can offer a more predictable playing field for  
developers, design professionals and contractors.
• Clarity for developers: Standardization improves understanding of the minimum  
requirements for land use and land development, which developers, design  
professionals and contractors have prior to land acquisition and construction.  
The greater the certainty that new homes are not permitted in the flood-prone  
areas, the lower the incentive for developers to acquire this land for new residential 
community development.
• Improved construction quality: New developments that comply with the  
flood-resilient community design standard provisions are less likely to incur flood  
damages. Enforcement of the standard can aid in maintaining quality of life and  
property values.
• Improved public awareness: Having a recognized standard can help increase public 
awareness and drive market demand for flood-resilient homes and communities.  
Enforcement of the standard can also help protect homebuyers from purchasing  
substandard housing.
• Improved inspections: Compliance inspections can become more effective and  
efficient if they are administered under a single set of provisions. Building inspectors 
familiar with flood mitigation provisions are more likely to identify flawed construction.
shutterstock_5836342731
10
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
2. FLOOD-RESILIENT RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY DESIGN: SCOPE AND BEST PRACTICES 
Recognizing the need to identify broadly applicable best practices for flood-resilient residential community design in  
Canada, the Intact Centre engaged with a group of municipal stormwater and flood management experts, engineering 
consultants, developers, homebuilders and other stakeholders from across Canada to identify priority areas of focus and 
best practices for building new residential communities that are more resilient to flooding. 
The Standards Council of Canada supported this effort through funding of this report, with the objective that the report  
will inform the development of a flood-resilient community design standard for new residential subdivisions in Canada.  
The expected end users of the standard would largely be municipalities, developers and homebuilders.
The scope of the draft best practices was specific to  
greenfield community development only (i.e., not infill  
or redevelopment) and the following building types:
• detached homes
• semi-detached homes
• row houses  
   (including stacked and back-to-back townhomes)
The types of flood hazards addressed by the draft best 
practices included:
• riverine flooding
• overland flooding
• storm and sanitary sewer surcharge
• drainage system failures
• groundwater seepage
The types of flood hazards not addressed by the draft 
best practices included:
• coastal flood hazards
• unique flood hazards (e.g., dam failures)
To develop the short list of 20 best practices (Section 2.3), 
 the Intact Centre used the following selection criteria:
• National applicability: Stakeholders from every province 
in Canada confirmed that the best practices proposed 
in this report were generally relevant and applicable for 
community design and construction. However, since each 
community may have unique flood management challenges 
(e.g., a combination of impermeable soil, flat terrain  
and high water tables), best practices to address these 
unique and area-specific challenges were not included  
in the report.
• Effectiveness in reducing flood damages from severe 
rain events: It is acknowledged that Low Impact Development 
(LID) measures, such as rain gardens and bioswales, can  
be effective to treat rainwater “at the source” during small, 
frequent rainfall events. Usually, traditional stormwater 
design features, such as stormwater end-of-pipe facilities, 
continue to be required to accommodate large, infrequent 
rainfall events, in addition to the LID measures.xxviii Since the 
focus of the proposed best practices was on reducing flood 
damages from severe rain events, best practices aimed at 
managing frequent rain events were not explicitly included 
in the report. However, feedback on LID measures is  
welcome (e.g., under report Section 2.3, Category 6;  
Preservation of Natural Features).
• Technical feasibility for implementation: Best practices in 
the report reflect technology and skill sets that are broadly 
available in Canada.
• Cost-effectiveness: The cost of implementing the pro-
posed best practices over their lifecycle was comparable  
to alternative methods to address flood risk reduction.
While the proposed best practices are expected to be  
relevant across Canada, their application may be limited in 
areas with permafrost, such as Yukon, Northwest Territories 
and Nunavut, as well as in coastal areas of Canada, where  
sea level rise and storm surge pose additional flood risk.
The decision to limit the scope to exclude northern  
and coastal areas was deemed reasonable. First, CSA  
Group has already published a national standard of  
Canada that will help northern communities design  
and implement effective community drainage systems  
(CAN/CSA-S503-15 Community Drainage System  
Planning, Design, and Maintenance in Northern  
Communities).xxix Second, due to tremendous variability 
both among and within Canada’s three marine coast  
regions (East Coast, North Coast and West Coast),xxx  
a stand-alone effort to identify flood-resilient community 
design best practices would be more appropriate. 
2.1 SCOPE OF THE FLOOD-RESILIENT RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY 
DESIGN BEST PRACTICES
shutterstock_637564582
11
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate
The magnitude, importance and, at times, direction of climatic changes vary both among and within  
Canada’s three marine coastal regions.
• The North Coast region (which includes about 70 percent of Canada’s coastline) is very sparsely populated;  
the majority of residents are Inuit, First Nations or Métis; and sea ice is a defining element of the coast for 
much of the year. 
• The East Coast region is characterized by several cities and an abundance of small towns and hamlets,  
with a diverse economy in which coastal resources continue to play an important role.
• The population of the West Coast region is concentrated in British Columbia’s lower mainland and southeastern 
Vancouver Island, with the number of residents and built-environment asset value of the greater Vancouver area far  
exceeding that of any other part of Canada’s marine coast.
Flood management approaches range from new dike construction and dike maintenance to beach nourishment,  
protection, revegetation and stabilization of dunes, to provision of buffer zones, to rolling easements or setbacks  
that allow the landward migration of the coastline.
Source: Government of Canada. 2016. Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate.
Accordingly, the priority areas of focus and best practices for flood-resilient community design identified by the  
Intact Centre (Section 2.3) will apply to most regions in Canada. However, additional work is required to address  
flood-resilient community design considerations for northern and coastal areas. 
Lastly, it is expected that new standards for green infrastructure to support flood mitigation and surface water protection  
from CSA Group will provide relevant guidance for LID implementation. Accordingly, duplication of this effort in this  
report is not justified.
SFU Community Trust, SITE Photography
12
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
2.2 METHOD TO DEVELOP DRAFT FLOOD-RESILIENT RESIDENTIAL  
COMMUNITY DESIGN BEST PRACTICES
Figure 3 outlines the process that the Intact Centre followed to identify priority areas of focus and best  
practices for flood-resilient residential community design.
Figure 3: The Process of Developing a Seed Document for a Flood-Resilient Community Design Standard
The first step in the process of developing best practices was a literature review focused on understanding 
provincial policies and guidelines that govern stormwater management and flood mitigation in Canada (see 
Appendix B for a summary of this review). Industry guides and other relevant documents were also reviewed 
to identify common requirements for a flood-resilient community design (see Appendix C).
Next, the Intact Centre consulted with technical experts to develop a first draft of flood-resilient residential 
community design best practices. These draft best practices were shared with 100 stakeholders and storm-
water management experts from across Canada, to determine their predisposition for on-the-ground imple-
mentation across different regions in Canada. The stakeholders consulted had expertise in flood-resiliency 
and community design - Appendix D lists organizations engaged in the consultation. Notably, the Intact 
Centre engaged stakeholders from at least one city from every province in Canada. In summary, the follow-
ing stakeholder groups took part in the consultation:
• Municipalities	
	
• Engineering consulting firms
• Developers and homebuilders	
• Conservation authorities
• Insurance industry representatives	
• Lawyers
• Government departments and agencies	
• Non-governmental organizations
• Academic institutions	
	
• Industry associations
• Standards development organizations
Stakeholder 
Consultations
Literature 
Review
Confirmation of Priority 
Areas of Focus and
Best Practices
Final Reporting*
* Seed Document for
 Flood-Resilient Community 
Design Standard Development
Interim Reporting and 
Stakeholder Feedback
Summer 
2016
Fall 
2016
Winter
2016
Spring /
Summer
2017
Fall
2017
shutterstock_678527053
13
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Based on stakeholder feedback, the Intact Centre identified priority areas for  
flood-resilient community design and best practices.
Once priority areas and draft best practices for a flood-resilient community design were 
prepared, the Intact Centre led a workshop with 25 stakeholders to rank best practices 
in terms of their effectiveness to reduce flood risk and financial feasibility for implemen-
tation; to share suggestions for modifications; and to identify areas for further research.
To gauge the effectiveness of the draft best practices to reduce flood risk and their 
financial feasibility for implementation, the Intact Centre asked workshop participants  
to rank each draft best practice on a scale from low to high.
Low ranking meant that the draft best practice was unlikely to lead to a significant  
flood risk reduction and/or is not practical to implement due to cost limitations.
Medium ranking meant that the draft best practice was likely to lead to flood risk  
reduction and/or may be practical to implement, under certain conditions.
High ranking meant that the draft best practice was very likely to lead to a significant 
flood risk reduction and/or is practical to implement (i.e., financially and technically), 
under most conditions.
Appendix E contains professional profiles of the workshop participants. Section 2.3  
outlines the highest-ranked best practices for flood-resilient community design,  
as determined at the workshop and though national consultations. 
shutterstock_163967195
14
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
2.3 FLOOD-RESILIENT COMMUNITY DESIGN BEST PRACTICES
Flood resilience in new residential communities is defined as the ability of the storm and 
sanitary infrastructure systems to perform as designed and to have capacity to minimize 
flood damages during some extreme events that exceed design capacities. Flood resil-
ience also includes the siting of new communities beyond natural flood hazard areas. 
There will inevitably be conditions and events that will exceed infrastructure system de-
sign capacities or extend natural hazards beyond regulated limits and may result in flood 
damages in vulnerable areas within communities where there are insufficient safety factors 
in place. However, the intent of the flood-resilient community design is to aid in reducing 
the negative impacts of these conditions and events, as well as to improve the recovery 
process following a flood. The report makes a key assumption that all new (greenfield) 
residential communities in Canada are designed in accordance with the following:
• Community design is in compliance with provincial, regional and local codes, standards 
and by-laws, which can also specify design and Regulatory Flood levels.
• Minor drainage systems are designed to convey runoff from 5-year recurrence-interval 
floods and more frequent rainfall events.
• Major drainage systems are designed to convey runoff for rainfall events, which exceed 
the capacity of the minor system and serve up to the design storm.
• Major and minor drainage systems are designed concurrently.
• Storm and sanitary sewer systems are fully separated. 
• Sanitary sewers are designed to convey extraneous flow from frequent rainfall events 
without surcharging (i.e., water backing up) and from the design storm events without 
damaging property (as per the minimum threshold requirements for a given community).
• Watershed and sub-watershed studies (or area structure plans in Alberta), official land 
use and master drainage plans guide the modelling, design objectives and sizing of 
drainage infrastructure.
The draft best practices (below) are organized into six broad categories of flood-resilient 
residential community design considerations:
1. Design for resilience to address weather and operational uncertainties
2. Storm sewer design (minor drainage system considerations)
3. Sanitary sewer design (wastewater drainage system considerations)
4. Street design (major drainage system considerations)
5. Wastewater pumping station design
6. Preservation of natural features
For each draft best practice, specific feedback sought from the reviewers of this report is 
included in question format.
shutterstock_657880468
15
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
CATEGORY 1: DESIGN FOR RESILIENCE (DR)
DR1. New homes should not be built in the floodway. 
New homes should also not be built in the flood fringe, 
unless flood-proofing addresses flood risks in the flood 
fringe.
• Stakeholders noted that development in the floodplain  
(floodway and flood fringe) always runs a higher risk of 
flooding and therefore should be avoided.
• Stakeholders also noted that there is a significant degree 
of variation in how floodway and flood fringe are defined 
across Canada. Stakeholders expressed that consistent 
definitions of floodway and flood fringe should be devel-
oped and applied across all regions in Canada.
 
• Some stakeholders were divided on whether or not new 
community development should be permitted in the flood 
fringe.
• No matter the definitions, all stakeholders agreed that new  
community development should not be permitted in the 
floodway. 
Feedback Sought:
• Should new homes be permitted to be built in the 
 flood fringe?
• If yes, what are the most pertinent design considerations  
for new homes to be built in the flood fringe?
DR2. “Safety Factors” should be used in new communi-
ty design to account for potentially more frequent and 
severe rainfalls and stormwater system failures. (e.g. 
locating buildings further distance away from the edge  
of the floodplain)
Stakeholders noted that safety factors should be used in the 
design of new developments to account for severe weather  
and operational uncertainty. At minimum, the following safe-
ty factors were recommended:
1. Factor of safety for the floodplain
2. Factor of safety for major drainage systems
3. Factor of safety for minor drainage systems
For example, a safety factor for the floodplain was intro-
duced by the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador 
– Climate Change Flood Zone delineation. In Newfoundland 
and Labrador, a Climate Change Flood Zone is the area 
(based on the extension of a flood fringe) which is likely to 
be impacted due to the latest forecasted effects of climate 
change.xxxi New residential community development in the 
Climate Change Flood Zone is given the lowest preference 
(i.e., such development is the least likely to be approved  
by the Newfoundland and Labrador Department of Municipal 
Affairs and Environment). For any development in the 1-in-
100 year and 1-in-100 year, climate-change-adjusted flood 
zones, the development has to be flood proofed to the 1-in-
100 year, climate-change-adjusted flood elevation, plus 0.6 
meters. The 0.6 meters is an additional factor of safety.  
In addition to flood proofing, the Newfoundland and Labra-
dor government requires that entrances and exits from the 
building can be used safely used, without hindrance, in the 
event of a flood.
Incorporating freeboard in floodplain mapping may be help-
ful to account for uncertainty when a quantitative approach to 
assessing the flood impacts is not feasible. Some stakehold-
ers noted that factors of safety could take the form of buffers 
from the floodplain. For example, Toronto Region Conserva-
tion Authority uses horizontal (10 meter) and vertical (0.3 to 
0.5 meter) buffers from the floodplain to establish develop-
ment limits. 
Safety factors for major and minor drainage systems that were 
suggested also relied on freeboard considerations (i.e., add-
ing extra height to a flood elevation to account for uncertain-
ties in precipitation and to account for inaccuracies  
during the construction of a community).
Stakeholders noted that updated Intensity-Duration-Frequen-
cy (IDF) curves, downscaled General Circulation Models and  
updated hyetographs and runoff coefficients could be used  
to account for climatic uncertainties.
Some stakeholders mentioned that Intensity-Duration- 
Frequency under Climate Change (IDFCC), a computerized 
tool developed by Western University Professor Slobodan 
Simonovic, could be leveraged to draw future climate change 
projections to adjust IDF curves for any province in Canada.xxii  
Stakeholders also identified other online climate service tools 
that can be used to carry out climate projections, such as the 
Climate Change Hazards Information Portal (CCHIP).
It is important to distinguish relative strengths and weaknesses 
of these tools prior to their use and application.
Lastly, some stakeholders noted that over time, there may  
be a degradation of safety factors (e.g., gradual accumulation  
of grease in sewers, urbanization) and consideration should 
be given to their longer-term efficacy.
Feedback Sought:
• What safety factors should be used to account for opera-
tional and design uncertainty in a new community design?
• What safety factors should be used to account for climate 
uncertainty in floodplain estimation?
16
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
DR3. New development should not increase the risk  
of flooding for existing communities.
•	Stakeholders noted that new developments add  
impervious area. Where poor master planning and  
stormwater management strategies are in place, this  
may introduce a greater burden on the existing  
drainage systems, increasing the risk of flooding  
for existing developments.
•	Stakeholders recommended that modelling should be  
completed at a watershed scale to account for future  
land use when developing flood plain mapping.
•	Stakeholders noted that a useful target would be to set 
post-development peak flow rates not to exceed the  
corresponding pre-development peak flow rates  
for stormwater runoff during design storm events.
•	For riverine development, stakeholders suggested that  
encroachment analysis and hydraulic modeling should 
demonstrate that the impact of new development on  
water levels for adjacent developments is negligible.
Feedback Sought:
•	What are critical considerations for analyzing flood 
impacts of new development on downstream and  
existing communities?
DR4. New development should be designed to  
minimize the risk of basement flooding from  
groundwater infiltration.
•	Stakeholders noted that additional clarity about ground-
water seepage risk and how it can be minimized in new 
developments is required.
•	In some areas, where groundwater levels are high, base-
ments should not be constructed, or should be sufficiently 
protected from seepage.
•	Some suggested that a hydrogeological assessment should 
be completed prior to new development approvals being 
granted.  
Feedback Sought:
•	What are critical considerations for assessing  
and minimizing groundwater seepage risk for  
new developments?
DR5. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), 
fuel and electrical systems should be well-elevated  
from the basement floor or located above grade.
•	Stakeholders noted that HVAC systems (including air condi-
tioning compressors, heat pumps, furnaces, ductwork); fuel 
systems (including natural gas lines and fuel storage tanks); 
and electrical systems (including wiring, switches, outlets, 
fixtures, and fuse and circuit breaker panels) all need to be 
elevated and secured in case basement flooding 
does occur.
•	Isolation of electrical systems (e.g., turning off the electricity 
to the circuit) located in the basement was noted as 
good practice.
Feedback Sought:
•	What are critical considerations for HVAC, fuel and  
electrical systems in the context of flood-resilient  
residential community design?
shutterstock_493799830
17
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
CATEGORY 2: STORM SEWER DESIGN (STO)
STO1. If the home foundation drainage system connects 
to a storm sewer*:
» the water level in the storm sewer should stay at least 
30 cm lower than the foundation drainage system 
during a major design event (e.g., 1-in-100-year flood 
event) AND
» a backwater valve should be installed on the storm 
sewer lateral to prevent stormwater from backing up into 
the basement if the storm sewer is overloaded; this back-
water valve should be accessible for maintenance.
•	Backwater valves on storm sewer laterals can mitigate 
against storm sewer backups when the storm sewers  
are overburdened during extreme rain events and the  
design capacity of the storm sewer system is exceeded. 
•	Stakeholders were divided on whether storm sewer  
connections to foundation drains should be a requirement 
for new developments or not. Stakeholders who supported  
the idea of storm sewer connections suggested weeping 
tile discharge to ground surface needs to be avoided, 
 as it may lead to icing or algae growth on sidewalks.
•	Stakeholders suggested that a freeboard of 30 cm should 
be included between the underside of the foundation foot-
ing and the hydraulic grade line of the storm sewer, in the 
event of a surcharge of the minor system  
(e.g., during extreme rain events). 
•	For properties adjacent to the floodplain and where the 
hydraulic grade line can be affected by the flood level in 
the floodplain, a freeboard of 50 cm was suggested.
Feedback Sought:
• What are critical considerations for determining freeboard 
requirements for a minor drainage system?
• Should the freeboard be determined as the distance  
between the finished floor slab and the hydraulic grade 
 line of the storm sewer for easier measurement?
• What are the pros and cons for requiring backwater 
 valves on storm sewer laterals?
• What are key considerations for accessibility to 
 backwater valves for easier maintenance?
STO2. If the home foundation drainage system does not 
connect to the storm sewer*: 
» sump pumps should be installed and equipped with one 
or more backup power systems.
Feedback Sought:
•	Is there any freeboard required if sump pumps  
are installed?
*Alternatively, a separate foundation drain collector system 
should be provided, with no risk of backing up to basement 
levels during the design flood events.
STO3. Inlet control devices (ICDs) should be used to  
restrict the flow of stormwater from the street into  
storm sewers.
• This draft best practice was effective in reducing flooding 
in the Cities of Ottawa and Calgary by limiting the inflow of 
rainwater into the storm sewer during extreme rain events.
 
• Stakeholders noted that ICDs could be used in catch ba-
sins, along with flow controls located at the external inflow 
locations, to ensure that inflow of storm water does not 
surpass the design capacity of the storm sewer. 
• Stakeholders recommended that the design capacity of 
the storm sewer should include surcharge conditions with 
adequate freeboard to basement elevations. They also 
noted that consideration should be given to the overland 
drainage and to the depth and extent of ponding on the 
road during the design storm events.
• Stakeholders noted that ICDs should be inspected and 
cleaned on a regular basis and that maintenance staff 
should not easily remove them during routine maintenance.
Feedback Sought:
• What are critical considerations for inlet control device 
implementation for new community developments?
shutterstock_6367525
18
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
CATEGORY 3: SANITARY SEWER DESIGN (SAN)
SAN1. Basements connected to sanitary sewers should 
have a backwater valve to mitigate sewage backup into 
the basement if the sanitary sewer is overloaded 
(e.g., during heavy rain).
•	This draft best practice aims to minimize the risk of sanitary 
sewer backups during extreme rainfall through installation 
of backwater valves. 
•	Stakeholders noted that backwater valves should be  
accessible for regular maintenance by the property  
owner/resident.
•	Stakeholders noted that homeowner education on 
 backwater valve inspection and maintenance is critical.
Feedback Sought:
•	What are critical maintenance and accessibility  
requirements applicable to backwater valves?
SAN2. Downspout, foundation drain and sump pump 
discharge should not be directed to the sanitary sewers.
•	This draft best practice aims to minimize sanitary sewer 
backups during extreme rainfall
.
•	Most stakeholders agreed this is a critical/mandatory best 
practice. Most stakeholders also noted that backup power 
for sump pumps is an important consideration, as power 
outages are frequent during floods. 
•	Stakeholders noted that sump pump discharge has to 
connect to the nearest storm sewer. If that is not an option, 
sump pumps need to discharge far enough from the base-
ment foundation to prevent/minimize flow from coming 
back into the basement.
•	Stakeholders noted that discharging downspouts to a  
pervious area may be problematic, due to icing issues 
in the winter and algae growth in the summer. 
•	Stakeholders noted that discharging downspouts to pervi-
ous areas tends to attenuate peak flow rates and volumes 
in the storm system; however, downspouts should not dis-
charge too close to homes to avoid basement infiltration.
•	Specific requirements can consist of the discharge distance 
being at least 2 meters away from the house, with at least 
a 2% grade distance from the house. 
Feedback Sought:
•	Under what circumstances should downspouts be 
 allowed to connect to the storm sewer?
•	What are the minimum distance and slope 
 requirements for discharge to a pervious area?
•	What is the optimal backup power solution for 
 sump pumps?
•	What are critical considerations for sump pump  
design and selection?
shutterstock_164529941
publicdomainpictures.net
19
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
SAN3. Design of sanitary sewers should have a factor 
for “Normal” infiltration of rainwater during typical rain 
events and a higher “Safety Factor” for infiltration and 
inflow during extreme rain events.
•	Stakeholders noted that a certain amount of infiltration  
and inflow (I&I) is unavoidable and is accounted for in  
the sanitary sewer design. During extreme rain events, I&I 
frequently exceeds traditional design allowances, increasing 
the risk of sewer overflows and backups.
•	Some stakeholders noted that the I&I design allowances 
from the Federation of Canadian Municipalities’ (FCM) 
InfraGuide (2003) “Infiltration/Inflow Control/Reduction  
for Wastewater Collection Systems” are highly variable  
and while these may be appropriate for typical “base 
flow” conditions, they may be of limited value for new 
community design, specifically when considering extreme 
wet weather conditions. 
•	Others suggested that a stress test should be used to  
account for “extreme weather I&I” demonstrating that  
sewer surcharge does not result in excessive surcharge  
(i.e., a freeboard between 100-year hydraulic grade  
line and basement elevation remains similar to storm  
system design).
•	Stakeholders noted that the safety factor would  
change over time (see comments in DR1.)
Feedback Sought:
•	What are key considerations to determine an appropriate 
Safety Factor for I&I during extreme rain events?
CATEGORY 4: STREET DESIGN (SD)
SD1. Roads and public spaces should be designed to  
convey excess runoff so that it does not flow through  
homeowner property.
• Stakeholders suggested that overland flow routes  
should be contained on public property to avoid potential 
obstruction and maintenance issues if they are located  
on private land.
• Some stakeholders noted that landowners might build  
over the overland flow routes or neglect their maintenance. 
• Moreover, in a large city, there can be too many kilometers 
of such overland flow routes to effectively inspect and main-
tain. Therefore, some stakeholders suggested that stringent 
protection for these features is warranted.
• Lastly, some stakeholders noted the importance of  
protecting rear yard catch basins, where applicable, 
through easement agreements.
Feedback Sought:
• Do easement agreements enable sufficient protection  
of the overland flow routes or should the overland flow 
routes be contained on public property?
SD2. Road design and lot grading should be such that  
the water on the road remains at least 30 cm below the 
lowest building openings (e.g., basement windows) during 
design flood conditions.
•	This draft best practice aims to reduce adverse impacts  
of overland flooding. 
•	Stakeholders suggested that a freeboard of 30 cm should 
be included between the overland flow runoff water level 
and the lowest building opening for storms in excess of 
1-in-5 years and up to the 100-year storm.
•	Stakeholders noted that freeboard requirements should  
differ based on the road types (e.g., arterial, major collector, 
and local roads). They suggested that the freeboard should 
be lower for high speed, high traffic roads and  
high for residential roads.
Feedback Sought:
•	What is an appropriate level of freeboard for a major 
 drainage system?
shutterstock_624348332
20
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
SD3. Roads should be designed so that the maximum 
depth of water during the extreme design condition  
does not exceed 30 cm at the curb.
• Some stakeholders noted that a maximum allowable 
 flow depth needs to be defined for roads. 
• Some stakeholders noted that emergency vehicle access 
 is limited to 35 cm of water.
Feedback Sought:
• What is the maximum depth of ponding on the right  
of way that should be permitted?
SD4. Driveways should be built to slope away from 
homes or garages (i.e., reverse-slope driveways should 
not be permitted).
• This draft best practice aims to prevent overland flooding 
through runoff entering through depressed driveways.
• Some stakeholders noted that changes to zoning and  
building height limits might be required to support the  
uptake of this draft best practice. For example, if a  
community has restrictions on the maximum building 
height, such restrictions may “push buildings down into  
the ground.” Therefore, the implementation of this draft 
best practice may depend on zoning and building height 
limits amendments.
Feedback Sought:
• What are key implementation challenges to restricting de-
pressed driveway construction for new low-rise residential 
communities?
SD5. Sanitary sewer manholes should not be located  
in low-lying areas. If sanitary sewer manholes need to  
be located in low-lying areas, manhole covers should  
be sealed to minimize inflow of accumulated runoff  
into the sanitary sewer.
•	Stakeholders noted that venting of sanitary sewers is  
important, as there may be gas build-up in the sewers,  
if the manhole covers are sealed.
•	Others suggested that sealed manhole covers should  
be used in all cases to minimize inflow during critical  
events (unless ventilation issues dictate otherwise).
•	Stakeholders also suggested that it is important to  
prescribe appropriate manhole sealing methods and  
materials (e.g., the use of rubberized products).
Feedback Sought:
•	What are key considerations for manhole sealing  
in new developments?
shutterstock_313861988
21
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
CATEGORY 5: WASTEWATER PUMPING  
STATION DESIGN (WP)
WP1. Wastewater pumping stations should be located  
in areas where they will remain operational and fully  
accessible during extreme rain events. 
•	Stakeholders noted that pumping stations might fail  
during extreme events.
•	Lawsuits have emerged from pumping station failure,  
which has caused property damages due to sanitary  
sewer backups.
•	Some stakeholders suggested that critical equipment  
within wastewater pumping stations should be located 
above the 1-in-100-year flood hydraulic grade line level.
Feedback Sought:
•	What is the appropriate level of service for wastewater 
pumping stations?
•	Should there be a freeboard requirement for  
wastewater pumping stations, consistent with  
a major system freeboard?
WP2. Wastewater pumping stations should have  
backup power to allow for a minimum of 48 hours  
of uninterrupted service and an overflow in case  
of catastrophic failure.
Feedback Sought:
•	What is the appropriate duration for backup power  
for wastewater pumping stations?
CATEGORY 6: PRESERVATION OF  
NATURAL FEATURES (PNF)
PNF1. Development should not encroach on riparian  
buffers (land and natural vegetation adjacent to water-
bodies), and sufficient setbacks should be maintained 
along the water bodies to reduce the risk of flooding  
due to stream movement and bank erosion.
•	Stakeholders noted that protection of riparian buffers  
and meander belts (lands across which streams can shift 
from time to time, especially during flooding) is critical  
to achieve flood risk reduction.
•	Over time, banks of lakes, rivers and streams can erode  
and alter floodplain delineation.
•	Stakeholders noted that setbacks should account for such 
potential changes in the floodplain (DR2) and that riparian 
buffers should remain in public ownership.
Feedback Sought:
•	What are key considerations for determining minimum  
setbacks along water bodies and minimum vegetated  
buffer zones?
PNF2. New development should aim to minimize runoff 
from impervious areas.
•	Stakeholders noted that impervious areas, such as as-
phalt roads, paved parking lots, driveways, sidewalks and 
building rooftops prevent stormwater from soaking into the 
ground. These areas generate more runoff and transport it 
more quickly than pervious surfaces, such as lawns, parks, 
etc., to discrete locations, which may affect flooding. 
•	Stakeholders noted that new developments should be  
designed to minimize runoff from impervious surfaces.
•	Some stakeholders noted that post-development peak  
flow rates should not exceed the corresponding pre-devel-
opment peak flow rates for the design storm events (DR3). 
The role of techniques that promote infiltration, reuse and 
rainwater harvesting could be considered, where feasible.
Feedback Sought:
•	What are key considerations for determining impervious 
surface area limits?
22
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
It is expected that a flood-resilient residential community design standard will help 
streamline the construction of communities that would be less prone to flooding.  
The following initiatives would further complement the standard and support flood  
risk reduction in Canada:
• Up-to-date, forward-looking floodplain maps: Current floodplain maps underpin any 
flood management effort. Accordingly, modelling, topographic and land development 
information to derive floodplain maps should be updated on a periodic basis and should 
incorporate future weather projections and uncertainty. Guidance contained in the 
Federal Floodplain Mapping Framework developed by Natural Resources Canada and 
Public Safety Canada should be used for any new developments in Canada. Other docu-
ments under development, which can aid in floodplain mapping efforts, include Federal 
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Procedures for Floodplain Delineation, Federal Geomatics 
Guidelines for Floodplain Mapping and Case Studies on Climate Change in Floodplain 
Mapping.xxxiii A review of hydrologic and hydraulic modelling calibration techniques, 
including data collection, is another important area of focus where guidance may  
be required.
• Consistent definition of floodway and flood fringe: The variation in how provinces  
and territories define the terms “floodway” and “flood fringe” hinders efforts to  
streamline flood management in Canada. Natural Resources Canada and Public  
Safety Canada need to develop nationally acceptable definitions of floodway and 
 flood fringe, which will guide decisions about permissible land use for new  
residential developments in Canada.
• Homeowner education: Homeowners play a critical role in reducing flood risk and 
maintaining flood resiliency in their community. Homeowners need to be aware of their 
responsibilities in flood risk management (such as maintain proper lot grading around 
houses, ensure that backwater valves and sump pumps are in operational condition and 
keep drainage swales and catch basins free of dirt and debris). Homeowners also need 
to be aware of flood mitigation technologies, such as inlet control devices, which may 
lead to occasional “nuisance” flooding on the street. Therefore, regular outreach to 
homeowners is necessary; especially, as when home ownership changes, knowledge  
of proper maintenance activities may be lost.
• Ongoing maintenance: Some stakeholders suggested that a maintenance standard 
needs to be developed to ensure that a “flood-resilient community” remains flood-resil-
ient over time. To address this need, CSA Group is working to develop a lot-level flood 
risk assessment standard. The utility of the standard is that it can be applied both to new 
and existing communities in Canada to assess the flood-resiliency of a home. Assuming 
municipal assets are maintained in a state of good repair, this standard can be applied 
within “flood-resilient communities” to ensure that they remain flood-resilient over time.
• Inspections and monitoring: Stakeholders noted the importance of ensuring that  
new communities are 1) built as designed, and 2) perform as designed. Stakeholders  
recommended that as-built drawings, certified by a professional engineer, should  
be mandated prior to local governments’ assumption of any new developments  
to confirm that flood-resilient residential community design best practices were  
integrated. Stakeholders suggested that third party testing could be used to  
confirm the quality of design, for example, testing of sanitary sewers for water  
tightness (to reduce the probability of leaks).
•	Engagement with developers and homebuilders: To ensure the uptake of a flood-re-
silient residential community design standard, early engagement with developers and 
homebuilders is critical. Grandfathering policies (where old flood management rules 
continue to apply, while new standards will need to be met in all future cases), could  
be used for development approvals. Furthermore, local governments may consider 
amending certain by-laws and zoning requirements to incentivize the adoption of  
a flood-resilient community design standard. 
3. NATIONAL STANDARD FOR FLOOD-RESILIENT RESIDENTIAL  
COMMUNITY DESIGN: ENABLING ENVIRONMENT
shutterstock_661703446
23
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
4. CONCLUSION AND NEXT STEPS
This report outlines the urgent need for flood risk reduction in Canada in light of the rising economic  
costs associated with flood damages, mortgage market stresses and legal liabilities. The report establishes  
a transparent and streamlined approach for flood risk reduction for new (low-rise, greenfield) residential 
communities built in Canada through the identification of critical best practices, which, if collectively  
implemented, can lead to new communities being less prone to flooding.
The expectation is that these critical draft best practices will serve as a foundation for the subsequent  
development of a National Standard of Canada.
There are 20 draft best practices outlined in the report, for which specific stakeholder feedback  
is being sought, as per the questions presented in Section 2.3. 
In addition, the Intact Centre welcomes comments on:
• The effectiveness of best practices to reduce flood risk and their practicality (technical and cost) 
 for implementation; 
• Suggestions of additional best practices that can lead to flood risk reduction for new residential  
communities in Canada; and
• Discussion of barriers to implementation, which may hinder the uptake of best practices.
Following stakeholder consultation, the Intact Centre will assess all feedback received and pursue  
the development of a national standard. 
Stakeholder Consultation Details
The stakeholder consultation period ends October 31, 2017.
Electronic submissions are preferred and should be sent 
to Natalia Moudrak: nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca
Written submissions can be mailed to:
Attention: Natalia Moudrak
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
EV3 4334 - 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3G1
An electronic version of this document is available on the Intact Centre’s website at: 
http://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/programs/natural-infrastructure-adaptation-program 
Please note that the Intact Centre intends to make submissions received publicly available. If you indicate 
that you do not want your submission or specific parts of your submission to be public, we will treat the 
submission, or the designated parts, as confidential.
24
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
APPENDIX A: DEFINING REGULATORY FLOOD, FLOODWAY  
AND FLOOD FRINGE IN CANADA (SOURCES)
Province/   
Territory
Source(s):
British Columbia
Province of British Columbia. Ministry of Forests, Lands, and Natural Resource Operations.  
Floodplain Mapping Definitions. 1994. Accessed at:  
http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/data_searches/fpm/definitions.html
Province of British Columbia. Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection.  
Flood Hazard Area Land Use Management Guidelines. 2004. Accessed at:
http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/pdfs_word/guidelines-2011.pdf
Government of Canada. Environment and Climate Change Canada.  
Flood Damage Reduction Program. 2013. Accessed at: 
https://ec.gc.ca/eau-water/default.asp?lang=En&n=0365F5C2-1
Alberta
Alberta Environment. Water Management Operations, River Forecast Section. Flood Hazard Identifica-
tion Program Guidelines. 2011. Accessed at:
https://www.alberta.ca/albertacode/images/Flood-Hazard-Identification-Program-Guidelines.pdf
Government of Alberta. Environment and Parks. Flood Hazard Mapping. 2017.  
Accessed at: http://aep.alberta.ca/water/programs-and-services/flood-hazard-identification-program/
flood-hazard-mapping.aspx
Saskatchewan
City of Regina, Saskatchewan. The Statements of Provincial Interest Regulations, Chapter P-13.2 Reg 3. 2012. Ac-
cessed at: http://www.publications.gov.sk.ca/freelaw/documents/English/Regulations/Regulations/P13-
2R3.pdf 
Government of Canada. Environment and Climate Change Canada. Flood Damage Reduction Pro-
gram. 2013. Accessed at: https://ec.gc.ca/eau-water/default.asp?lang=En&n=0365F5C2-1 
Manitoba
MMM Group Limited. Public Safety Canada. National Floodplain Management Assessment –  
Final Report. 2014. Accessed at: https://www.slideshare.net/glennmcgillivray/national-floodplain-map-
ping-assessment 
Ontario
Government of Ontario. Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. Provincial Policy Statement.  
2014. Accessed at: http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/page10679.aspx 
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources. Technical Guide, River & Stream Systems:  
Flooding Hazard Limit. 2002. Accessible at: http://www.renaud.ca/public/Environmental-Regulations/
MNR%20Technical%20Guide%20Flooding%20Hazard%20Limit.pdf   
Quebec
Gouvernement du Québec. Centre de services partagés du Québec. Protection Policy for Lakeshores, 
Riverbanks, Littoral Zones and Floodplains - Environment Quality Act. 2005. Accessed at: 
http://legisquebec.gouv.qc.ca/en/ShowDoc/cr/Q-2,%20r.%2035 
New Brunswick
Government of New Brunswick. Environment and Local Government. Defining a Flood Plain. 2017. Accessed at: 
http://www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/departments/elg/environment/content/flood/flood_plain.html 
Nova Scotia
Government of Nova Scotia. Municipal Government Act. Statements of Provincial Interest. 2001, 2013. 
Accessed at: https://novascotia.ca/just/regulations/regs/mgstmt.htm 
Newfoundland  
and Labrador
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador. Department of Municipal Affairs and Environment.  
Policy for Flood Plain Management. 1996, 2014. Accessed at: http://www.mae.gov.nl.ca/waterres/ 
regulations/policies/flood_plain.html
Northwest  
Territories
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. An Assessment of Flood Risk Management in Canada. 2013. 
Accessed at: https://www.iclr.org/images/An_Assessment_of_Flood_Risk_Management_in_Canada.pdf 
Nunavut
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. An Assessment of Flood Risk Management in Canada. 2013. 
Accessed at: https://www.iclr.org/images/An_Assessment_of_Flood_Risk_Management_in_Canada.pdf 
25
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
APPENDIX B: EXAMPLES OF PROVINCIAL GUIDELINES, ACTS AND POLICIES  
AND MUNICIPAL BY-LAWS FOR FLOOD MANAGEMENT
CATEGORY 1: DESIGN FOR RESILIENCE (DR)
The following are draft best practices and examples of related municipal by-laws (and, where applicable,  
examples of Provincial Guidelines, Acts and Policies).
DR1. New homes should not be built in the floodway. New homes should also not be built in the flood fringe,  
unless flood-proofing addresses flood risks in the flood fringe.
Alberta
Government of Alberta. Flood Hazard Identification Program Guidelines. Alberta Environment,  
Water Management Operations, River Forecast Section. July 2011. 
“In extreme flood hazard areas such as floodways, appropriate development would mean uses that would 
not adversely affect flood elevations and that would minimize threats to public safety while decreasing the 
potential for flood damages. For the floodway, appropriate development would typically be non-obstructive 
development or infrastructure that needs to be near the river (such as a drain outlet).”
https://www.alberta.ca/albertacode/images/Flood-Hazard-Identification-Program-Guidelines.pdf
British  
Columbia
Province of British Columbia. Flood Hazard Area Land Use Management Guidelines. Ministry of Water,  
Land and Air Protection. May 2004: 
“Official Community Plans must contain general land use policy statements and maps respecting restrictions 
on the use of land that is subject to hazardous conditions [e.g., flood prone areas]”
http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/pdfs_word/guidelines-2011.pdf 
Manitoba
Government of Manitoba. The Planning Act. Provincial Planning Regulation. June 20, 2011.
“5.2.1 Land subject to flooding, erosion and bank instability or that has been designated under the Designat-
ed Flood Area Regulation, Manitoba Regulation 59/2002, must be identified. 
Development of this land may be permitted only if the risks are eliminated or ways are identified to ensure 
that a) no additional risk to life, health or safety is created as a result of development; b) buildings and other 
things constructed, such as septic fields, are protected from the risks related to flooding, erosion and bank 
instability; and c) water flow, velocities and flood levels will not be adversely altered, obstructed or increased 
as a result of development.
5.2.2 Appropriate flood protection and mitigation measures must include the following: a) the identification 
of protection levels i) for land subject to flooding, that maintain a minimum 0.67 metres (two feet) of free 
board at a flood level equalling the design flood, and ii) for lands adjacent to lakes and large reservoirs, incor-
porate the effects of wind set-up and wave uprush.”
http://web2.gov.mb.ca/laws/regs/current/081.11.pdf  
New  
Brunswick
Government of New Brunswick Community Planning Act, Interpretation (Flood Risk Area By-Law).  
Chapter C-12. Jan 2015.
“41.1(1) Where a municipality requests, the Minister may designate any area within the municipality  
to be a flood risk area. 
41.2(4) A flood risk area by-law may prohibit development that would obstruct or interfere with  
the normal floodway or free flow of flood waters during a flood period.
41.2(5) A flood risk area by-law may require that all development in a flood risk area or in any portion  
thereof shall be carried out so as not to reduce the flood water storage capacity of such area, and may  
prohibit development in any other manner.”
https://www.canlii.org/en/nb/laws/stat/rsnb-1973-c-c-12/latest/rsnb-1973-c-c-12.html 
26
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Newfoundland 
and Labrador
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador. Policy for Flood Plain Management. Municipal Affairs  
and Environment. 2014. 2014.
“6.01 Development in a designated flood risk area, development in a flood plain and development  
in a climate change flood zone shall be subject to the prior written approval of the Minister of  
Environment and Conservation (the “Minister”) in accordance with the Act. AND Residential and  
other institutional development is Not Permitted in all Flood Plains, and in Floodway (1:20 year Zone),  
where Flood Plains are Designated.”
http://www.mae.gov.nl.ca/waterres/regulations/policies/flood_plain.html
Nova Scotia
Government of Nova Scotia. Statements of Provincial Interest, Section 193 and subsections 194(2) and (5), 
Municipal Government Act. 2013. 
“For Flood Risk Areas that have been mapped under the Canada-Nova Scotia Flood Damage Reduction  
Program planning documents must be reasonably consistent with the following: 
(a) within the Floodway, 
(i) development must be restricted to uses such as roads, open space uses, utility and service corridors,  
parking lots and temporary uses, and 
(ii) the placement of off-site fill must be prohibited; 
(b) within the Floodway Fringe, (i) development, provided it is floodproofed, may be permitted, except for
(1) residential institutions such as hospitals, senior citizen homes, homes for special care and similar facilities 
where flooding could pose a significant threat to the safety of residents if evacuation became necessary, and 
(2) any use associated with the warehousing or the production of hazardous materials, (ii) the placement  
of off-site fill must be limited to that required for floodproofing or flood risk management.”
https://novascotia.ca/just/regulations/regs/mgstmt.htm 
Ontario
Government of Ontario. Ontario Provincial Policy Statement, Under the Planning Act. Provincial Planning 
Policy Branch, Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. 2014.
“Development shall generally be directed to areas outside of a) hazardous lands adjacent to the shorelines of 
the Great Lakes - St. Lawrence River System and large inland lakes which are impacted by flooding hazards, 
erosion hazards and/or dynamic beach hazards; b) hazardous lands adjacent to river, stream and small inland 
lake systems which are impacted by flooding hazards and/or erosion hazards; and c) hazardous sites.”
“Development and site alteration shall not be permitted within: a) the dynamic beach hazard; b) defined 
portions of the flooding hazard along connecting channels (the St. Marys, St. Clair, Detroit, Niagara and St. 
Lawrence Rivers); c) areas that would be rendered inaccessible to people and vehicles during times of flood-
ing hazards, erosion hazards and/or dynamic beach hazards, unless it has been demonstrated that the site has 
safe access appropriate for the nature of the development and the natural hazard; and d) a floodway regard-
less of whether the area of inundation contains high points of land not subject to flooding.”
“Where the two zone concept for flood plains is applied, development and site alteration may be permitted 
in the flood fringe, subject to appropriate floodproofing to the flooding hazard elevation or another flooding 
hazard standard approved by the Minister of Natural Resources.”
http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/AssetFactory.aspx?did=10463 
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources. Technical Guide, River & Stream Systems: Flooding Hazard Limit. 2002. 
Accessible at: http://www.renaud.ca/public/Environmental-Regulations/MNR%20Technical%20Guide%20
Flooding%20Hazard%20Limit.pdf  
Prince  
Edward 
Island
Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI). Coastal Property Guide: What you should know about living on 
PEI’s coast. PEI Department of Communities, Land and Environment. 2016.
“Within the provincial planning jurisdiction, a subdivision of a coastal property(s) must allow for:
A coastal subdivision buffer that is at least 18.3 m (60 ft) wide, or 60 times the annual rate of erosion.” 
Almost all activity within the Buffer Zone is prohibited. Within the Buffer Zone, you need a permit to: build, 
repair, or remove structures or obstructions, including seasonally removable stairways and floating docks.”
https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/sites/default/files/publications/prince_edward_island_coastal_proper-
ty_guide.pdf 
27
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Quebec
Government of Quebec. Protection Policy for Lakeshores, Riverbanks, Littoral Zones and Floodplains  
Q-2, r.35, Environment Quality Act. Publications Quebec. 
“4.1. Prior authorization for activities in floodplains:
All structures, undertakings and works that are liable to alter the water regime, interfere with the free flow  
of water during flood periods, disturb plant or wildlife habitats or threaten the safety of persons or property 
are subject to prior authorization. The pre-verification should be performed as part of the process when  
permits or other forms of authorization are issued by municipal authorities, the Government or its depart-
ments or bodies, according to their respective jurisdictions. The authorizations granted by municipal and 
government authorities are to take into account the scope for action allowed by the measures relating to 
floodplains, protect the integrity of the environment and ensure that the free flow of water is maintained.
4.2. Measures relating to the high-velocity zones of floodplains:
All structures, undertakings and works are in principle prohibited in the high-velocity zone of a floodplain 
 and in identified floodplains where high-velocity zones are not distinguished from low-velocity zones,  
subject to the measures under Subsections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2.”
http://legisquebec.gouv.qc.ca/en/ShowDoc/cr/Q-2,%20r.%2035 
Saskatchewan
Government of Saskatchewan. Statements of Provincial Interest, 2012.
“To assist in meeting the province’s public safety interests, planning documents and decisions shall, 
insofar as is practical:
1. Identify potential hazard lands and address their management;
2. Limit development on hazard lands to minimize the risk to public or private infrastructure;
3. Prohibit the development of new buildings and additions to buildings in the flood way of the  
1:500 year flood elevation of any watercourse or water body;
4. Require flood-proofing of new buildings and additions to buildings to an elevation 0.5 metres  
above the 1:500 year flood elevation of any watercourse or water in the flood fringe”
http://www.publications.gov.sk.ca/freelaw/documents/English/Regulations/Regulations/P13-2R3.pdf 
DR2. “Safety Factors” should be used in new community design to account for potentially more frequent  
and severe rainfalls and stormwater system failures. (e.g. locating buildings further distance away from the edge  
of the floodplain)
Alberta
Specific policy references not found.
British  
Columbia
Government of British Columbia, Professional Practice Guidelines: Legislated Flood Assessments in  
a Changing Climate in BC, APEGBC V1.1, Natural Resources Canada. 2012.
“Practitioners should recognize that the effect of changes in land use, hence storm runoff, may have to  
be superimposed on projections of hydroclimatic change to arrive at the most appropriate estimates of  
future flood flows. This is particularly important in urbanizing areas, where dramatic changes in storm  
runoff accompany land use conversion.”
https://www.apeg.bc.ca/getmedia/18e44281-fb4b-410a-96e9-cb3ea74683c3/APEGBC-Legislated-Flood-As-
sessments.pdf.aspx
Manitoba
Government of Manitoba. Provincial Planning Regulation, The Planning Act, C.C.S.M. c. P80. 2011.
“5.2.2 c) In areas where the flooding and erosion risks cannot be readily defined, that the required set-back for 
permanent structures from water bodies be at least 10 times the height of the bank above the normal summer 
water level or 30 metres, whichever is greater, unless a geotechnical engineering investigation shows that the set-
back may be altered without creating any additional risks.”
http://web2.gov.mb.ca/laws/regs/current/081.11.pdf 
Government of Manitoba. Planning Resource Guide: Climate Change Adaptation through Land Use Planning. 
2015.
Through development plans, secondary plans and zoning by-laws, municipalities are required to:
“Ensure planning takes account of future trends in flooding. Use geographic information systems (GIS) and climate 
models to guide development away from flood prone areas. Designate these areas in the development plan for 
agricultural or recreational uses rather than residential or commercial. Use the zoning by-law to re-site infrastructure 
and routes so that disruption during flooding is minimized.”
https://digitalcollection.gov.mb.ca/awweb/pdfopener?smd=1&did=23005&md=1 
28
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
New  
Brunswick
Government of New Brunswick. Climate Change Action Plan 2007-1012, Planning Policy.  Department of 
Environment, New Brunswick. 2007.
“The Province is developing a provincial planning policy to guide development to appropriate locations. This 
policy will be an integrated initiative designed to develop statements of provincial interest, such as coastal 
areas protection, smart growth for settlement patterns, floodplain and drinking-water protection, and industri-
al uses. It will also set out the framework for delivery and implementation at the provincial, regional and local 
levels necessary to protect these interests and promote sustainable communities. A provincial planning policy 
will organize and direct development activity with consideration of its impacts on the environment, society 
and the economy. Climate change predictions will be considered in land, air and water planning.”
http://www2.gnb.ca/content/dam/gnb/Departments/env/pdf/Climate-Climatiques/2007-2012Climat-
eChangeActionPlan%20.pdf 
Newfoundland 
and Labrador
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador. Policy for Flood Plain Management. Department of Municipal 
Affairs and Environment. 2014. 
“Development Requires Written Approval Development in a designated flood risk area, development in a 
flood plain and development in a climate change flood zone shall be subject to the prior written approval of 
the Minister of Environment and Conservation (the “Minister”) in accordance with the Act.”
http://www.ecc.gov.nl.ca/waterres/regulations/policies/flood_plain.html 
Nova Scotia
Government of Nova Scotia. Municipal Climate Change Action Plan Guidebook, Canada-Nova Scotia Agree-
ment on the Transfer of Federal Gas Tax Funds. Service Nova Scotia and Municipal relations Canada-Nova 
Scotia infrastructure Secretariat. November 2011.“For new infrastructure projects climate change risk assess-
ment should be included in the ‘Request for Proposal’ for the design engineer to consider.”
http://www.fcm.ca/Documents/tools/PCP/municipal_climate_change_action_plan_guidebook_EN.pdf 
Ontario
Government of Ontario. Provincial Policy Statement, Under section 3 of the Planning Act. Ontario Ministry of 
Municipal Affairs and Housing. 2014.
“Planning authorities shall consider the potential impacts of climate change that may increase the risk associ-
ated with natural hazards.”
http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/AssetFactory.aspx?did=10463
Prince  
Edward 
Island
Government of Prince Edward Island. Report of the Task Force on Land Use Planning Policy. January 2014.
Task Force on Land Use Policy recommended that the Province “Prohibits or regulates development in areas 
potentially at risk from flooding, storm surges and the adverse effects of climate change; identifies non-devel-
opment areas, required setbacks, buffer zones.”
https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/sites/default/files/publications/report_on_land_use_policy.pdf  
Quebec
Government of Quebec. Manuel de calcul et de conception des ouvrages de gestion des eaux pluviales. 
Ministère du Développement durable, de l’Environnement et de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques. 
March 2017. 
 “Section 5.5. [translated] For new development, flow calculations for all precipitation events above 1:2 year, 
must increase the Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves by 18%.”
http://www.mddelcc.gouv.qc.ca/eau/pluviales/manuel-calcul-conception/manuel.pdf 
29
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
DR3. New development should not increase the risk of 
flooding for existing communities.
Government of Alberta. Water Act: Storm Water  
Management. 2000.
“Storm water systems that are demonstrated to have  
an adequate outlet do not require a Water Act approval.  
More specifically, if the impact of the post-development  
flow cannot be detected, then the outlet is expected to be 
adequate; or if the discharge performs within its design capacity 
during the peak in 1-in-100 year storm event and will not create 
an adverse impact on the environment and others, then the 
outlet is expected to be adequate.”
http://aep.alberta.ca/water/education-guidelines/documents/
StormWaterManagement-FactSheet.pdf
Government of Manitoba. Planning Resource Guide:  
Subdivision in Manitoba. October 2016.
“Hydraulic design calculations are to be provided for review  
using a design scenario that details how post-development 
storm water runoff rates of the subject property are to be equal 
to, or less than predevelopment run-off rates subject to the 
following criteria: 
The site design must be able to handle a minimum of 1-in-25 
year storm event. Water-ponding volumes should equal the 
difference between a one-in-five year allowable outflow, and a 
1-in-25 year post-development flow hydrograph. The allowable 
outflow is the one-in-five year peak flow based on predevelop-
ment conditions. The ponding storage is typically accomplished 
through retention ponds, or internal storage via ditches and 
drainage patterns.
In cases where increased post development runoff cannot 
 be accommodated within the development, the Subdivision 
Development Drainage Plan must detail how the developer  
will mitigate negative downstream impacts of an increase in 
surface water flows. Mitigation may include upgrading existing 
drainage infrastructure, such as culverts and drainage channels 
downstream, to accommodate additional runoff.”
http://www.gov.mb.ca/imr/mr/land_use_dev/pubs/guide_subpr.pdf
City of Saint John. Storm Drainage Design Criteria Manual. 
March 2016.
“It is the responsibility of the Developer and/or Consultant  
to ensure that the proposed development does not create  
a downstream flooding problem, or aggravate an existing 
downstream flooding problem.
When adequate downstream capacity does not exist, one  
possible option is to upgrade downstream infrastructure.  
Alternatively, the Developer and/or Consultant may reduce 
peak flow through the use of storage, and a “zero-increase” 
covenant may be implemented that will limit post-develop-
ment peak discharge to the existing pre-development peak 
discharge. In following this alternate approach, it is the responsi-
bility of the Developer and/or Consultant to exercise innovative 
engineering design, including various methods of on-site  
storage, to mitigate the detrimental effects of their develop-
ment by any storm up to the 1 in 100 year return period storm.”
http://www.saintjohn.ca/site/media/SaintJohn/Storm%20Drain-
age%20Design%20Criteria%20Manual%20March%207,%20
2016.pdf
City of Moncton. Design Criteria Manual for Municipal 
Services. June 2013.
“For the post-developed condition, hydrologic analysis 
should be based on the land parcel in its altered imper-
vious condition. The time concentration (Tc) should be 
based on altered flow patterns. Runoff hydrographs must 
be prepared for the 2, 5, 10, 25, 50 and 100(+20%) -year 
design storm events for the post developed condition. 
Adequate detention storage must be provided within  
the development to ensure that the post-developed  
hydrographs, after routing through the detention  
storage, do not exceed the pre-developed hydrographs.”
https://www.moncton.ca/Assets/Government+English/
Department+English/Engineering+and+Environmental+-
Services/Engineering+Design+Criteria+Manual.pdf
City of Barrie. Storm Drainage and Stormwater Manage-
ment Policies and Design Guidelines. November 2009.
“Post-to-pre quantity control shall be provided unless 
otherwise directed by the City or Conservation Authori-
ty, or unless otherwise indicated in an approved master 
drainage plan or watershed plan. Under certain circum-
stances where the proposed development is located in 
close proximity to Lake Simcoe and where there are no 
downstream land owners, the post-to-pre peak flow con-
trol requirements may be waived subject to approval by 
the City and Conservation Authority.”
http://www.barrie.ca/Doing%20Business/Develop-
ment-Services/Documents/City-Standards/StormDrainag-
eandStormwaterManagementPoliciesandDesignGuide-
lines.pdf
City of Saskatoon. Design and Development Standards 
Manual, Section Six Stormwater Drainage System.  
January 2017.
“Minor System: The release rate from any proposed  
development shall not exceed the capacity of the  
downstream system.
Major System: Continuity of flow routes between  
adjacent development shall be maintained.”
https://www.saskatoon.ca/sites/default/files/documents/
transportation-utilities/construction-design/new-neigh-
bourhood-design/6._2017_section_six_-_storm_water_
drainage_system.pdf
30
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
DR4. New development should be designed to minimize the 
risk of basement flooding from groundwater infiltration.
Government of Saskatchewan. Guidelines for Sewage  
Works Design. Saskatchewan Ministry of Environment.  
January 2008.
“Where sewers are proposed to be located below  
groundwater table or where they may pass through  
sensitive groundwater recharge areas, consideration  
should be given to use of watertight sewers.”
http://www.saskh2o.ca/DWBinder/EPB203GuidelinesSew-
ageWorksDesign.pdf
Halifax Regional Municipality. By-law L-400 Respecting  
Lot Grading. May 2016.
“The Storm Drainage Systems, be they Community Systems 
or Individual Lot Systems, designed within the context of the 
Lot Grading By-law, and the siting and grading of the house, 
shall achieve the following objectives: To provide for conve-
nient and reasonable use of lot areas during and following 
rain and snow events and from subsurface or groundwater 
flow, e.g. continuously saturated backyard, significant  
continuous icing.”
https://www.halifax.ca/sites/default/files/documents/city-
hall/legislation-by-laws/By-lawL-400.pdf 
City of Moncton. Design Criteria Manual for Municipal  
Services. City of Moncton Department of Engineering  
and Environmental Services. June 2013.
“4.2.1.14 Groundwater Migration: The Consultant shall 
assess the possibility of groundwater migration through 
mainline sanitary sewer, and service lateral trenches  
resulting from the use of pervious bedding material.  
Corrective measures, including provision of impermeable 
collars or plugs, to reduce the potential for basement  
flooding resulting from groundwater migration should  
be employed.”
https://www.moncton.ca/Assets/Government+English/De-
partment+English/Engineering+and+Environmental+Ser-
vices/Engineering+Design+Criteria+Manual.pdf 
DR5. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), 
fuel and electrical systems should be well-elevated from 
the basement floor or located above grade.
City of Chilliwack. Floodplain Regulation Bylaw 2004,  
No. 3080. March 2007.
 “Furnaces, hot water heaters and electrical panels shall be 
located above Flood Construction Level (FCL) & any electric 
circuits extending below FCL shall be equipped with ground 
fault circuit breakers”
http://www.chilliwack.ca/main/attachments/Files/363/
BL%203080%20Floodplain%20Regulation%20Bylaw%20
%28Consolidated%29.pdf
Town of Halifax. Zoning Regulation, As Amended.  
March 2012.
“All development [in Special Flood Hazard Area] shall be: 
Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing 
and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities 
that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water 
from entering or accumulating within the components 
during conditions of flooding; and 
Required to locate any fuel storage tanks (as needed to 
serve an existing building in the Special Flood Hazard Zone) 
a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation and 
be securely anchored to prevent flotation; or storage tanks 
may be placed underground, if securely anchored as certi-
fied by a qualified professional.”
https://halifaxvermont.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/
Halifax-Zoning-Bylaw-2012-03-06.pdf
Credit Valley Conservation. Technical Guidelines for  
Floodproofing. 2011.
“Electrical control panels, wiring, and outlets must  
always be above the flood and freeboard elevation.  
No electrical equipment or appliances should be below 
the flood elevation except a submersible sump pump 
with protected wiring.”
http://www.creditvalleyca.ca/wp-content/up-
loads/2011/09/007-Technician-Guidelines-for-Floodproof-
ing.pdf 
31
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
CATEGORY 2: STORM SEWER DESIGN (STO) 
The following are draft best practices and examples  
of related municipal by-laws (and, where applicable,  
examples of Provincial Guidelines, Acts and Policies).
STO1. If the home foundation drainage system  
connects to a storm sewer*:
» the water level in the storm sewer should stay at 
least 30 cm lower than the foundation drainage sys-
tem during major design event (e.g., 1-in-100- year 
flood event) AND
» a backwater valve should be installed on  
the storm sewer lateral to prevent stormwater  
from backing up into the basement if the storm 
sewer is overloaded; this backwater valve should  
be accessible for maintenance.
STO2. If the home foundation drainage system  
does not connect to the storm sewer*:
» sump pumps should be installed and equipped  
with one or more backup power systems.
*Alternatively, a separate foundation drain collector  
system should be provided, with no risk of backing up  
to basement levels during the design flood events.
City of Vancouver. BY-LAW NO. 10908, Section 1:  
Adoption of Building Code and Interpretation. July 2014.
“Where a storm sump is provided there shall be a back-
water valve within the sump attached to the outlet pipe.
A backwater valve is not required if the storm sump and 
the storm sump piping are both located above the level 
of the next upstream manhole of the public storm sewer.”
http://former.vancouver.ca/blStorage/10908.PDF
City of Winnipeg. Plumbing Installations. Planning,  
Property and Development Department. June 2016.
A homeowner guide to the City of Winnipeg plumbing 
requirements for a single-family dwelling
“All fixtures installed below street level must be  
protected by a backwater valve arranged to prevent  
sewer back-up. The backwater valve must be installed  
to protect the branch drain. A backwater valve may  
be installed on a building drain or building sewer if  
listed for that location.”
http://www.winnipeg.ca/ppd/pdf_files/Brochures/Plumb-
ing-Installations.pdf
Province of Saskatchewan. Stormwater Guidelines EPB 
322. Water Security Agency. January 2014.
“Development standards may permit foundation drains  
to be connected to the storm sewer in some municipali-
ties. Instead of connecting to the storm sewer, an alterna-
tive can be made by pumping foundation drainage  
to surface ponding/infiltration trench systems.”
http://www.saskh20.ca/DWBinder/epb322.pdf
City of Regina. Bylaw No. 2003-7. The Uniform Building 
and Accessibility Standards Act. The Cities Act. 2011
“2.17.1 Any building or structure that is constructed,  
reconstructed or relocated shall be required to meet  
the following flood proofing measures: (a) an automatic 
backwater valve or backflow preventer approved by 
the authority having jurisdiction must be installed in the  
sanitary and storm sewer lines that service the building  
or structure where the finished basement floor elevation  
is at or below the 1:500 design flood level”
http://www.regina.ca/opencms/export/sites/regina.ca/resi-
dents/bylaw/.media/pdf/building_bylaw_no_2003-7.pdf
STO3. Inlet control devices (ICDs) should be used  
to restrict the flow of stormwater from the street  
into storm sewers.
City of Saint John. Storm Drainage Design Criteria  
Manual. September 2008.
“Inlet control devices (ICDs) must be provided where 
there is risk of surcharging the minor storm drainage  
system by storm events that exceed the 1 in 5 year  
return period. Typical ICD sizing requirements for  
medium density residential development are provided  
in Table 2.7.”
http://www.saintjohn.ca/site/media/SaintJohn/Storm%20
Drainage%20Design%20Criteria%20Manual.pdf
City of Ottawa. 2016. Technical Bulletin PIEDTB-2016-0:
“Inlet controls should be designed to fully capture the 
design event on local and collector streets without any 
ponding on the surface, while minimizing surcharging 
during the 100-year event and meeting the HGL and  
water level requirements as stated in Section 5.1.4.  
of the Sewer Design Guidelines.”
Information provided by the City of Ottawa.
32
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
CATEGORY 3: SANITARY SEWER DESIGN (SAN)
The following are draft best practices and examples of  
related municipal by-laws (and, where applicable,  
examples of Provincial Guidelines, Acts and Policies).
SAN1. Basements connected to sanitary sewers 
should have a backwater valve to mitigate sewage 
backup into the basement, if the sanitary sewer is 
overloaded (e.g., during heavy rain).
British Columbia Plumbing Code 2012, includes  
Version 1.02, Revision 7. December 2014.
“2.4.6.4. Protection from Backflow 1) Except as permitted 
in Sentence (2), a backwater valve or a gate valve that 
would prevent the free circulation of air shall not  
be installed in a building drain or in a building sewer. 
Except as provided in Sentences (4), (5) and (6), where  
a building drain or a branch may be subject to backflow, 
a gate valve or a backwater valve shall be installed 
on every fixture drain connected to them when the 
fixture is located below the level of the adjoining 
street. 4) Where the fixture is a floor drain, a removable 
screw cap may be installed on the upstream side of the 
trap. 5) Where more than one fixture is located on a  
storey and all are connected to the same branch, the  
gate valve or backwater valve may be installed on the 
branch. 6) A subsoil drainage pipe that drains into a  
sanitary drainage system that is subject to surcharge  
shall be connected in such a manner that sewage  
cannot back up into the subsoil drainage pipe.”
http://www.bccodes.ca/BCPC_Update_01.16.pdf
City of Toronto. Sewer and Watermain Design Criteria 
Manual. November 2009.
“Storm backwater prevention valves or backflow preven-
tion devices are required on all foundation drain systems 
connecting to storm or combined sewer systems to  
minimize backup of stormwater, where an exemption  
has been made by the City to allow foundation drain 
connections. Backwater prevention valves will be located 
inside the building, if there is a sump pump or outside 
the building with a riser to allow ease of access and  
maintenance—if a sump pump is not part of the system.”
https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/toronto_water/ar-
ticles/files/pdf/package_sewer_and_watermain_manual.pdf 
City of Charlottetown. Water & Sewer Utility Minimum Stan-
dard of Acceptability for Water, Sewer & Sprinkler Connections. 
December 2012.
“All sewer services shall be installed with a 100 mm  
(minimum) clean out immediately inside the foundation 
wall and a 100 mm back water valve installed on the 
upstream side of the clean out as indicated on the Typical 
Service Installation. The clean out and backwater valve 
are to be accessible for maintenance by the homeowner 
and exposed for inspection.”
http://www.city.charlottetown.pe.ca/pdfs/ServiceStandard.pdf
City of Regina. Bylaw No. 2003-7, Including Amend-
ments to December 19, 2011. The Uniform Building  
And Accessibility Standards Act and The Cities Act. 2003.
“Any building or structure that is constructed, reconstruct-
ed or relocated shall be required to meet the following 
flood proofing measures: (a) an automatic backwater 
valve or backflow preventer approved by the authority 
having jurisdiction must be installed in the sanitary and 
storm sewer lines that service the building or structure 
where the finished basement floor elevation is at or be-
low the 1:500 design flood level;”
http://www.regina.ca/opencms/export/sites/regina.ca/
residents/bylaw/.media/pdf/building_bylaw_no_2003-7.pdf
SAN2. Downspout, foundation drain and sump  
pump discharge should not be directed to the  
sanitary sewers.
Government of Alberta. Standards and Guidelines for 
Municipal Waterworks, Wastewater and Storm Drainage 
Systems; Part 5 Stormwater Management Guidelines. 
March 2013.
“Roof leaders shall not be connected to storm sewers in 
residential areas, but shall discharge to grassed or pervi-
ous areas.”
http://aep.alberta.ca/water/programs-and-services/
drinking-water/legislation/documents/Part5-Stormwater-
ManagementGuidelines-2013.pdf 
City of Winnipeg. Lot Grading By-law No.4569/87. 1998.
“All building roof downspouts shall be located such that 
effective positive drainage away from the building is 
achieved. All downspouts shall discharge through a suit-
able elbow onto a splash pad as detailed in Schedule “C” 
or by an equivalent method approved by the designated 
City Administrator. Building roof downspouts shall not be 
located nor directed so as to cause storm water  
to drain directly onto adjacent property.”
http://clkapps.winnipeg.ca/DMIS/Documents/DocExt/
BL/1998/1998.7294.pdf
33
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
City of Winnipeg. Sump Pits & Pumps: The Winnipeg 
Building By-law No. 4555/87, Subsurface Drainage,  
Section 23. September 1990.
“Where in the opinion of the Commissioner of Works  
and Operations, the landscaped area around the  
building is adequate to dispose of subsurface drainage 
without causing a nuisance to adjoining properties,  
the discharge from the sump pump shall be directed  
to the outside of the building and discharged on to a 
splash pad as specified in the City of Winnipeg Lot  
Grading By-law No.4569/87.”
http://www.winnipeg.ca/ppd/pdf_files/sumppump.pdf
City of Saint John. Storm Drainage Design Criteria 
Manual. September 2008.
 “For residential developments, roof drains shall  
not be connected to storm drains, but shall discharge 
onto splash pads at the ground surface a minimum  
of 600 mm from the foundation wall in a manner that  
will carry water away from the foundation wall.”
http://www.saintjohn.ca/site/media/SaintJohn/Storm%20
Drainage%20Design%20Criteria%20Manual.pdf 
Halifax Water. Design and Construction Specifications 
for Water, Wastewater & Stormwater Systems. Halifax 
Regional Water Commission June 2017.
“Roof drains are not permitted to be connected to 
stormwater system mains and shall be managed onsite. 
Appropriate lot grading measures shall be provided  
as per Halifax Regional Municipality requirements.”
https://www.halifax.ca/sites/default/files/documents/
home-property/water/2017%20Design%20Specification.pdf 
City of Toronto. Sewer and Watermain Design Criteria 
Manual. 2009.
“Roof drains will be discharged to the ground surface 
onto splash pads with flows directed away from the 
building onto grass filter strips, where possible and 
towards the road. Any above ground discharge will be 
contained on the property in a manner that is not likely 
to cause damage to any adjoining property or create  
a hazardous condition on any stairway, walkway, street 
or boulevard.”
“The connection of foundation drains to the sanitary sew-
er system is not permitted for new developments.”
https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/toronto_water/arti-
cles/files/pdf/package_sewer_and_watermain_manual.pdf
City of Charlottetown. Lot Grading Guidelines.  
January 2007.
“Downspouts must have an elbow and splash pad.  
A downspout elbow should be directed away from the 
foundation walls towards a drainage easement or to 
 a public right-of-way. Downspout extensions or splash 
pads must not project past the property line and must 
maintain a minimum distance of 15 cm from an adjacent 
private property and 30 cm from an adjacent  
City property.” 
 “A sump pump discharges groundwater from weeping 
tile to the ground surface or directly to a storm sewer 
system. If a sump pump discharges to the ground sur-
face, then it is important to provide a splash pad or  
a flexible hose at the discharge point. This minimizes  
soil erosion at the foundation wall and the re-circulation 
of the groundwater back to the weeping tile.”
http://www.city.charlottetown.pe.ca/pdfs/Lot_Grad-
ing_Guidelines.pdf
Town of Beaumont. General Design Standards.  
September 2011.
“A sump pump discharge collection service shall be 
provided to each newly developed single family lot and 
to each multi-family unit. The system is dedicated to col-
lection of weeping tile system discharges. There shall be 
no roof leaders, garage drain, sanitary line or any other 
plumbing systems connected to the sump pump/weep-
ing tile system. The collection system shall discharge 
to the minor storm sewer system by connection of the 
service lateral to the fronting collection main.”
http://www.beaumont.ab.ca/DocumentCenter/View/47
SAN3. Design of sanitary sewers should have a factor 
for “normal” infiltration of rainwater during typical 
rain events and a higher “Safety Factor” for infiltra-
tion and inflow during extreme rain events.
Government of Alberta. Standards and Guidelines for 
Municipal Waterworks, Wastewater and Storm Drainage 
Systems; Part 5 Stormwater Management Guidelines. 
2013.
“In computing the total peak flow rates for design of 
sanitary sewers, the designer should include allowances 
as specified below to account for flow from extraneous 
sources.
1. General Inflow / Infiltration Allowance
A general allowance of 0.28 L/s/ha should be applied, 
irrespective of land use classification, to account for 
wet-weather inflow to manholes not located in street 
sags and for infiltration flow into pipes and manholes.”
http://aep.alberta.ca/water/programs-and-services/
drinking-water/legislation/documents/Part4-Wastewater-
SystemsGuidelines-2013.pdf
34
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
City of Toronto. Sewer and Watermain Design Criteria 
Manual. 2009.
“In computing the total peak flow rates for the design  
of new sanitary sewers, an allowance of 0.26 litre/second/
gross hectare will be applied, irrespective of land use 
classification to account for ground water infiltration and 
wet weather inflow into the pipes and maintenance holes. 
Assume no roof drains or foundation drains are connect-
ed directly or indirectly to the sanitary sewer.”
“The flow data and any applicable parameters must be 
provided to the City prior to being used in any computa-
tion. Wet weather flow monitoring will take place during 
the late spring, summer and early fall in order to collect 
data during severe summer storm events. “
https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/toronto_water/
articles/files/pdf/package_sewer_and_watermain_manu-
al.pdf
Environment Canada. Atlantic Canada Wastewater 
Guidelines Manual for Collection, Treatment,  
and Disposal. 2006.
“Prior to the preparation of a pre-design report on an 
existing sewerage system, a comprehensive infiltration/
inflow investigation should be conducted. This will give 
the designers a better indication of extraneous flow 
contributions, as well as aid in design solutions, (i.e. the 
potential for reducing flows at an existing plant). “ 
“When designing sanitary sewer systems, allowances must 
be made for the leakage of groundwater into the sewers 
and building sewer connections (infiltration) and for other 
extraneous water entering the sewers from such sources 
as leakage through manhole covers, foundation drains, 
roof down spouts, etc.”
https://novascotia.ca/nse/water/docs/AtlCanStdGuideS-
ewage.pdf
Government of Saskatchewan. Guidelines for Sewage 
Works Design. Saskatchewan Ministry of Environment. 
January 2008.
 “Sanitary sewers should be designed on a peak design 
flow basis using values established from an Infiltration / 
Inflow study, if practical. In cases where such data are not 
available, peak design flow may be determined using 
a peaking factor (ratio of extreme flow to daily average 
flow) derived from a generally accepted and reliable 
formula.” 
http://www.saskh2o.ca/DWBinder/EPB203Guideli-
nesSewageWorksDesign.pdf
CATEGORY 4: STREET DESIGN (SD)
The following are draft best practices and examples  
of related municipal by-laws (and, where applicable, ex-
amples of Provincial Guidelines, Acts and Policies).
SD1. Roads and public spaces should be designed  
to convey excess runoff so that it does not flow 
through homeowner property.
City of Maple Ridge. Design Criteria Manual.  
October 2015.
“Major flow routing is generally accommodated along 
roadways, swales and watercourses. These designated 
flow paths shall be protected by restrictive covenants 
or right-of-ways and clearly identified in the stormwater 
management plan.”
https://www.mapleridge.ca/DocumentCenter/View/6033
City of Winnipeg. Residential Lot Grading, Lot Drainage. 
February 2014.
“A swale easement is an agreement that is registered 
against a property. This agreement reserves a portion 
of land for land drainage purposes so that neighboring 
properties may properly drain their storm water runoff. 
Swales must be unobstructed and free draining.”
http://www.winnipeg.ca/waterandwaste/drainageFlood-
ing/lotgrading/lotDrainage.stm
Halifax Water. Design and Construction Specifications for 
Water, Wastewater & Stormwater Systems. Halifax Re-
gional Water Commission 2016. “Where this stormwater 
forms part of the major overland flow path, the develop-
er shall secure easements to ensure the continued use of 
the drainage course except where the drainage course 
is a designated watercourse as per NSE regulations. In 
the case of a watercourse, the developer shall obtain all 
necessary permits prior to construction of the stormwater 
system.”
https://www.halifax.ca/sites/default/files/documents/
home-property/water/2016%20Design%20and%20Con-
struction%20Specifications.pdf
35
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
City of Pickering. Stormwater Management Design 
Guidelines. 
“Major system flow paths shall be in public ownership.”
https://www.pickering.ca/en/city-hall/resources/
DC-StormwaterManagementGuidelines.pdf
City of Ottawa. Technical Bulletin PIEDTB-2016-0. 2016.
“In order to prevent water from accumulating at or near 
the buildings and thus prevent damage to structures, an 
overflow must be provided from all sags or depressions 
which must ensure that the water level must not touch 
any part of the building envelope and must remain below 
the lowest building opening during the stress test event 
(100-year + 20%). Furthermore, there must be at least 15 
cm of vertical clearance between the spill elevation on 
the street and the ground elevation at the nearest build-
ing envelope that is in the proximity of the flow route or 
ponding area.”
Information provided by the City of Ottawa.
SD2. Road design and lot grading should be such 
that the water on the road remains at least 30 cm 
below the lowest building openings (e.g., basement 
windows) during design flood conditions.
Town of Beaumont. General Design Standards.  
September 2011.
“Lot grading and general grading shall provide protection 
of property for a 1-in-100-year return frequency  
design storm. Designs shall provide that maximum  
flooding or ponding shall be 600 mm below the lowest 
anticipated ground elevation at buildings. Overflow 
routes and provisions shall be designed such that the 
maximum depth of ponding is not more than 300 mm.”
http://www.beaumont.ab.ca/DocumentCenter/View/47
City of Maple Ridge. Design Criteria Manual.  
October 2015.
“The freeboard between the Minimum Building  
Elevations (the elevation of 0.1 m above the lowest  
floor slab in a building or the underside of the floor  
joists where the lowest floor is constructed over a  
crawlspace) and the 1:100-year hydraulic grade line  
may be reduced to 0.2m.”
https://www.mapleridge.ca/DocumentCenter/View/6033
City of Kamloops. Design Criteria Manual, Schedule “B” 
of Subdivision and Development Control By-law No. 
4-33. Development and Engineering Services Depart-
ment. 2012.
“Roadway and other surface features along the major flow 
path shall provide a minimum of 300 mm freeboard to 
the finished ground elevation of buildings on adjacent 
properties.”
“Protection of habitable floor space from flooding is to be 
provided up to the 200-year flood level (inclusive of 0.6 
m freeboard) for areas in the flood plains of the Thomp-
son River systems. As identified on City Flood Mappings, 
all other areas will be protected from the 100-year flood 
level (plus 0.6 m freeboard).
http://www.kamloops.ca/development/pdfs/12-Design-
CriteriaManual.pdf 
City of Pickering. Stormwater Management 
Design Guidelines.
“Major systems shall be sized to capture and convey 
the Regulatory Storm to a safe outlet without flooding 
adjacent properties and should provide a minimum of 
300 mm of freeboard from the maximum water surface 
elevation of the major system flow path to the minimum 
opening of structures. Hydraulic Grade Line in the storm 
sewer for the 100 year storm is a minimum of 300 mm 
below the basement footing elevation.”
https://www.pickering.ca/en/city-hall/resources/
DC-StormwaterManagementGuidelines.pdf
City of Ottawa. Technical Bulletin PIEDTB-2016-0. 2016.
“The water level in the major system must not touch any 
part of the building envelope, and must remain below 
the lowest building opening that is in the proximity of 
the flow route or ponding area, during the stress test 
event (100-year plus 20%). This test must be applied to 
all areas of the major system, including rear yards. There 
must be at least 15 cm of vertical clearance between the 
spill elevation on the street and the ground elevation at 
the building envelope that is in the proximity of the flow 
route or ponding area.”
Information provided by the City of Ottawa.
36
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
SD3. Roads should be designed so that the maximum 
depth of water during the extreme design condition 
does not exceed 30 cm at the curb.
City of Mississauga. Development Requirements  
Manual. 2009.
“Overland Flow Route:
- Maximum ponding depth is 0.35 m
- Where overland flow is directed between two dwellings, 
the depth and width of the swale must be such that the 
100-year flow does not come in contact with the dwelling. 
Basement windows will not be permitted on the side of 
the dwelling abutting the overland flow route swale.”
http://www.mississauga.ca/file/COM/Section2Re-
vised2010.pdf 
City of Waterloo. Development Engineering Manual. 
2013.
“Surface ponding shall be minimal and a maximum pond-
ing depth of 0.3 m is permitted for the 100 year storm 
event in parking areas and 0.8 m in grassed areas. No 
ponding of water is permitted within 0.3 m of an opening 
to a building.”
“The 100 year storm is used to represent an extreme 
event for which maximum surface ponding depths (0.3 m) 
and major system flow capacity should be designed. The 
SWM design may allow overland flow from the extreme 
event after a reasonable and safe amount of ponding to 
the municipal right of way.”
http://www.waterloo.ca/en/contentresources/resources/
business/DEM_2013_Chapter7.pdf
City of Pickering. Stormwater Management Guidelines.
“The maximum ponding depth shall be 300 mm and grad-
ing shall be between 0.5% and 5%.”
https://www.pickering.ca/en/city-hall/resources/
DC-StormwaterManagementGuidelines.pdf
Town of Beaumont. General Design Standards. Septem-
ber 2011. “Depths of flows and ponding in roadways and 
public utility lots shall be a maximum of 350 mm. Water 
depths at the crown in arterial roadways shall not exceed 
150 mm.”
http://www.beaumont.ab.ca/DocumentCenter/View/47 
SD4. Driveways should be built to slope away from 
homes or garages (i.e., reverse-slope driveways 
should not be permitted).
City of Maple Ridge. Design Criteria Manual.  
October 2015.
“Driveway access grades shall be designed to permit 
the appropriate vehicular access for the zone, without 
“bottoming-out” or “hanging-up.” From edge of pave-
ment to property line, the driveway shall follow proper 
boulevard slope to drain towards the road. For the first 
10 m on private property, the maximum grade shall be 
limited to 10% if accessing a collector, or if a commercial 
or industrial zone.”
https://www.mapleridge.ca/DocumentCenter/View/6033
City of Toronto. Sewer and Watermain Design Criteria 
Manual. November 2009.
“Reverse Driveway Drainage: The City discourages the 
installation of reverse driveways. Should they be installed, 
drainage will comply with the Sewer Use Bylaw, Section 
681-11-O of the Toronto Municipal Code.”
https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/toronto_water/
articles/files/pdf/package_sewer_and_watermain_man-
ual.pdf
City of Markham. Design Criteria Section F - Lot Grading. 
2012.
“Lot Grading Minimum driveway slope = 2%; all drive-
ways must slope away from the dwelling units.”
http://www3.markham.ca/Markham/aspc/engineering/
drawings/getPDF.aspx?ATTACHMENTRSN=459908 
City of Ottawa. Technical Bulletin PIEDTB-2016-0. 2016.
The property slope from the building to the street should 
be minimum 2%. Depressed driveways are discouraged 
and are not allowed in sag locations. For other locations, 
the builder must ensure that the maximum depth of flow 
on the street during the 100-year and stress test events 
will not spill onto the depressed driveway.
Information provided by the City of Ottawa.
37
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
SD5. Sanitary sewer manholes should not be located 
in low-lying areas. If sanitary sewer manholes need to 
be located in low-lying areas, manhole covers should 
be sealed to minimize inflow of accumulated runoff 
into the sanitary sewer.
Government of Alberta. Standards and Guidelines for 
Municipal Waterworks, Wastewater and Storm Drainage 
Systems; Part 5 Stormwater Management Guidelines. 
2013.
 “Manholes in Sag Locations When sanitary sewer 
manholes are located within roadway sags or other low 
areas, and are thus subject to inundation during major 
rainfall events, the sanitary design peak flow rate should 
be increased by 0.4 L/s for each such manhole, which is 
applicable for manholes which have been waterproofed. 
For new construction, all sanitary manholes in sag loca-
tions are to be waterproofed.”
http://aep.alberta.ca/water/programs-and-services/
drinking-water/legislation/documents/Part4-Wastewater-
SystemsGuidelines-2013.pdf 
British Columbia Plumbing Code 2012, includes Version 
1.02, Revision 7. December 2014. “2.4.7.3. Manholes
1) A manhole including the cover shall be designed  
to support all loads imposed upon it.
2) A manhole shall be provided with a) a cover that  
provides an airtight seal if located within a building,  
b) a rigid ladder of a corrosion-resistant material where 
the depth exceeds 1 m, and c) a vent to the exterior  
if the manhole is located within a building.
3) A manhole shall have a minimum horizontal dimension 
of 1 m, except that the top 1.5 m may be tapered from  
1 m down to a minimum of 600 mm at the top.
4) A manhole in a sanitary drainage system shall be  
channeled to direct the flow of effluent.”
http://www.bccodes.ca/BCPC_Update_01.16.pdf
Halifax Water. Design and Construction Specifications 
for Water, Wastewater & Stormwater Systems. Halifax 
Regional Water Commission. 2016.“The wastewater sys-
tem manhole inclusive of the grade rings, shaft, precast 
sections and base shall be constructed with a Blueskin 
waterproofing membrane and gaskets. Stormwater sys-
tem manholes are not required to be constructed with a 
waterproofing membrane.”
https://www.halifax.ca/sites/default/files/documents/
home-property/water/2016%20Design%20and%20Con-
struction%20Specifications.pdf
Government of Saskatchewan. Guidelines for Sewage 
Works Design. Saskatchewan Ministry of Environment. 
January 2008.
“The manholes should be designed to be watertight,  
durable and of adequate size for ease of entry and 
maintenance. Minimum diameter should be 1050 mm  
(42 inches). Bases should be watertight and ‘flow-
through’ channels through manholes should be made 
to conform in shape and slope to that of the sewers. 
Wherever manhole tops may be flooded by street runoff 
or high water, watertight manhole covers should be used. 
Consideration may be given to providing suspended 
baskets to catch debris that may enter manholes, 
 such as gravel from unpaved streets.” 
http://www.saskh2o.ca/DWBinder/EPB203Guideli-
nesSewageWorksDesign.pdf
Government of Ontario. Design Guidelines for Sewage 
Works. 2008. “The specifications should include  
a requirement for inspection and testing for watertight-
ness or damage prior to placing into service. Air testing, 
if specified for concrete sewer manholes, should conform 
to the test procedures described in ASTM C 1244.”
https://www.ontario.ca/document/design-guide-
lines-sewage-works
Town of Beaumont. General Design Standards. Septem-
ber 2011. “Where connection is proposed to existing 
sewers at manholes, the manhole barrel and existing 
benching shall be disturbed to the minimum required 
to make the connection, restored and made water tight 
using appropriate materials and good practice. Bench-
ing shall be restored to provide a smooth ‘free flowing’ 
channel.” 
http://www.beaumont.ab.ca/DocumentCenter/View/47
38
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
CATEGORY 5: WASTEWATER PUMPING 
STATION DESIGN (WP)
The following are draft best practices and examples  
of related municipal by-laws (and, where applicable,  
examples of Provincial Guidelines, Acts and Policies).
WP1. Wastewater pumping stations should  
be located in areas where they will remain  
fully-operational and fully-accessible during  
extreme rain events.  
Environment Canada. Atlantic Canada Wastewater 
Guidelines Manual for Collection, Treatment,  
and Disposal. 2006.
 “Sewage pumping station structures and electrical and 
mechanical equipment shall be protected from physical 
damage from the one hundred (100) year flood. Sewage 
pumping stations should remain fully-operational and 
accessible during the twenty-five (25) year flood. During 
preliminary location planning, consideration should be 
given to the potential of emergency overflow provisions 
and as much as practically possible the voidance of 
health hazards, nuisances and adverse environmental 
effects.”
https://novascotia.ca/nse/water/docs/AtlCanStdGuideS-
ewage.pdf 
Government of Ontario. Design Guidelines for Sewage 
Works. 2008. “Sewage pumping station structures and 
electrical and mechanical equipment should be protect-
ed from physical damage by the 100-year design flood 
event. Sewage pumping stations should remain fully-op-
erational and accessible during the 25-year flood event. 
Regulations/requirements of municipalities, provincial 
and federal agencies regarding flood plain obstructions 
should be considered.”
https://www.ontario.ca/document/design-guide-
lines-sewage-works/plumbing-stations 
Government of Saskatchewan. Guidelines for Sewage 
Works Design. Saskatchewan Ministry of Environment. 
January 2008.
“Sewage pumping station structures and electrical/me-
chanical equipment should be protected from physical 
damage and should remain fully operational during 
floods. During preliminary location planning, consid-
eration should be given to the potential of emergency 
overflow provisions and, as much as practically possible, 
the avoidance of health hazards and adverse environ-
mental effects.”
http://www.saskh2o.ca/DWBinder/EPB203Guideli-
nesSewageWorksDesign.pdf 
WP2. Wastewater pumping stations should have 
backup power to allow for a minimum of 48 hours 
of uninterrupted service and an overflow in case of 
catastrophic failure.
Government of Alberta. Standards and Guidelines for 
Municipal Waterworks, Wastewater and Storm Drainage 
Systems. Part 4 Wastewater Systems Guidelines for De-
sign, Operating and Monitoring. March 2013.
“For use during possible periods of extensive power 
outages, mandatory power reductions, or uncontrollable 
emergency conditions, consideration should be given 
to providing a controlled, high-level wet well overflow 
to supplement alarm systems and emergency power 
generation in order to prevent backup of wastewater into 
basements, or other discharges which may cause severe 
adverse impacts on public interests, including public 
health and property damage. Where a high level over-
flow is utilized, consideration should also be given to the 
installation of storage/detention tanks, or basins, which 
should be made to drain to the station wet well.”
http://aep.alberta.ca/water/programs-and-services/
drinking-water/legislation/standards-and-guidelines.aspx 
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador. Guidelines 
for the Design, Construction and Operation of Water 
and Sewerage Systems. Department of Environment and 
Conservation. December 2005.
“Emergency Operation Pumping stations and collec-
tion systems shall be designed to prevent or minimize 
bypassing of raw sewage. For use during periods of 
extensive power outages, mandatory power reductions, 
or uncontrolled storm events, consideration should be 
given to providing a controlled, high-level wet well over-
flow to supplement alarm systems and emergency power 
generation in order to prevent backup of sewage into 
basements, or other discharges which may cause severe 
adverse impacts on public interests, including public 
health and property damage.”
http://www.mae.gov.nl.ca/waterres/waste/groundwater/
guidelines_for_design_constr_oper_wss.pdf 
39
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
CATEGORY 6: PRESERVATION OF  
NATURAL FEATURES (PNF)
The following are draft best practices and examples  
of related municipal by-laws (and, where applicable,  
examples of Provincial Guidelines, Acts and Policies).
PNF1. Development should not encroach on riparian 
buffers (land and natural vegetation adjacent to 
waterbodies) and sufficient setbacks should be 
maintained along the water bodies to reduce  
the risk of flooding due to stream movement 
and bank erosion.
District of Metchosin, British Columbia. Bylaw No. 467, 
for the Protection and Management of Rain Water. 2004.
“No person, applicant or owner shall:
•  Alter, repair, remove, fill in, reconstruct, divert, obstruct 
or impede the flow of water in, remove vegetation or 
carry out any other works or development within an 
approved drainage system, a watercourse, water body 
or Riparian-wetland Area; 
• Undertake development within a Riparian-Assessment Area; 
•  Remove or deposit any soil or material whatsoever with-
in a 200-year floodplain or within a watercourse, water 
body and/or Riparian-wetland Area;
•  Undertake any development on a lot, site, or area of 
land that will result in a loss of Proper Functioning Con-
dition of a watercourse, water body or Riparian-wet-
land Area, a loss of water quality in any water body, an 
increase in runoff rates or volumes of rain water leaving 
the lot, site, or area of land based on predevelopment 
levels.”
https://metchosin.civicweb.net/document/276
Prince Edward Island. Watercourse, Wetland and Buffer 
Zone Activity Guideline. 2012.
“In accordance with the Environmental Protection Act of 
Prince Edward Island, Watercourse and Wetland Protec-
tion Regulations, No person shall, without a license or 
a Buffer Zone Activity Permit, and other than in accor-
dance with the conditions thereof, engage in or cause or 
permit the engaging in of any of the following activities 
within 15 metres of a watercourse boundary or wetland 
boundary: construct or place, repair or replace, demol-
ish or remove, buildings or structures or obstructions of 
any kind, including, but not limited to bridges, culverts, 
breakwaters, dams, wharves, docks, slipways, decks or 
flood or erosion protection works;” 
http://www.gov.pe.ca/photos/original/elj_webpkg.pdf 
Halifax Water. Design and Construction Specifications 
for Water, Wastewater & Stormwater Systems. Halifax 
Regional Water Commission. 2016. 
“The auxiliary power supply system (loosely referred to 
here as “generator”) shall be designed with adequate 
capacity to operate the wastewater pump or pumps 
required to pump peak wastewater flows, control and 
monitoring systems, and heating and lighting systems 
within the pump house. The generator is to run auto-
matically on a power outage and to stop when the power 
returns; the stopping and starting of the generator is to be 
activated in co-ordination with an automatic power transfer 
switch.”
https://www.halifax.ca/sites/default/files/documents/
home-property/water/2016%20Design%20and%20Con-
struction%20Specifications.pdf
Government of Ontario. Design Guidelines for  
Sewage Works. 2008.
“The designer should evaluate the need for standby power 
at a sewage pumping station for each specific location 
and should confirm this assessment with the Ministry. The 
objective of emergency operation is to prevent (and in the 
case of combined sewer system to minimize) the discharge 
of raw or partially treated sewage to any waters and to 
protect public health by preventing backup of sewage and 
potential discharge to basements, streets and other public 
and private property.”
https://dr6j45jk9xcmk.cloudfront.net/documents/1122/72-
design-guidelines-for-sewage-works-en.pdf
Government of Saskatchewan. Guidelines for Sewage 
Works Design. Saskatchewan Ministry of Environment. 
January 2008.
“Emergency Operation Pumping stations (and collection 
systems) should be designed to prevent by-passing of raw 
sewage. For use during possible periods of extensive power 
outages or uncontrolled storm events, consideration should 
be given for alarm systems and emergency power generation 
in order to prevent back-up of sewage into basements, or 
other discharges which may cause severe adverse impacts on 
public interests, including public health and property dam-
age. Where a high level overflow is necessary, consideration 
should also be given to the installation of storage/detention 
tanks or basins which can drain back to the wet well following 
the emergency. Standby power should be considered for all 
pumping stations, particularly main pumping stations. Standby 
power may be provided by means of an emergency stand-
by generator powered by either a diesel engine, a gasoline 
engine, a natural or propane gas engine or by an auxiliary 
drive system powered by any of the foregoing primary power 
sources. For smaller stations, portable generators or portable 
gasoline or diesel engine driven pumps may be satisfactory. 
The method of providing standby power should be capable of 
operating enough pumps to handle peak sewage flows.”
http://www.saskh2o.ca/DWBinder/EPB203Guideli-
nesSewageWorksDesign.pdf 
40
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Province of Saskatchewan. Planning Handbook:  
“Companion Document to the Statements of Provincial 
Interest Regulations.” Ministry of Municipal Affairs.  
April 2012.
“To assist in meeting the province’s interests in biodiver-
sity and natural ecosystems, planning documents and 
decisions shall, insofar as is practical: 
1. Consider the ecological value, integrity and manage-
ment of wetlands, riparian areas, significant natural land-
scapes and regional features, and provincially designated 
lands; 
2. Minimize, mitigate or avoid development impacts 
 to safeguard the ecological integrity of wetlands, riparian 
areas, significant natural landscapes and regional features, 
and provincially designated lands;”
http://publications.gov.sk.ca/docu-
ments/313/98344-spi-planning-handbook.pdf 
PNF2. New development should aim to minimize 
runoff from impervious areas.
City of Vancouver. Best Management Practices “Site De-
sign for Stormwater Management,” May 2015.
“Maximize Permeability: Within the development enve-
lope, many opportunities are available to maximize the 
permeability of new construction. These include minimiz-
ing impervious areas, paving with permeable materials, 
clustering buildings, and reducing the land coverage of 
structures by smaller footprints. All of these strategies 
make more land available for infiltration and dispersion 
through natural vegetation.”
http://vancouver.ca/files/cov/Park-Development-Stan-
dards-BMP-Stormwater-Management-VPB.pdf
City of Pickering. Stormwater Management  
Design Guidelines.
“Porous and Pervious Pavement: The City encourages 
porous and pervious pavement installations provided  
that they are not receiving runoff from high traffic areas 
where large amounts of de-icing salts are used or from 
source areas where land uses or activities have the  
potential to generate highly contaminated runoff (e.g., 
vehicle refueling, handling areas for hazardous materials).  
The design of these systems shall be in accordance  
with the guidance in the Ministry of the Environment’s 
Stormwater Management manual and Low Impact  
Development manual.”
https://www.pickering.ca/en/city-hall/resources/
DC-StormwaterManagementGuidelines.pdf
District of Metchosin, British Columbia. Bylaw No. 467, 
for the Protection and Management of Rain Water. 2004.
 “3.5.2 Where a person is subdividing land, the area of 
the lands at post-development that may be covered 
by an Effective Impervious Area shall not exceed 10%, 
including all new roads, driveways, and potential Impervi-
ous Surface Areas for all proposed lots.”
https://metchosin.civicweb.net/document/276 
 
DUC
41
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
APPENDIX C: FURTHER LITERATURE REVIEW
CLIMATE AND OPERATIONAL UNCERTAINTY
Canada, Federal  
Floodplain Mapping  
Series
Natural Resources Canada and Public Safety Canada. Federal Floodplain  
Mapping Framework. 2017.
“Floodplain mapping that accurately delineates flood hazards serves as the precondition  
for such mitigation activities and is therefore the first step to increasing community resilience 
with regard to flooding. Establishing a national approach to floodplain mapping will facilitate  
a common national best practice and increase the sharing and use of flood hazard information, 
thereby improving the foundation from which further mitigation efforts can be initiated.”
http://ftp.maps.canada.ca/pub/nrcan_rncan/publications/ess_sst/299/299806/gip_112_e.pdf
Pending publications:
Federal Hydrologic and Hydraulic Procedures for Floodplain Delineation. Spring 2017;
Case Studies on Climate Change in Floodplain Mapping (to be developed);
Federal Geomatics Guidelines for Floodplain Mapping. Spring 2017;
Bibliography of Best Practices and References for Flood Mitigation. Spring 2017.
Australia, Handbook
Australian Institute for Disaster Resilience. AEM Handbook 7. Managing the Floodplain:  
Best Practice in Flood Risk Management in Australia. 2014.
“The goal of increased resilience to floods requires the management of the flood impacts  
to both existing developed areas of the community, and in areas that may be developed 
in the future.”
https://aidr.infoservices.com.au/collections/handbook 
Australia, Standard
ACBC. Construction of Buildings in Flood Hazard Areas. 2012.
“This Standard provides the requirements for buildings in flood hazard areas consistent with 
 the objectives of the BCA (Building Code of Australia). The objectives primarily aim to protect 
the lives of occupants of those buildings in events up to and including the defined flood event.” 
http://www.abcb.gov.au/Resources/Publications/Education-Training/Construction-of-Buildings-
in-Flood-Hazard-Areas-Standard
United Kingdom,  
Standard
British Standards Institution (BSI) Group. BS 85500:2015 Flood Resistant and Resilient  
construction: Guide to Improving the Flood Performance of Buildings. 2015.
“National flood risk management policy requires developments to be safe, to avoid increasing 
flood risk elsewhere and, where possible, to reduce flood risk overall, so it is critical that new 
buildings in these areas are designed and built appropriately to cope with floodwaters and mini-
mize the time for reoccupation after a flooding event.”
http://shop.bsigroup.com/ProductDetail/?pid=000000000030299686
United States, Standard
The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). ASCE/SEI 24-05 Flood Resistant Design  
and Construction. 2016.
“Flood Resistant Design and Construction provides minimum requirements for flood-resistant 
design and construction of structures located in flood hazard areas. Revising the earlier ASCE/
SEI 24-98, this standard applies to new structures, including subsequent work, and to substan-
tial repair or improvement of existing structures that are not historic structures. Specific topics 
include: basic requirements for flood hazard areas; high-risk flood hazard areas; coastal high-
risk hazard areas and Coastal A Zones; materials; dry and wet floodproofing; utilities; building 
access; and miscellaneous construction.” 
http://ascelibrary.org/doi/book/10.1061/9780784408186 
42
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
United States, Code
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Flood Resistant Provisions of the  
2015 International Codes. 2015.
“This document is a compilation of flood resistant provisions, prepared by FEMA, of the 2015 
International Codes (IBC, IRC, IEBC, IMC, IPC, IFGC, IFC, ISPSC, IPSDC, and ICC Performance 
Code). Also included, as a separate document, is a summary of changes from the 2012 I-Codes. 
The 2015 edition of the I-Codes contains provisions that meet or exceed the minimum flood-re-
sistant design and construction requirements of the NFIP (National Flood Insurance Program) for 
buildings and structures.”
https://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/100537
United States,  
Technical Bulletin
Federal Emergency Management Agency. Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements for 
Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas in Accordance with the National Flood Insur-
ance Program. 2008.
https://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/20130726-1502-20490-4764/fema_tb_2_rev1.pdf
MAJOR AND MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM 
Canada, Guide
The CSA Group. PLUS 4013-Technical guide: Development, interpretation and use of  
rainfall intensity-duration-frequency (IDF) information, Guideline for Canadian water  
resources practitioners. 2012. 
“Canada has significant investments in stormwater, drainage, wastewater, and flood manage-
ment systems. Every day, Canadians rely on this infrastructure to protect lives, property, and 
natural systems such as creeks, rivers, and lakes. In designing and managing these works, prac-
ticing professionals need to be concerned with the probability of occurrence of extreme values 
of rainfall amounts, often for specific storm durations. Rainfall IDF Intensity-Duration-Frequency) 
information commonly forms a critical input when applying the analytical techniques routinely 
used by practitioners.”
http://shop.csa.ca/en/canada/infrastructure-and-public-works/plus-4013-2nd-ed-pub-2012/
invt/27030802012 
Canada, Guide
Federation of Canadian Municipalities and National Research Council. National Guide to  
Sustainable Municipal Infrastructure, Stormwater Management Planning. 2004.
“The document outlines some guiding principles that should be used in implementing 
stormwater management planning.”
http://www.fcm.ca/Documents/reports/Infraguide/Stormwater_Management_Planning_EN.pdf
Australia, Standard
Australian Capital Territory (ACT). Municipal Infrastructure Standard, Part 8: Stormwater. 2015.
“This present document is part of the ACT Municipal Infrastructure Standard (MIS) series span-
ning the broad scope of municipal infrastructure development and management in the ACT. 
Whilst based on the earlier Urban Services Design Standards for Urban Infrastructure Works, this 
document has been significantly expanded to incorporate new technologies and to bring it into 
line with Australian best practice.”
http://www.tccs.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/808850/MIS08-Stormwater-Ed0-Rev0.pdf 
Hong Kong, Manual
Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. Stormwater Drainage Manual 
Planning, Design and Management. Drainage Services Department. 2013.
“This Manual offers guidance on the planning, design, operation and maintenance of stormwa-
ter drainage works which are commonly constructed in Hong Kong. Such works include storm-
water pipelines, box culverts, nullahs, river training works, polders and floodwater pumping 
facilities.”
http://www.dsd.gov.hk/EN/Files/Technical_Manual/technical_manuals/Stormwater_Drainage_
Manual_Eurocodes.pdf 
United Kingdom, Guide
National Building Specification. REP R 139 Water-Resisting Basement Construction. 1995.
“Gives guidance on water and vapour protection of new and existing basements; distinguishes 
between guidance appropriate to deep and shallow basements; includes references to forms of 
deep basement construction such as diaphragm and secant walls, contiguous bored piles and shal-
low basements of concrete, masonry or steel sheet piling; provides illustrated examples of construc-
tion types; and takes account of the control of dampness by appropriate ventilation and heating.”
https://www.thenbs.com/PublicationIndex/documents/details?Pub=CIRIA&DocID=282840
43
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
United Kingdom, Guide
Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA). Designing for  
Exceedance in Urban Drainage-Good Practice. 2006.
“This guideline includes information on the effective design of both underground systems and 
overland flood conveyance. It also provides advice on risk assessment procedures and planning 
to reduce the impacts that extreme events may have on people and property within the sur-
rounding area.”
http://www.ciria.org/Resources/Free_publications/Designing_exceedance_drainage.aspx 
United Kingdom,  
Standard
British Standards Institution (BSI) Group. BS EN 752-1 Drain and Sewer Systems  
Outside Buildings. 2008.
http://shop.bsigroup.com/ProductDetail/?pid=000000000030292823
United Kingdom, 
 Standard
British Standards Institution (BSI) Group. 2011. BS 8102:2009 NHBC Standard Basements  
and Waterproofing:
“BS 8102 gives recommendations and provides guidance on methods of dealing with and  
preventing the entry of water from surrounding ground into a structure below ground level.  
It covers the use of:
a) Waterproofing barrier materials applied to the structure
b) Structurally integral watertight construction
c) Drained cavity construction.
It also covers the evaluation of groundwater conditions, risk assessment and options for drain-
age outside the structure. It applies to structures which extend below ground level and those  
on sloping sites.”
http://www.nhbc.co.uk/NHBCPublications/LiteratureLibrary/Technical/TechnicalExtra/filedown-
load,43882,en.pdf
United States, Guide
US Environmental Protection Agency. EPA 402-F-13053 Moisture Control Guidance  
for Building Design, Construction and Maintenance. 2013.
“This guidance includes information on the effective design of site drainage, foundation, 
external gutter and downspout and internal roof drainage systems.”
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-08/documents/moisture-control.pdf 
Canada, Code
National Research Council Canada. National Building Code of Canada 2015. 2015.
Canada, Standard
Standards Council of Canada. CAN/CSA-B64.10 Selection and Installation of Backflow  
Prevention Devices 2007.
“This Standard provides requirements for the selection and installation of backflow 
 prevention devices.”
https://www.scc.ca/en/standardsdb/standards/7542
Canada-United States, 
Standard
Standard for Safety: ANSI/CAN/UL/ULC 1201: Sensor Operated Blackwater  
Prevention System. 2016.
http://canada.ul.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/11/2016/12/ANSI-CAN-UL-ULC-1201-2016-EN.pdf 
Canada, Guide
Federation of Canadian Municipalities and National Research Council. National Guide to Sus-
tainable Municipal Infrastructure: Infiltration/Inflow Control/Reduction for Wastewater Collec-
tion Systems. 2003.
“This best practice describes the implementation of an infiltration/inflow (I/I) control/reduction 
program with the focus on sanitary sewers.”
https://www.grandriver.ca/en/our-watershed/resources/Documents/Water_Wastewater_Optimiza-
tion_InfraguideInflow.pdf 
44
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Canada, Guide
Federation of Canadian Municipalities and National Research Council. National Guide to Sustainable 
Municipal Infrastructure, Selection of Technologies for Sewer Rehabilitation and Replacement. 2003.
“Municipalities are provided with a method of selecting the appropriate sewer rehabilitation or 
replacement technology based on their social, economic, and environmental factors, and on current 
best practices in the industry.” 
https://fcm.ca/Documents/reports/Infraguide/Selection_of_Technologies_for_Sewer_Rehabili-
tation_and_Replacement_EN.pdf
United States, Guide
US Environmental Protection Agency. Guide for Estimating Infiltration and Inflow. 2014.
“This Guide is intended to provide background and information for managers of wastewater  
collection systems on estimating the amount of infiltration and inflow (I&I) entering their collection 
system and for responding to National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) I&I permit 
reporting requirements.”
https://www3.epa.gov/region1/sso/pdfs/Guide4EstimatingInfiltrationInflow.pdf
APPENDIX D: ORGANIZATIONS INCLUDED IN THE FLOOD-RESILIENT COMMUNITY  
DESIGN CONSULTATION PROCESS
•	
AECOM
•	
Amec Foster Wheeler
•	
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation
•	
Canadian Home Builders’ Association
•	
Canadian Water and Wastewater Association
•	
Canadian Water Resources Association
•	
City of Calgary
•	
City of Charlottetown
•	
City of Edmonton
•	
City of Fredericton
•	
City of Halifax
•	
City of Iqaluit
•	
City of Kelowna
•	
City of Markham
•	
City of Mississauga
•	
City of Ottawa
•	
City of Regina
•	
City of Saskatoon
•	
City of St. John’s
•	
City of Toronto
•	
City of Winnipeg
•	
Conservation Halton
•	
Cortel Group
•	
Counterpoint Engineering Inc.
•	
Credit Valley Conservation
•	
CSA Group
•	
Emergency Management BC
•	
Engineers Canada
•	
Federation of Canadian Municipalities
•	
Fieldgate Development
•	
Greenland Consulting Engineers
•	
Gray Taylor Law
•	
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador
•	
Halifax Water
•	
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
•	
Insurance Bureau of Canada
•	
Intact Financial Corporation
•	
International Institute for Sustainable Development
•	
J.F. Sabourin and Associates Inc.
•	
Lasalle | NHC
•	
Laval
•	
Mattamy Homes
•	
Montréal
•	
National Research Council of Canada
•	
Pollution Probe
•	
Pristine Homes
•	
Standards Council of Canada
•	
Stantec
•	
Toronto Region Conservation Authority
•	
Zizzo Strategy
shutterstock_74843272
45
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
APPENDIX E: PARTICIPANT PROFILES FOR MARCH 24, 2017 WORKING SESSION 
“FLOOD-RESILIENT COMMUNITY DESIGN: DEVELOPING A NATIONAL STANDARD  
FOR NEW RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS IN CANADA”
Anneke Olvera, Manager, Strategy and Stakeholder Engagement Branch, Standards Council of Canada 
As a Manager at the Standards Council of Canada (SCC) responsible for Strategic Policy and Sector Engagement focusing on 
Environment and Climate Change, Indigenous and Northern Affairs, Infrastructure, Transport, Energy and Natural Resources, 
Ms. Olvera specializes in collaborative working relationships with representatives from governments, industry and other exter-
nal organisations that are the primary contributors, users, and beneficiaries of Canada’s standardization system. Ms. Olvera has 
20 years of experience working with practitioners and policy makers nationally and internationally in the field of standardiza-
tion policy, and engaging with stakeholders to understand their priorities to initiate the development of potential strategies, 
programs or services that will address their objectives and needs. Ms. Olvera has worked closely with international standards 
and accreditation bodies, federal and provincial/territorial government, NGOs, and industry in support of setting appropriate 
standardization priorities as a means to enhance Canada’s competitiveness and social well-being. Ms. Olvera holds an MA in 
English Literature from Carleton University.
Chris Rol, Senior Policy Advisor, Insurance Bureau of Canada
Chris Rol has over 20 years of experience in the public and private sectors. She has served as a political assistant for the Pre-
mier of Ontario in addition to various roles for both MPPs and the Progressive Conservative caucus. Following her time in the 
public sector, she held a management position with a property and casualty insurance brokerage as well as a government rela-
tions role with Co-operators Insurance. Having joined Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) policy department in 2011 Chris works 
as part of the Catastrophe Risk and Economic Analysis team. Chris holds a bachelor’s degree in political science from Wilfrid 
Laurier University.
Christie Moore, Sector Specialist, Strategy and Stakeholder Engagement Branch, Standards Council of Canada 
As a Sector Specialist at the Standards Council of Canada (SCC), Christie brings advanced knowledge of Canadian and inter-
national standardization networks to support federal and provincial/territorial governments, NGOs, and industry in address-
ing their objectives and needs through effective standardization. Specializing in strategic partnerships management, Christie 
leads the Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative (NISI), a program that addresses the unique circumstances found in 
northern Canada through the effective use of standards, addressing issues such as permafrost degradation, coastal erosion, 
rising temperatures and changing precipitation patterns. Christie also supports the strategic directives of the Infrastructure 
Program at SCC, helping subject matter experts navigate the standards development process and supporting work to develop 
and adapt standards to ensure infrastructure is climate resilient. Christie’s previous experience includes disaster management 
strategy and operational response, federal intelligence oversight and private sector partnership management. Christie has an 
MA in International Affairs and recently completed her MBA.
David Crenna, Director, Urban Issues, Canadian Home Builders’ Association 
David Crenna has been Director, Urban Issues at the Canadian Home Builders’ Association (CHBA) since October of 2003. 
He organizes the work of the CHBA Urban Council in conjunction with a volunteer Chair. This Council is Canada’s only nation-
al forum for the residential development industry. He also coordinates CHBA policy and government relations research and 
supports his colleagues in finding and using evidence and data on key housing and urban issues. Prior to joining CHBA, Mr. 
Crenna worked as a consultant for over 19 years, undertaking projects for a range of government departments and agencies, 
international organizations, NGOs, and some private sector companies. He has addressed environmental, housing, science 
policy, innovation, and urban issues in his practice. Prior to that, he had a 13 year career as a policy advisor and executive in the 
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation and in the Prime Minister’s Office. David has Master’s degrees in political science 
and political sociology from the University of Toronto and the London School of Economics and Political Science respectively 
and is currently working toward a doctorate in urban geography at Western University.
shutterstock_170154509
46
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
David Lapp, Practice Lead, Engineering and Public Policy, Engineers Canada
David graduated with a bachelor’s degree in geological engineering from the University of Toronto in 1978. After nearly 20 
years as an engineering consultant, he joined Engineers Canada in July 1997 and served initially as a Director and now Man-
ager, Professional Practice serving the Canadian Engineering Qualifications Board. In recent years his work has focused on 
environment, sustainability and climate change issues and their relationship to the practice of engineering. From 2005 to the 
present, he has served as project manager for a long-term national project to assess the engineering vulnerability of Canadian 
public infrastructure to the impacts of climate change. This project has developed an infrastructure climate risk assessment tool 
known as the PIEVC Engineering Protocol. David provides advice and ongoing technical and administrative support for appli-
cations of the Protocol. Since November 2007, David has managed the Secretariat for the World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations Committee on Engineering and the Environment, hosted and chaired by Engineers Canada.
Deighen Blakely, Team Lead River Engineering, Watershed Planning, City of Calgary
Deighen is a Civil Engineer with a Master’s Degree in Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulics. Deighen over 15 years of experience 
working both as a consultant and for municipal, provincial and state government in a range of areas including hydrologic 
analysis, hydrotechnical design, erosion and sediment control planning, drainage design, tender package preparation, on-
site construction inspection and emergency response planning. Deighen currently leads the City of Calgary Water Resources 
River Engineering team. The River Engineering team works in three primary areas: Operations, Capital Projects and Policy. The 
operations component entails flood response planning, operational monitoring and hydrological modelling. The capital project 
aspect deals with all river-related construction projects including riverbank erosion protection, bridge construction, outfall repair 
work and local flood mitigation projects. The policy side covers regulatory review of development applications proximal to Cal-
gary’s rivers or creeks, development of bylaws and policies related to near river development and working with provincial and 
federal agencies in setting development guidelines and policies.
Eric Tousignant, Senior Water Resources Engineer, City of Ottawa
Eric is a Senior Water Resources Engineer with the City of Ottawa. He has 30 year of experience in stormwater management 
and municipal engineering, fifteen of them in the private sector. For the past 10 years, Eric has been heavily involved in flood 
remediation projects ranging from basement flooding in combined, separated and partially separated areas, overland drainage 
issues in urban subdivisions and sanitary sewer flood remediation projects. Eric is also the author of the City’s “Sewer Design 
guidelines” including the Stormwater Management Section. Lately, he has been re-writing these guidelines to address issues 
such as climate change, intensification and flat topography.
Gilles Rivard, Vice-President, Urban Hydrology, Lasalle NHC
Gilles has 33 years of experience in civil engineering, in the fields of hydrological studies, urban networks, water resources and 
glaciological studies. He has developed a broad expertise in municipal networks studies and in water resources management 
while managing numerous projects involving development of master plans for sewer and waterworks systems, hydrology/hydraulics 
analyses for bridges, river trainings and dams. As an experienced engineer, he has also been called upon as an expert witness for 
important cases related to urban networks analysis. In the last 20 years, he has specialized in storm water management and has pub-
lished an impressive number of scientific articles on the subject. As a researcher and innovator, Mr. Rivard is the author of a book per-
taining to the application of storm water management concepts in an urban environment (1998, with a second edition in 2005) and is 
the writer of the Quebec provincial guide on storm water management. His professional journey has led him to fill several manage-
ment positions, specifically with Dessau (now Stantec) where he was acting as Director – Urban Networks and Water Resources, from 
1993 to 2000. From 2000 to 2010, Mr. Gilles Rivard was president of the firm Aquapraxis which specialized in software development, 
technical training as well as state-of-the-art consultation for urban networks analyses and water resources management. Gilles has 
also worked at the international level, in Algeria, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Jamaica, Grenada, Trinidad and Tobago, Morocco, Mexi-
co, Senegal and Russia. After a period with Genivar (now WSP) and Dessau (now Stantec) from 2010 to 2014, he joined NHC in 
2015 as Vice President, Urban Hydrology.
Dr. Henry David (Hank) Venema, Planning Director at the Prairie Climate Centre, International Institute for Sustainable Development
Hank is a professional engineer with a diverse natural resource background spanning water resources, agriculture, energy, cli-
mate change mitigation and adaptation, rural development, ecosystem management, environmental economics and environmental 
finance. He holds a PhD in Systems Design Engineering from the University of Waterloo, an MASc in Water Resources Engineering 
from the University of Ottawa, and a BASc in Civil Engineering (Gold Medal) from the University of Manitoba.
shutterstock_618261680
47
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Husam Mansour, Chief Operating Officer, Pollution Probe
As Chief Operating Officer at Pollution Probe, Husam Mansour is responsible for leading the development and implementation 
of programs including energy, human health and transportation. His mandate includes developing and expanding new markets 
and new lines of business. Examples of his work include the development and implementation of business cases to establish 
Energy Exchange; a new division dedicated to energy literacy at Pollution Probe and Climate Change Division at Canadian 
Standards Association. In his current role, Husam was instrumental in completing the transformation of the organization, oper-
ationally and at the governance level, to enable a more sustainable pursuit of its public interest mission. Prior to joining Pollution 
Probe, Husam completed a two year assignment as Project Director responsible for overseeing the development and execution of a 
$105M project at Masdar Institute of Science and Technology (MIST). MIST is the first project to be completed in Masdar City, UAE 
which is the first city in the world to be designed as carbon-neutral and zero-waste. Previous to that, Husam had a rewarding career 
at Canadian Standards Association (CSA) where he held successively progressive positions including Director, Built Environment and 
Director, Business Management and Life Science. Husam graduated as a mechanical engineer from the University of London, UK, and 
holds P.Eng and Project Management Professional (PMP) designations.
Jeff Walker, Program Manager, Natural Resources, CSA Group
Jeff is responsible for Canadian, American, and International standards in the water resources, mining, forestry, and oil and 
gas sectors. In the water sector, Jeff oversees standards in stormwater management, protection of surface and groundwa-
ter, erosion and settlement control, service and performance for water utilities, and climate change adaptation related to 
flooding and drought. Previously, Jeff was the International Secretary for the ISO Carbon Capture and Storage Technical 
Committee. Jeff also was active in developing training modules with subject matter experts for sustainable stormwater 
management. Jeff worked on consensus standards in sustainable stormwater management, erosion and settlement con-
trol, wetlands, water quality monitoring and watershed health; as well as assessed the readiness of infrastructure professionals 
to address the impacts of climate change on infrastructure.
Kevin Gray, Manager of Engineering Approvals at Halifax Water
Kevin is the Manager of Engineering Approvals at Halifax Water. Halifax Water is Canada’s first water, wastewater and stormwa-
ter utility. The Engineering Approvals section performs reviews of all expansions and connections to the Halifax Water systems. 
Kevin is responsible for creating and maintaining several development charges, which facilitate growth at the local and regional 
level. Kevin is a geomatics engineer with a graduate degree in urban planning and is a member of various water, wastewater 
and stormwater specification committees.    
Laura Zizzo, Founder and CEO, Zizzo Strategy Inc.
Laura Zizzo is a lawyer and strategic advisor with over a decade of experience leading organizations towards a low-carbon and 
climate-adapted future through the application of law and policy. Laura started her legal career with a prominent Bay Street law 
firm before founding the first law firm in Canada focused on climate change in 2009. In 2015, she founded a strategic consul-
tancy focused on advising public and private sector clients on climate risks. Laura is a frequent writer and speaker on the move 
to the low-carbon economy and has become a leading voice on the legal imperative to adapt to climate change. She has con-
tributed to numerous research and policy papers on legal liability related to climate change adaptation, the use of existing le-
gal mechanisms to address climate change, and the role of markets and flexibility mechanisms in driving emissions reductions. 
Laura has a degree in Environmental Studies from the University of Waterloo and a law degree from the University of Toronto. 
She is called to the Bar of Ontario.
Mark Palmer, Executive Director, Greenland Group of Companies
Since 1986, Mark has practiced in the consulting engineering industry. He has been responsible for many watershed protection, 
municipal infrastructure and new community projects. Mark oversees all international partnerships and ‘smart’ technology joint 
ventures involving other businesses and research teams in Canada, U.S. Europe and Pacific-Rim. Mark provides expert testimo-
ny at environmental and municipal planning tribunals. Mark was also retained to peer-review work completed by all levels of 
government and by other engineering companies in Canada. 
Nancy Hill, Program Manager, AECOM
Nancy Hill is AECOM’s lead facilitator for the Canadian National Water & Wastewater Benchmarking Initiative, Stormwater  
Task Force. She has been supporting municipalities across Canada in the planning, design and construction of their infrastruc-
ture for over 20 years both as a municipal employee (City of Vancouver), as well as a consultant. Although Nancy has helped 
municipalities in all aspects of their infrastructure, she is currently focused on climate change adaptation, stormwater manage-
ment (including financing and low impact development) and asset management.
Natalia Moudrak, Director, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation – Working Session Lead
As a Director of Infrastructure Adaptation Program, Natalia advances the development of best practices for building new resi-
dential communities in Canada that are more resilient to flooding; as well evaluates the business case for natural infrastructure 
preservation. Natalia has experience in sustainability strategy, operationalization, reporting and business case development across a  
wide range of industry sectors and client organizations. Prior to joining the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, Natalia worked at  
PricewaterhouseCoopers Canada, Risk Assurance Services. Natalia holds a B.A in Economics and a Masters in Urban Planning from 
the University of Waterloo. Natalia is a member of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Technical Committee (TC) 
224 “Service Activities Relating to Drinking Water Supply Systems and Wastewater Systems - Quality Criteria of the Service and Perfor-
mance Indicators”, where she is a Subject Matter Expert representing Canada on Working Group 11 “Storm Water Management”.
48
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Peter Duncan, Manager, Infrastructure Planning, Halifax Regional Municipality
Peter Duncan is a Civil Engineer, Graduated from Technical University of Nova Scotia, and has practiced Municipal Engineering 
for 30 years. He has a background in construction, project management, wastewater treatment, land development, environ-
mental policy, infrastructure financing and rate design. He has worked for the Halifax Regional Municipality for the past 18 
years, currently as Manager of Infrastructure Planning with Planning and Development Services, and is responsible for joint 
Stormwater Policy matters with Halifax Regional Water Commission. Prior to this position, previous management portfolios in-
cluded the Environmental and Utility sections of the HRM Regional Plan, Development Engineering, Development Charges and 
the Environmental Management Office.
Philip Rizcallah, Program Director, Construction Portfolio, National Research Council of Canada
Philip Rizcallah is currently the Program Director within the Construction Portfolio at the National Research Council. He is 
responsible for Codes Canada, the Canadian Construction Materials Centre, and several of the associated research labs. He 
graduated from Dalhousie University with degrees in Mechanical Engineering, and Mathematics. His long career in the federal 
government also included positions with Labour Canada as a safety officer, the Federal Fire Commissioner as a Fire Protection 
Engineer, and Public Works Canada as a Senior Project Manager. He is the NRC Policy Advisor to the Canadian Commission on 
Building and Fire Codes; the Policy Advisor to the Provincial Territorial Policy Advisory Committee on Codes; Member of the 
CSA Strategic Steering Committee on Civil Engineering and Infrastructure; and the ULC Fire Council Steering Committee.
Robert J. Muir, Manager of Stormwater, City of Markham
Robert manages Markham’s long term Flood Control Program, including planning studies, design and construction of remedia-
tion works, and funding, as well as lifecycle planning and management of stormwater management facilities, drainage systems 
and watercourses. He has over 26 years of experience in the planning, analysis, design and approval of municipal drainage 
and flood hazard management systems - 20 years as a private sector consultant at Dillon Consulting Limited where he led 
the national Water Resources Practice. His experience involves management of large, complex studies involving hydrody-
namic modelling, full life-cycle costing of management alternatives, litigation involving extreme weather events, and peer 
review of technical studies. Currently he is advising the National Research Council on industry needs for Climate-Resilient 
Core Public Infrastructure.
Ron Scheckenberger, Principal, Amec Foster Wheeler
Ron currently heads the Water Resources Team based in the Burlington Infrastructure office. He has over 30 years’ experience 
in all aspects of water resources projects from concept, to design, to implementation, to monitoring. Ron has strived to be at 
the forefront of technology, while focusing on practical and implementable solutions for his clients. He has had the good for-
tune to be involved in numerous community planning exercises providing stormwater and environmental strategies to protect 
important ecological functions.
Sameer Dhalla, Associate Director, Engineering Services, Restoration and Infrastructure, Toronto Region Conservation Authority
Sameer Dhalla is the Associate Director of Engineering Services at the Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (TRCA).  
He has 19 years of experience in both the private and public sector and has worked on various projects from watershed 
planning to flood plain management. At the TRCA, Sameer leads a team of engineers, scientists and technicians in reviewing 
development applications, implementing flood remediation projects, developing water management policies and administer-
ing TRCA’s flood protection and warning program.
shutterstock_401695021
49
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
Sean Lee, Assistant Director of Engineering & Operations / Manager of Engineering Services, City of Fredericton
Sean Lee is a Civil Engineer and the Assistant Director of Engineering & Operations / Manager of Engineering Services at the 
City of Fredericton in New Brunswick. Drawing on 20 years of experience, Sean is responsible for the administration of the 
City’s annual capital construction program, providing technical support and guidance for developments, and management of 
the City’s transportation systems and solid waste collection programs. Sean has taken a leadership role in the development 
of the Canadian Public Works Association (CPWA) Engineer’s Council, opening communication between municipal Engineers 
from all parts of New Brunswick. During his career, Sean has worked in technical, operational and management roles, where he 
has gained a detailed knowledge of Fredericton’s storm water systems and been instrumental in the development of adaptive 
strategies to address anticipated impacts of climate change.
Scott Adams, Project Coordinator, City of Charlottetown
In his current role, Scott is responsible for overseeing all Public Works’ winter and summer maintenance activities and project 
management of all Public Works and Water & Sewer capital projects at the City of Charlottetown. Past experiences include 
project manager of highway construction including drainage and culvert construction with the Province of New Brunswick.  
Scott is a graduate of Civil Engineering and holds a MEng degree in Transportation Engineering from the University of  
New Brunswick.
Subhi Alsayed, Vice President Sustainable Development, Mattamy Homes 
Subhi’s main focus as a Vice President Sustainable Development at Mattamy Homes is to investigate and implement strategies 
for sustainable communities. Prior to Mattamy, Subhi was the innovation manager for the Tridel Corporation, as well as the  
director of projects with Tower Labs at MaRs. He also co-founded netZED, the first branded net zero energy concept in  
high-rise living. Subhi is a MBA graduate from Ivey Business School, a Professional Engineer, LEED Accredited Professional,  
and a Certified Energy manager.
Terry Geddes, Senior Project Manager, Cortel Group
Terry holds a number of urban land development responsibilities at the Ontario-based Cortel Group. Terry is also a Director 
of the Great Lakes Pilotage Authority. Previously, Terry served as a Warden of the Simcoe County, Ontario; Mayor of Town of 
Collingwood, Ontario (1997-2006); Director and Secretary for the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Cities Initiative and Mayor’s 
Association; Member of Federal Minister of Industry Auto Pact Relations Committee, as well as a member on a wide range of 
other committees focusing on municipal Issues at all levels of government. Terry is a founding Director of the Great Lakes and 
St. Lawrence Cities Initiative.
shutterstock_3182720
50
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
ENDNOTES
i Federation of Canadian Municipalities and National Research Council. 2004. National Guide to Sustainable Municipal Infrastructure: Stormwater Management Planning;Fed-
eration of Canadian Municipalities and National Research Council. 2003. National Guide to Sustainable Municipal Infrastructure: Infiltration / Inflow Control / Reduction for 
Wastewater Collection Systems; Natural Resources Canada and Public Safety Canada. 2017. Federal Floodplain Mapping Framework; City of London. 2011. Drainage By-
Law; Government of Canada. 2015. Wastewater Systems Effluent Regulations; Government of Canada. 2016. Working Group on Adaptation and Climate Resilience - Final 
Report.
ii Office of the Auditor General of Canada. Reports of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development. Report 2 Mitigating the Impacts of Severe 
Weather. 2016. Accessed at: http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_cesd_201605_02_e_41381.html 
iii Public Safety Canada. 2016-2017 Evaluation of the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements. March 2017. Accessed at: https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/
vltn-dsstr-fnncl-ssstnc-2016-17/vltn-dsstr-fnncl-ssstnc-2016-17-en.pdf 
iv Office of the Auditor General of Canada. Spring 2016 Reports of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development. Report 2: Mitigating the Impacts of 
Severe Weather. Accessed at: http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/docs/parl_cesd_201605_02_e.pdf
v Parliamentary Budget Officer of Canada. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements due to Weather Events. 2016. Accessed at: 
http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf 
vi Insurance Bureau of Canada. Facts of the Property and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada 2016, 2016. Web. Accessible at: http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20
Book/Facts_Book/2016/Facts-Book-2016.pdf
vii Government of Canada. 2016. Working Group on Adaptation and Climate Resilience - Final Report. Accessible at: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/migration/cc/
content/6/4/7/64778dd5-e2d9-4930-be59-d6db7db5cbc0/wg_report_acr_e_v5.pdf 
viii Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working 
Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2012. Accessed at: https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/srex/SREX_Full_Report.pdf
ix International Energy Association. World Energy Outlook 2016. Accessed at: https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/WorldEnergyOutlook2016Execu-
tiveSummaryEnglish.pdf 
x Government of Canada. Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change. 2016. Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/themes/environment/
documents/weather1/20170125-en.pdf 
xi Canadian Standards Association Group. Guideline on Flood Proofing and Flood Prevention Measures to Protect Basement Flooding. 2017. Accessed at: https://www.scc.
ca/en/standards/notices-of-intent/csa/guideline-flood-proofing-and-flood-prevention-measures-protect-basement-flooding 
xii Canadian Standards Association Group. CSA Group Launches Initiative to Incorporate Climate Change Adaptation into Seven Canadian Infrastructure Projects. April 2017. 
Accessed at: http://www.csagroup.org/news_or_press/csa-group-launches-initiative-to-incorporate-climate-change-adaptation-into-seven-canadian-infrastructure-projects/ 
xiii Canadian Underwriter. New IBC flood model shows 1.8 million Canadian households at ‘very high risk’. February 2016. Accessed at: http://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/
insurance/new-ibc-flood-model-shows-1-8-million-canadian-households-at-very-high-risk-1004006457/ 
xiv Forbes. Flood Insurance: Protection Against Storm Surge. 2012. Accessed at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/realtorcom/2012/07/10/flood-insurance-protection-against-
storm-surge/#3da7aa604136 
xv Canadian Payroll Association. Eighth Research Survey of Employed Canadians. 2016. Accessed at: http://www.payroll.ca/cpadocs/npw/2016/CPA_2016_NPW_Nation-
al_Media_Deck_Final_English.pdf 
xvi Daniella Dávila Aquije. Institute on Municipal Finance and Governance. 2016. Paying for Stormwater Management: What Are the Options? Accessed at: http://munk-
school.utoronto.ca/imfg/uploads/342/imfg_perspectives_no12_stormwater_daniella_davilaaquije_apr26_2016.pdf
xvii Association of Municipalities of Ontario. 2011. AMO’s 2011 Municipal Insurance Survey Results: Managing the Cost of Risk. https://www.amo.on.ca/AMO-PDFs/Re-
ports/2011/2011ManagingtheCostofRisk.aspx 
xviii West’s Encyclopedia of American Law. 2008. Joint and Several Liability. Accessed at: http://legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/joint+and+several+liability 
xix Association of Municipalities of Ontario. 2011. AMO’s 2011 Municipal Insurance Survey Results: Managing the Cost of Risk. https://www.amo.on.ca/AMO-PDFs/Re-
ports/2011/2011ManagingtheCostofRisk.aspx
xx Zizzo Strategy. 2017. Legal Risks and Requirements to Address Flood Resilience (Prepared for the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation).
xxi How CDP Data Can Inform Investors about Risk and Opportunities in U.S. Municipal Bonds. 2015. Accessed at: https://b8f65cb373b1b7b15feb-c70d8ead6ced550b4d-
987d7c03fcdd1d.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.com/cms/reports/documents/000/001/613/original/White-paper-muni-bonds.pdf?1486720635 
xxii Ibid.
xxiii Hulley, M., Watt, E., Zukovs, G. XCG Consultants Ltd. Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Stormwater Management. 2015. Accessed at: http://www.esaa.org/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2015/01/WaterTech2008-Paper24.pdf
xxiv Natural Resources Canada and Public Safety Canada. 2017. Federal Floodplain Mapping Framework. Accessed at: http://geoscan.nrcan.gc.ca/starweb/geoscan/servlet.
starweb?path=geoscan/downloade.web&search1=R=299806 
xxv U.S. Geological Survey. Floods: Recurrence intervals and 100-year floods. Accessed at: https://water.usgs.gov/edu/100yearflood.html 
xxvi Ibid.
xxvii Chow, Ven Te, Maidment, David and Mays, Larry (1988). Applied Hydrology. McGraw-Hill, New-York.
xxviii Brander K. E., Owen K. E. and Potter K. W. 2004. Modelled Impacts of Development Type and Runoff Volume and Infiltration Performance. Journal of the American Wa-
ter Resources Association, 40(4): 961-969; Holman-Dodds, J.K., Bradley A.A. and Potter K.W. 2003. Evaluation of Hydrologic Benefits of Infiltration Based Urban Stormwater 
Management. Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 39(1): 205-215; Williams, E.S. and Wise W.R. 2006. Hydrologic Impacts of Alternative Approaches to 
Stormwater Management and Land Development. Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 42(2): 443-455.
xxix Standards Council of Canada. 2017. Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative (NISI). Accessible at: http://www.scc.ca/nisi
xxx Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., James, T.S. and Mercer Clarke, C.S.L. editors (2016): Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON. 
274p. Accessed at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/files/pdf/NRCAN_fullBook%20%20accessible.pdf
xxxi Government of Newfoundland and Labrador. Department of Municipal Affairs and Environment. Policy for Flood Plain Management. 2014. Accessed at: http://www.mae.
gov.nl.ca/waterres/regulations/policies/flood_plain.html
xxxii Slobodan Simonovic. 2015. A Web-Based Intensity-Duration-Frequency Tool. Accessed at: http://www.cwn-rce.ca/assets/End-User-Reports/Municipal/Simonovic/CWN-
EN-Simonovic-2015-5Pager-Web.pdf
xxxiii Natural Resources Canada and Public Safety Canada. 2017. Federal Floodplain Mapping Framework. Accessed at: http://geoscan.nrcan.gc.ca/starweb/geoscan/servlet.
starweb?path=geoscan/downloade.web&search1=R=299806
51
Preventing Disaster Before It Strikes
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ABOUT THE REPORT,  
PLEASE CONTACT:
NATALIA MOUDRAK
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
EV3 4334 - 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3G1 
nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca
shutterstock_105056729
