Designed for safer living®
Protect your home from
Earthquakes
Designed for safer living® is a program endorsed 
by Canada’s insurers to promote disaster-resilient homes.
About the Institute
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR), established in 1997, 
is a world-class centre for multidisciplinary disaster prevention research 
and communication. ICLR is an independent, not-for-profit research 
institute founded by the insurance industry and affiliated with 	
Western University.
The Institute’s mission is to reduce the loss of life and property caused 
by severe weather and earthquakes through the identification and 
support of sustained actions that improve society’s capacity to adapt to, 
anticipate, mitigate, withstand and recover from natural disasters.
ICLR’s mandate is to confront the alarming increase in disaster 	
losses caused by natural disasters and to work to reduce disaster 
deaths, injuries and property damage. Disaster damage has been 
doubling every five to seven years since the 1960s, an alarming trend. 
The greatest tragedy is that many disaster losses are preventable. 
ICLR is committed to the development and communication of disaster 
prevention knowledge. For the individual homeowner, this translates 
into the identification of natural hazards that threaten them and their 
home. The Institute further informs individual homeowners about steps 
that can be taken to better protect your family and your home.
The purpose of this handbook is to outline actions that homeowners 
can take to protect their homes from earthquake damage. Some of 
these measures are simple and free; others cost money. All contribute 
to reducing the risk of severe earthquake damage. 
Published by: The Institute For Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Cover photos: U.S. Geological Survey, Department of the Interior/USGS, U.S. Geological Survey photos by 
J.K. Nakata (top), H.G. Wilshire (bottom left and right) 
Thank you to IBHS and Simpson Strong-Tie for their permission and help in providing graphics for this booklet.
Waiver: ICLR accept no responsibility of liability for:
•	 any loss or damage that any person may sustain as a result of the information in, or anything done or 
omitted in reliance on, this pamphlet; and
• 	any personal injury or bodily injury, including death, and any loss or damage caused by earthquake to 
insured or uninsured structures and/or property where QuakeSmart principles have been applied.
ISBN: 978-1-927929-18-6
Copyright®2016 The Institute For Catastrophic Loss Reduction
1
Start reducing your risk of 
earthquake damage
With population and development continuing to increase in at-risk areas, 
a growing number of Canadians are vulnerable to earthquake damage. 
Earthquakes are impossible to predict and can strike suddenly with no 
warning. They can occur at any time of the year and at any time of day. 
Canada experiences up to 5,000 earthquakes each year, most of them 
small. While all provinces and territories have some degree of earthquake 
risk, the western and southwestern regions of British Columbia are most 
at risk. Other at-risk areas include the St. Lawrence and Ottawa River 
valleys, as well as parts of the three northern territories. The June 23, 
2010 magnitude 5 earthquake in Val-des-Bois, Quebec served as a 
reminder of the risk that also exists in eastern Canada. 
This map provides an idea of the likelihood of experiencing strong earthquake shaking at various 
locations across Canada, using the relative seismic hazard for single family dwellings (1-2 story structures). 
Map courtesy of Natural Resources Canada
2
Small or moderate earthquakes commonly last only a few seconds and 
typically do not cause structural damage, although objects/items may 
move or fall. Larger earthquakes can last up to several minutes and can 
cause significant damage if 	the epicentre is near a densely populated 
area, or if the magnitude is sufficiently large for the region. Over the 
past 100 years, at least ten earthquakes in or near Canada have 
registered a magnitude greater than 7. A few have caused extensive 
damage. Even a magnitude 6 earthquake could cause extensive 
damage to poorly constructed buildings and other structures in major 
urban centres. A strong quake near one of Canada’s heavily populated 
cities would likely be the most destructive natural disaster this country 
could ever experience. 
Individuals can determine the relative risk of earthquake in a given postal code 
Forward Sortation Area (FSA) using ICLR’s Earthquake Risk Mapping Tool, available at 
www.iclr.org/earthquakerisktool.html
3
While homeowners cannot predict earthquake activity, there are steps 
they can take to protect themselves and minimize damage to their 
homes. To minimize earthquake damage, a home must be able to 
absorb the quake’s energy and provide a stable path to transfer these 
forces back into the ground. Structural damage is less likely if the roof is 
attached securely to the walls and the walls are fastened to each other 
and anchored to a strong foundation. Damage and personal injury 
within the home can be reduced significantly by securing large items in 
place. Engineered structures can be designed and built to resist 
earthquake forces because of the attention given to construction 
connections (joints, fasteners) and load paths (the path that seismic 
forces pass through to the foundation of the structure). 
Historically, little engineering design had been required or 
applied to any building constructed prior to 1985 and all 
residential construction. These buildings can be vulnerable 
to earthquake damage when open space at the ground 
floor (as is commonly found in commercial establishments 
and parking garages) is introduced without proper 
consideration of earthquake engineering. 
If homeowners are not sure whether their homes are at 
risk from an earthquake, they can check with their local 
building officials, city engineers or planning and zoning 
administrators. These individuals can confirm whether 	
the area in question is subject to more frequent 	
seismic activity. 
This publication is designed to assist homeowners whose 
residences are at risk of damage from an earthquake. 	 	
It provides an overview of key areas in and around the 
house that may require attention in order to reduce 	
the risk of earthquake damage.
How earthquake forces 
affect a home.
4
Talk to your local government.
Local governments can often offer helpful advice to homeowners 
on how to protect their homes from earthquake damage. Municipal 
and provincial government websites, public works, utilities, building 
and emergency management departments are all useful sources of 
information. Towns and cities located in areas of increased seismic 
activity can offer a great deal of expertise on how to protect your home. 
Some key questions worth asking: 
•	
What advice can they offer?
•	
Are there engineering studies on your house/subdivision?
•	
How do you report damage from seismic activity?
•	
What actions does your local government suggest you take?
•	
Is there disaster-relief assistance available?
•	
Can they recommend any contractors with expertise in earthquake 
mitigation/protection?
•	
What permits, if any, are required to strengthen your home’s 
defenses?
Talk to your insurance agent or broker.
Talk to your insurance agent or broker to find out about what types
of water damages are covered under your policy. Trying to make a claim 
after you have suffered water damage is not a good way to find out 
that you don’t have the proper coverage, or that overland flooding 
is uninsurable.
Have a building inspector evaluate your home
Each home is unique. An engineer or contractor who is fully versed in 
seismic safety can best help you protect your home. Understanding 
the risks of seismic damage and the nature of your residence will 
help to ensure that the best course of action is taken to reduce future 
earthquake damage to your home. Your municipality may help you find 
an engineer or contractor.
First steps
1
2
3
5
1. Taking action on your own
These initiatives cannot guarantee personal safety and the security of 
any property but, if properly addressed, will help to minimize the risk of 
earthquake damage to your home.
Secure light fixtures and suspended ceilings 
While a glass chandelier can be an attractive addition to a dining room 
or foyer, you may wish to consider other options if you live in an 
earthquake-prone area. Light fixtures hanging from the ceiling will sway 
during an earthquake and may fall. More earthquake-resistant light 
fixture selections include recessed lighting and track lighting. If a ceiling 
light has a cover, it should be fastened to the fixture itself. Installing 
plastic sleaves over fluorescent light tubes will keep the glass from 
scattering if they break. 
Suspended ceilings should be attached to the structure of the home 
every few feet using chain straps, plumber’s strapping or minimum 
14-gauge wire. You can also prevent ceiling panels from flying upward 
by installing adjustable compression struts.
Brace water heaters and major appliances
The horizontal forces created by an earthquake can topple water 
heaters that are not braced to the structure. Once a water heater has 
tipped over, the broken water pipe will flood the home, damaging or 
destroying floors, walls, furniture and personal possessions. Homes are 
at additional risk to possible explosion and fire damage if the water 
heater is powered by natural gas, as gas lines are often severed during 
an earthquake. Bracing a water heater is a simple and affordable way 
to avoid this problem. Water tanks should be secured using an 
approved seismic restraint kit that is strong enough for your size of 
tank. Installation instructions should be followed carefully.
Just as water heaters may shift and/or topple during an earthquake, 	
so too can major appliances (e.g. refrigerators, stoves, dishwashers, 
washing machines and dryers). Each of these appliances may be 
attached to water and/or gas lines that can cause serious damage to 
the structure if the line is severed. You should replace all rigid appliance 
6
connections with flexible metal armoured connectors and install 
automatic shut-off valves for both the gas and water supply to further 
reduce the possibility of a gas or water line break. Stoppers or wedges 
purchased at most any hardware or home improvement store can keep 
large appliances from moving during an earthquake.
A seismic natural gas shut-off valve located on 
your natural gas meter will turn off the gas 
supply to the home in the event of an 
earthquake. This could prevent explosion and fire 
in the event a gas line in your home is severed 
from the force of the shaking. Using a metal 
screen to protect the gas meter from falling 
bricks and/or a collapsing chimney is also a 
relatively inexpensive and easy measure to take to 
prevent gas leaks and possible explosion and fire.
Reposition heavy objects 
Heavy objects such as television sets, stereos and personal computers 
are often placed on the tops of cabinets, bookcases, desks and tables. 
They can slide or fall off during an earthquake, causing damage and 
personal injury. These items should be secured to the furniture they are 
resting on using velcro or non-skid pads. You may wish to consider 
Attach bracket to blocking 	
with two (2) #16 (or min. 1⁄4”) by 
11⁄2” lag screws.
Extend blocking at least two (2) studs beyond bracket attachment.
Existing wall
Attach blocking to wall, see 
General Notes below.
2 x 4 wood blocking in 
two (2) places.
Use minimum 3⁄4” plumber’s strapping. Wrap around 
water heater and provide snug fit.
Attach bent ends of strapping with a minimum 1⁄4” x 1” hex 
bolt. Use washers under head and nut. Keep 1” between end 
of strapping and centre of bolt.
© Insurance Institute for Business & Home Safety
Use one (1) heavy-duty 
shelving bracket in four (4) 
places.
Attach bracket to plumber’s strapping with a 
minimum 1⁄4” x 3⁄4” hex bolt. Use a washer under 
the nut. Keep 1” between end of bracket and 
centre of bolt.
General Notes: Blocking attachment to wall
1) 	 Wood stud wall: Use two (2) #16 (or min. 1⁄4”) by 31⁄2” lag screws 
with hex head and washer under head of screw.
2) 	 Concrete or Masonry wall: Use 3⁄8” masonry anchors with 15⁄8” 
embedment into existing wall at 12”–16” on centre.
3) 	 Steel stud wall: Use two (2) #10–16 self-drilling sheet metal screws 
with hex head and washer under head of screw.
4) 	 Wood and Steel stud walls: Centre screws on studs.
Method recommended by NIST. See NIST Report GCR 97-732 reference 
page 37.
7
fastening several wall units together to form a wider footprint using 	
#8 machine screws (minimum 3”). The tops of top-heavy furniture 
should be secured to a wall by anchoring the furniture to studs using 
flexible fasteners.
Brace bookcases and other storage shelving 
Bookcases can shake and tip over during an earthquake, causing 
damage or injury. To prevent these items from overturning, they should 
be attached to a structural member using L-brackets or Z-brackets. 
Heavier items such as large books should be placed on lower shelves 	
to reduce the centre of gravity. Ledge barriers (wood, plastic, or metal) 
can be installed to prevent items from falling off shelves. The wheels on 
all rolling furniture should be locked. Ideally, casters should be removed 	
all together.
Use lockable cabinets 
During an earthquake, cabinets can tip over and their doors can open, 
spilling – even spraying – their contents. To prevent damage, you 
should use lockable file cabinets and attach them to the wall using the 
same method noted for bookcases and other storage shelving (above). 
Self-locking kitchen drawers and cabinets should be installed. For 
retrofits, a locking mechanism (eg. baby-proof latches) can be used. 
Although the locks may seem cumbersome at first, the mild 
inconvenience can prevent injury and potentially save you from 
replacing hundreds of dollars worth of expensive glassware. 
 
Secure picture frames, mirrors and bulletin boards
Photographs, mirrors, bulletin boards and artwork can easily fall from 
walls during an earthquake and cause damage and personal injury. 
These items should not be placed over beds and should be secured to 
walls using closed-eye screws (where possible) instead of traditional 
picture hangers. The screw eye should be attached to a wooden stud. 
Multiple screw eyes may be required depending on the weight of 	
the item.
8
Properly mount flat screen 
televisions
Wall-mounted flat screen televisions are often 
inadequately mounted on brackets that are 
attached either to a single framing stud or, in 
some cases, just to the drywall. There is a 
good chance that either of these installation 
methods will be inadequate when an 
earthquake strikes. Flat screen televisions 
should be mounted to at least two framing 
studs spaced no more than 24 inches apart 
on centre. Heavy-duty brackets should be 
installed using manufacturers’ 
recommendations. For wall mount brackets 
that can only be installed to a single stud, 	
the bracket might be retrofitted using items 
readily available from hardware or home 
improvement stores. However, before starting, ensure that the 
television is less than approximately 50 kilos (110 pounds, usually 
60-inch diagonal screen size or smaller) and that framing studs behind 
the drywall are not more than 24 inches apart (on centre).
9
2.	Structural improvements 		
	
to your home
Homeowners undertaking renovations should be mindful of structural 
changes to the home that, while visually appealing, could increase the 
risk of earthquake damage. These include: replacing large portions of 
walls with windows and glass doors; adding large skylights or 
additional stories; opening large portions of existing floors (e.g. creating 
a two-story foyer); and additions that create an ‘L’ configuration.
Cripple walls 
Cripple walls are short wood-frame walls that are situated between the 
foundation and the first floor framing. They are commonly found in 
wood-frame structures that have a basement or crawlspace. Because 
the pliable wood frame cripple wall is typically attached to a less flexible 
concrete foundation, the connection between these two different 
materials is vulnerable to earthquake-related failures. You can take 
steps to strengthen the cripple wall so that it and the foundation 
behave more as a single unit. To complete this retrofit, access to the 
cripple wall beneath the first floor framing is required. Structural grade 
plywood or oriented strand board (minimum 3⁄8”) can be fastened to 
the inside of the cripple wall framing. While homeowners will benefit 
10
more from bracing the entire cripple wall, 	
only the corners of the cripple wall can be 
braced if budget is an issue. All edges should 
be attached to the structural framing. Air 
holes should be drilled in the structure so that 
moisture is not trapped within the bracing. 
Building foundations
Homes that are not properly attached to the 
foundation can shift during an earthquake. 	
It is important that the building is connected 
to the foundation with anchor bolts or other 
steel connectors (including anchors, steel 
plates or straps) that secure the sill plate (the wooden board that sits 
directly on top of the foundation) to the foundation. A professional 
engineer should be consulted if it is found that the foundation is in 
poor condition (e.g. made of unreinforced masonry) or uses a post-and-
pier type configuration. It is important to note that properly securing a 
home to its foundation may also secure the structure against damage 
from severe wind.
Floor systems
Floor systems typically consist of 
floor joists, floor sheathing and 
band joists, which are located along 
the floor’s perimeter. An earthquake 
exposes the floor to substantial 
forces that can distort and 	 	
damage it. Floor systems should be 
tied together with the sub-floor 	
securely connected to underlying 
floor joists. To reduce the possibility 
of rotation in an earthquake, each 
joist should be nailed to a band joist. 
Blocking shown 
to illustrate 
metal installation.
Metal framing angles connect the 
cripple wall to the floor system.
11
Blocking or bridging can also be placed between joists to keep them 
from falling over. The forces absorbed by the band joist or blocking 
must, in turn, be transferred to the foundation. The connection should 
be secured using metal ties or framing anchors. 
Wood-framed walls
Traditionally, the exterior walls of woodframe houses are supported 
with wood studs attached to structural-grade plywood, oriented strand 
board or diagonal wood sheathing. To protect 
the exterior walls from the elements, they are 
covered with lap siding, stucco, stone or brick 
veneer. In order for this system to resist 
damage from earthquake forces, it must be 
well designed with the appropriate hardware 
in place to ensure a strong connection 
between all of the elements. 
Masonry walls
A home whose walls are made entirely of 
brick, stone, clay tile, concrete block or adobe 
could be susceptible to earthquake damage. 	
In newer masonry homes, these types of walls 
are often reinforced with steel bars grouted 
inside the walls. If the walls are reinforced 	
and well anchored to the foundations, floors 
and roofs, they can usually withstand an 
earthquake. But masonry that is in poor 
condition, unreinforced or not securely tied 	
to the rest of the structure, has the potential 
to collapse. A proper retrofit generally 	
requires anchorage designed specifically for 
earthquakes. Since evaluating structural 
masonry walls for general soundness and 
specific seismic features is quite complex, 	
it is best for you to consult a 	
professional engineer.
12
Roof systems
For homes to adequately resist the force of an earthquake, the roof 
structure must keep the walls tied together. The typical roof system 
includes a roof covering, roof sheathing and supporting roof frame. 
You should inspect the roof covering. It should be in good condition 
with no evidence of excessive wear and tear. Nonstructural lightweight 
coverings (such as wood or asphalt shingles) behave well during an 
earthquake. Tile and slate coverings (which are heavy) are susceptible 	
to sliding or falling off the roof during an earthquake. Both plywood 
and OSB roof sheathing give strength to the roof regardless of the roof 
style. Roofs fully sheathed with structural grade plywood or OSB 
provide the greatest stability to the overall structure. Large dormers, 
skylight openings and any other features that interrupt the sheathing 
can weaken the roof structure. You should also consider the roof 
system’s framing (trusses or rafters that support the roof covering and 
sheathing). Similar to floor systems, roof-framing systems can rotate or 
fall over when your home starts to move in an earthquake. To prevent 
this, blocking can be placed between the rafters or trusses where they 
rest on the wall. The blocking should be nailed to the roof sheathing in 
order to transfer the lateral loads into the wall. Metal strap connectors 
(i.e. hurricane straps or clips) or properly placed toe-nailing ensure that 
the blocking is adequately connected to the wall and rafters.
Garage door openings
Garages are particularly vulnerable to earthquake damage, especially 	
if there is living space above. To avoid earthquake damage, the narrow 
walls on either side of the garage opening must be able to support the 
seismic load that is transferred from the roof and additional living space 
above the garage (if one exists) into the foundation below. In order for 
Home before earthquake.
Home tears apart during 
earthquake.
Home detaches and garage 
collapses.
13
these narrow walls to support this load, they must be properly braced. 
The bracing can be done using steel bracing or specially detailed plywood 
panels that are recommended by a registered professional engineer.
Chimneys
Until recently, most building codes did not require homes with masonry 
chimneys to be reinforced and braced to the structure. Chimneys that 
are not properly reinforced and braced often break away from homes 
and topple, even during moderately-sized earthquakes. (As such, 
property owners should ensure that beds and chairs are located away 
from chimneys, which can collapse through roofs and severely injure or 
kill an individual.)
A few strategically placed metal straps secured to structural members 
(floor, ceiling and roof joists) can help to brace the chimney. Chimneys 
should be inspected regularly for signs of significant cracking (greater 
than the width of a dime) along the mortar joints. You should ensure 
that the mortar is in good condition and does not easily crumble when 
scraped with a metal tool. Registered professional engineers can be a 
good source for information on how to adequately brace a chimney. 
Windows and glass doors
Brittle materials like glass can fail suddenly during an earthquake, 
spraying shards throughout a room and injuring those nearby. 
Tempered glass (similar to that installed in automobiles) is designed to 
break into small pieces that are far less likely to injure anyone. If you are 
contemplating window replacements, you should consider replacing 
your windows with tempered glass. If your budget does not allow for 
window replacement, a much less expensive option is to install a 
protective film (4 millimetres minimum thickness) on the inside of the 
windows. The film can be purchased at home improvement stores. 
14
3.	Measuring your risk of 	
	
	
	
	
earthquake damage 
Assign yourself the indicated number of points for each question. The fewer the points 
you score, the more protected your property is against earthquake damage. 
If a question does not apply to your home, assign a score of 0.
Question
Answer
Points 
Risk 
Score
Foundation and Walls
Is the masonry reinforced and the sill 
plate secured to the foundation?
Yes
No
0
25
Are the cripple walls reinforced?
 
Braced entirely
Braced at the corners
No reinforcement
0
10
20
Are the floor systems connected using 
metal ties or framing anchors?
Yes
No
0
10
Are the wall elements reinforced, 
well connected and anchored to the 
foundation?
Yes
No
0
10
Is the garage door opening secured 
with steel bracing or plywood panels?
Yes
No
0
10
Are the windows and glass doors 
protected against breakage? 
Tempered glass
Protective film (Minimum 
4 millimetres)
No
0
5
10
15
Low 21 or less, Moderate 21-29
High 30-35, Extreme 35 or more
Question
Answer
Points 
Risk 
Score
Roof Systems
What roof covering does the 
home have?
Nonstructural lightweight 
covering (wood/asphalt 
shingles)
Tile/slate covering
0
5
Does the roof sheathing include 
structural grade plywood or OSB?
Yes
No 
0
5
Is there blocking between rafters/
trusses for the roof framing and is it 
anchored to the wall?
Yes
No
0
10
Does the home have a large skylight?
No
Yes
0
5
Is the chimney properly reinforced and 
braced?
Yes
No
0
10
Inside the Home
Are light fixtures secured?
Recessed/track lighting 
and/or hanging light 
fixtures are secured
Light fixtures are not 
secured
0
5
Are the home’s suspended ceilings 
attached to the structure with safety 
cables?
Yes
No
0
5
Are major appliance and the water 
heater anchored to the wall using 
safety cables?
Braced to the structure
No
0
15
My total Risk Score is
16
Repair or upgrade to-do-list
Description
Location	
Start date	
Completed
Repair       Upgrade      Replace	
$ Budgeted	
Actual cost
Description
Location	
Start date	
Completed
Repair       Upgrade      Replace	
$ Budgeted	
Actual cost
Description
Location	
Start date	
Completed
Repair       Upgrade      Replace	
$ Budgeted	
Actual cost
Description
Location	
Start date	
Completed
Repair       Upgrade      Replace	
$ Budgeted	
Actual cost
Important questions
17
Important contact information
Insurance company
Address	
	
Postal code
Telephone	
Alternative telephone
E-mail	
Website
Contact person 	
Contact person
Insurance broker or agent
Address	
	
Postal code
Telephone	
Alternative telephone
E-mail	
Website
Contact person 	
Contact person
Municipal government
Address	
	
Postal code
Telephone	
Alternative telephone
E-mail	
Website
Contact person 	
Contact person
Contractor
Address	
	
Postal code
Telephone	
Alternative telephone
E-mail	
Website
Contact person 	
Contact person
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Institut de prévention des sinistres catastrophiques
Toronto office 
20 Richmond Street East
Suite 210
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
M5C 2R9
416-364-8677
416-364-5889
info@iclr.org
www.iclr.org
youtube.com/iclrinfo
twitter.com/iclrcanada
facebook.com/instituteforcatastrophiclossreduction
Search: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR)
London office
Western University 
Amit Chakma Building, Suite 4405
1151 Richmond Street
London, Ontario, Canada
N6A 5B9
519-661-3234
519-661-4273
With Federal funding support through Natural Resources
Canada’s Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Program.
Natural Resources	
Ressources naturelles
Canada	
Canada
