Designed for safer living®
Protect your home from
Extreme heat
Designed for safer living® is a program endorsed 
by Canada’s insurers to promote disaster-resilient homes.
About the Institute
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR), established in 1997, 
is a world-class centre for multidisciplinary disaster prevention research 
and communication. ICLR is an independent, not-for-profit research 
institute founded by the insurance industry and affiliated with Western 
University, London, Ontario.
The Institute’s mission is to reduce the loss of life and property caused 	
by severe weather and earthquakes through the identification and 
support of sustained actions that improve society’s capacity to adapt to, 
anticipate, mitigate, withstand and recover from natural disasters.
ICLR’s mandate is to confront the alarming increase in losses caused by 
natural disasters and to work to reduce deaths, injuries and property 
damage. Disaster damage has been doubling every five to seven years 
since the 1960s, an alarming trend. The greatest tragedy is that many 
disaster losses are preventable. ICLR is committed to the development 
and communication of disaster prevention knowledge. For the individual 
homeowner, this translates into the identification of natural hazards that 
threaten them and their home. The Institute further informs individual 
homeowners about steps that can be taken to better protect their family 
and their homes. 
The purpose of this handbook is to outline actions that homeowners 
can take to protect their homes and, as a result, themselves, from 
extreme heat. Some of these measures are simple and free; others cost 
money. All contribute to reducing the impact of extreme heat.
Published by: The Institute For Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Cover photos: (top) Wikimedia; (bottom left) PYC Awnings, Pennsylvania; (bottom right) HomeGuard 
Restoration 
Waiver: ICLR accepts no responsibility of liability for:
•	 any loss or damage that any person may sustain as a result of the information in, or anything done or 
omitted in reliance on, this pamphlet; and
•	 any personal injury or bodily injury, including death, and any loss or damage caused by extreme heat to 
insured or uninsured structures and/or property as a result of actions outlined in this document.
ISBN: 978-1-927929-27-8
Copyright ® 2020 The Institute For Catastrophic Loss Reduction
1
Extreme heat
In many parts of the country, Canadians are experiencing more frequent 
and extreme heat events. Temperatures sometimes soar to levels that are 
dangerous to health and safety. The risk of health impacts from extreme 
heat is expected to continue rising due to climate change.
The evidence over the past 20 or 30 years shows that the risk of death or 
serious health issues increases when the temperature rises. In particular, 
fatalities in many urban centres across Canada often start to increase 	
when the temperature is above 25°C, and increase significantly when the 
temperature is above 35°C. Some communities have even experienced a 
few days when the temperature has exceeded 40°C. Over the next 	
25 years, it is likely that many – perhaps most – Canadians will experience 
high temperatures dangerous to their health.
Fredericton
1961–1990
2021–2040
2041–2060
2061–2100
Number of days above 30ºC
Observed
SRES A1B
Toronto
Québec
London
Windsor
Winnipeg
Calgary
Victoria
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Current and projected number of days exceeding 30°C/86ºF for 	
Canadian cities 
The number of hot days for each city is based on the observed temperature data between 	
1961 and 1990, and projected for 2021–2040, 2041–2060 and 2081–2100.
Source: Developed by Kharin Slava, Canadian Centre for Climate Modeling and Analysis, Canadian 
Global Climate Change Model version 3.1, personal communication, 2009. 
2
The risk of heat illness and death is greatest for older adults, infants, 
young children, people with chronic illnesses, those who are physically 
disabled, and people living alone. The risk is greatest when 
temperatures increase beyond rates traditionally experienced, and 
when these high temperatures are sustained through several 
consecutive extraordinarily warm days and nights.
Fortunately, there are actions that can be taken to ensure that new 
homes are designed, and existing homes are retrofitted, to protect 
those who reside in them from extreme heat. 
This publication is designed to assist homeowners whose residences are 	
at risk of extreme heat. Recommendations presented here to reduce 
overheating of low-rise residential structures include elements around 
building design, considerations for building materials, and landscaping 
approaches.
The information to follow provides an overview of key areas in and 
around the house and lot that may require attention in order to reduce 
the risk posed by extreme heat to a home and – hence – to its 
occupants. Several measures presented in this document, while focused 
on management of heat-related impacts, have additional benefits 
related to energy efficiency.
Noon
8 am
4 pm
5 pm
7 am
4 pm
7 pm
5 am
8 am
2 pm
10 am
December
Main solar collecting hours
June/September
June
Dining
area
Main room
Sliding
glass doors
N
Office
Master
bedroom
Kitchen
Bath
Interior layout 
Good interior layout can assist 
greatly with passive heating 
and cooling, with particular 
opportunities for efficient 
daylighting.
Synergies/Barriers:
Layout decisions should 
incorporate other building 
elements and work in harmony 
with them, such as the windows 
and mechanical systems. 
Impact on Energy Efficiency:
Good interior layout can off-set 
later energy consumption by 
reducing need for light and heat.
3
What advice do they offer?
What does your local government suggest you do?
Do they offer incentives, or are they familiar with incentives offered by 	
other levels of government for such things as energy efficient windows or 
improving insulation?
Do they recommend contractors with expertise in protection from 	
extreme heat?
Are there any by-laws which may prevent you from taking certain actions?
What permits, if any, are required to strengthen your home’s defenses?
t
t
t
t
t
t
First steps
Understand your home’s vulnerabilities
Unlike other natural hazards, like extreme wind or rain for example, 
extreme heat does not do extensive damage to homes per se. The idea 
of protecting a home from extreme heat is ultimately to protect the 
home’s residents from the negative impacts of overheating. It is 
important to be aware and educated about your home’s vulnerabilities 
to the threat of extreme heat and other hazards.
      Talk to your local government
Local governments may be able to offer important advice for 
homeowners on how to protect their home from extreme heat. 
Municipal government websites, public works, utilities and the building 
department can all be useful sources. Towns and cities located in parts 
of the country with hotter summers may be able offer more information 
on how to protect your home. Considerations include:
      Have a private building inspector evaluate your home
Because every home is different, private building inspectors may be able 
to offer important insights into the your home’s capacity to withstand 
extreme heat and other hazards.
1
2
4
Taking action on your own or 
with help from contractors
These initiatives cannot guarantee personal safety and the security of 
any property but, if properly addressed, will help to minimize the risk of 
extreme heat damage to your home and, thus, harm to residents. It is 
recognized that homeowners may be able to perform none, some, most 
or all of the items in this section, or may choose to utilize third-party 
contractors.
Landscaping
Landscaping choices, essentially using shading trees and other plants 
near south, east and west-facing exposures, will work to minimize solar 
heat gains through windows.
It is recommended that deciduous trees (i.e. leafy green trees that shed 
leaves seasonally, as opposed to needled coniferous trees that do not 
shed) be planted to provide shading for south, west and east-facing 
windows. Deciduous trees provide shade in the summer and early 
autumn, but allow for sun to heat the home in the colder months when 
they have shed their leaves.
Landscaping with coniferous trees or hedges can help provide a 
windbreak or filter against harsh winds, particularly in winter.
At least 25 per cent of the lot surface (less roof area) should be 
comprised of tree cover.
For those living in areas of the country that present risk of wildfire to 
structures, it is essential that landscaping comply with FireSmart® 
landscaping guidelines and should not increase risk of wildland urban 
interface fire. Information on FireSmart® and FireSmart® landscaping 
information can be found at www.firesmartcanada.ca.
Trees should also be properly maintained and trimmed to prevent power 
outages and damage during windstorms.
5
Windows
According to the City of Vancouver, residential buildings can 
lose about half of their heat through windows but gain only 
a few percentage points back in passive solar gain. “In order 
to design windows that contribute to passive heating in the 
cooler winter months without an associated overheating risk 
in the summer, it is critical to balance location, size and 
thermal quality.”
The City maintains that there are four major considerations 
when choosing windows that minimize heat loss and 
maximize solar gains in colder months: 
•	
How does window design address daylighting, views, 
ventilation?
•	
How much heat loss will be attributable to the 
windows?
•	
What is the payback for investing in high performance 
systems?
•	
Are there other design considerations (overhangs, 
landscaping etc.)? 
Overall window quality is an important consideration. 	 	
This includes the solar heat gain coefficient of the glass 		
and spacer material. Other considerations here include 
number of panes (double versus triple) and the material used 
for frames.
When replacing windows (and doors) for an existing home 
or purchasing windows for a new build, products should 	
be selected that have low U-Values (a.k.a. thermal 
transmittance, the rate of transfer of heat through a 
structure divided by the difference in temperature across 
that structure).
Heat gain/loss
(Adapted from Passive 	 	
Design Toolkit for Homes, 	
City of Vancouver)
Single pane U-Factor = 1.04
Double pane U-Factor = 0.50
Triple pane U-Factor = 0.15
What is a U-Value?
U-Value is the amount of heat loss or gain through a construction material. U-value is 
measured by U = I/R. U-values for windows can refer to the centre of glass or edge of 
window whole frame’ measurements. The value will change with the size of the 	
window because the ratio of window to frame will increase as the window gets bigger. 
Most manufacturers provide the U value of the glass and the frame separately – 	
proper analysis must assess the U value of the entire system.
6
Windows and doors should also have a low minimum air leakage value.
According to Vancouver, style of window is also key to balancing the 
issue of heat loss and solar gain: “Slider windows may be poorer air 
barriers as the sealing system is harder to design. Fixed windows are 
permanently sealed but do not offer the benefits of ventilation. 	
Hinged windows use compression seals that are more sturdy than slider 
windows but may still wear out. Issues arise when worn out seals are 
not replaced.”
It should be noted that homes built to reduce the impact of extreme 
heat typically use windows that swing inward, which gives a better seal.
Positioning of windows according to exposures is also important. 
According to Vancouver, window area on south elevations should be 
maximized, while east-facing elevations should be limited in size or 
protected by overhangs or trees and west elevations should be avoided 
unless they can be fully shaded during the summer.
As a general rule of thumb, windows should not exceed 2⁄3 of the 
envelope. Further, the number of windows used should be kept at 	
a minimum. Vancouver notes that “one slightly larger window is 		
more efficient than two windows even if they equal the same area 	
of window.”
Homeowners are advised to consult with window experts on how best 
to meet these requirements for their homes.
Detailed information on windows, including performance comparisons 
and placement recommendations, can be found in the City of 
Vancouver’s Passive Design Toolkit for Homes.
Window shading
As with the strategic planting of trees, shading windows through the 
use of structure design or commercially available window shading 
devices or products can also work to reduce solar heat gains through 
windows. Homeowners are advised against relying only on curtains or 
interior blinds, because the idea is to reduce heat from the sun before it 
enters the home.
7
From a building design standpoint, windows and glass doors can be 
shaded with permanent design elements, like covered porches, 
brise-soleils and vertical or horizontal louvres.
Products that can be used to shade windows (some of which are less 
permanent than design elements) may include insulated exterior roll 
shutters, exterior window screens, roll out awnings and heat control 
window films. It should be noted that such options as roll shutters and 
roll out awnings require the homeowner to physically operate them, 
while other options are more passive.
Common strategies used for window shading: (top left) covered porches; 	
	
(top right) insulated exterior roll shutters; (bottom left) vertical or horizontal 	
louvres; (bottom right) exterior screens
Passive window shading
(Adapted from Passive Design Toolkit for Homes, City of Vancouver)
Overhang
Louvres
Sunshades
8
Lighting
Availability of natural lighting is important, as access to high quality 
natural light reduces the need for artificial lighting, keeping interior 
temperatures down and reducing energy bills. 
Building layout and orientation are key considerations and, again, 
success depends on the right balance between gaining access to 
natural light while reducing solar gains. South-facing exposures, for 
instance, will provide a lot of quality sunlight, but will also provide for 
high solar gains. North-facing exposures, conversely, will deliver good 
quantities of diffused sunlight, with low solar gains. Designs should 
seek to balance different lighting needs according to the room (direct 
light for kitchens, offices, workshops etc., diffused light for living rooms 
and bedrooms). It is recommended that all living areas (kitchen, living 
rooms, dining rooms) be located on the south exposure and bedrooms 
on the north.
Other considerations include the type of light source used for artificial 
lighting. Standard incandescent bulbs are inefficient as light sources 
and they omit high amounts of heat. Energy efficient bulbs should be 
used where possible. Homeowners may also consider using lighter 
colour paints on walls, windowsills etc. Lighter colours reflect more 
light than do darker surfaces.
Overhang
Because the winter sun is at 
a lower angle, sun can travel 
directly into the building 	
warming it during the cool 
months. The high summer sun 
is blocked by the overhang 
creating a cooling shade
Summer sun (overhang 
creates cooling shade)
Winter sun (sunlight 
warms directly)
9
Roofing
When replacing older roof covering or 
choosing covering for an addition or new 
build, homeowners might consider installing 	
a cool roof. 
According to the U.S. Department of Energy 
“A cool roof is one that has been designed 	
to reflect more sunlight and absorb less heat 
than a standard roof. Cool roofs can be made 
of a highly reflective type of paint, a sheet 
covering, or highly reflective tiles or shingles.”
Cool roofs can serve to reduce reliance on 	
air conditioning systems, improve thermal 
comfort for indoor spaces, reduce local air 
temperatures and provide other additional 
temperature and energy-related benefits.
Cool roofs can come in many forms and much depends on whether 	
the roof is low-sloped or steep-sloped. Green roofs, which can include 
anything from basic plant cover to a garden, are also considered a 	
form of cool roof.
Homeowners will best be served by discussing cool roof options with 
their roofing expert or contractor. They may also wish to discuss any 
plans to install a green roof with their 
insurance provider before installation 	
takes place.
Insulation
Insulation in a home generally serves two 
purposes: 1) It mitigates heat loss or gain 	
and 2) It lessens or even eliminates radiant 
energy from hot surfaces in warm months 	
(e.g. asphalt shingled roofs) and cold surfaces 
in winter (e.g. exterior walls). 
Victoriaville, Quebec
The City of Victoriaville, QC, designed 
and implemented a program that 
incentivizes the introduction of 
sustainability and resiliency features 
into the construction of new homes 
and the renovation of existing homes. 
Some measures suggested provide 
improved thermal comfort, include 
tips on tree planting around properties 
and the promotion of cool roofs.
Example of a cool roof, 	
	
Rosemont-Petite-Patrie, Montreal
10
According to the City of 
Vancouver, “Insulation is 
arguably the most critical 
determinant of energy 
savings and interior thermal 
comfort, though good 
insulation should not 
preclude consideration of air 
tightness, heat bridges and 
appropriate windows.”
The City recommends that 
these questions be asked 
when a homeowner is 
making decisions regarding 
replacing or reinforcing 
insulation in an existing 
property, or when planning 
for a new build:
•	
What is climate-
appropriate insulation for 
this building?
•	
What are the environmental considerations of the material 
selected?
•	
Are there other benefits of the material besides insulation?
•	
How will the design of the building be airtight?
When making decisions regarding insulation, homeowners – and 
contractors – should also be aware of minimum insulation requirements 
of the respective provincial building code and ensure that these 
requirements are met, at the very minimum. Considerations must be 
made for roofs with and without attics, above grade and below grade 
(i.e. foundation) walls, and slabs where there is no basement.
Detailed information on the different types of insulation and their pros 
and cons can be found in the City of Vancouver’s Passive Design Toolkit 
for Homes.
Heat exits a non-insulated building 
quickly thus requiring more heating 
resources to keep a room comfortable
(Adapted from Passive Design Toolkit for 
Homes, City of Vancouver)
Insulated
Not insulated
11
Design strategies and structural 
improvements to your home
Passive design strategies
Passive design, climate adaptation design, or climate responsive design 
are defined as approaches to building design that use “…the building 
architecture to minimize energy consumption and improve thermal 
comfort” (City of Vancouver Passive Design Toolkit).
Proposed building code changes that relate to heat adaptation in new 
homes include lower U-value windows, air tightness testing, and 
continuous insulation.
New construction offers an opportunity for increasing the stock of heat 
resilient homes. Buildings that are designed to promote passive cooling 
and higher levels of thermal comfort are more likely to keep cool during 
summer power outages and extreme heat events, thereby reducing the 
risk of morbidity and mortality.
Recommendations presented here for reducing overheating of low-rise 
residential structures include building design, building materials, and 
landscaping approaches. While most of these measures can be 
implemented in both new and existing homes, passive cooling and 
thermal comfort is optimized when measures are integrated early in 	
the design process of a building.
Design strategies for passive cooling
Passive cooling design optimizes a house’s orientation, shape, glazing, 
and placement of glazing to limit overheating during heat waves and 
power outages. Decisions regarding the 
placement and size of windows can make 
houses more resilient towards extreme heat 
by both influencing the amount of glazing 
that is exposed to the sun, and promoting 
cross-ventilation inside the building 	 	
(see example). Placing windows on 	 	
opposite sides and at different heights of 	
the building promotes the flow of air 	
through the building.
Example of cross-ventilation
12
Materials used in new home construction 	
can also affect passive cooling. For example, 
double or triple glazed windows with low 
U-values, insulation in walls and roofs with 
higher R-values, and light or solar reflective 
building exteriors reduce risk of overheating 
and serve to reduce energy use. Reflective 
building exteriors may also help to reduce local 
urban heat island (UHI) effects.
Considerations when purchasing an existing house 
or planning for new home construction
Neighbourhoods/subdivisions and individual houses with the following 
features can reduce health risks associated with extreme heat:
•	
Gridded street patterns with longer blocks along the east/west 	
axis allow for more homes to face north or south and have 
neighbouring homes shade east and west exposures;
•	
Streets, open spaces and buildings can be planned in a manner that 
promotes radial ventilation;
•	
Wide roads with vegetated shoulders and medians and open linear 
parks of 100m or more in width can increase urban cooling during 
summer nights;
•	
Compact buildings in densely planned subdivisions are beneficial. 
For instance, buildings can benefit from shared shade (i.e. where 
buildings are situated in a manner that allows them to shade each 
other. Compact buildings also have fewer external walls that are 
exposed to the elements, minimizing heat gain/loss potential;
•	
Open floor plans in individual homes promote both cross 
ventilation and energy efficiency;
•	
Simple floor plans (square/rectangular), with few corners and 	
joints that tend to leak energy, are more efficient than complex 
floorplans;
Montreal, Quebec
In Montreal, the borough of 
Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie decided to 
revise its zoning by-law to mandate 
property owners that were replacing 
or building a new roof to install 
a green (vegetative) roof, a white 
roof, a highly reflective roof, or a 
combination of these different types. 
This initiative was implemented in 
an effort to mitigate the urban heat 
island effect in the City and has 
since been adopted by several other 
boroughs across the City.
13
•	
Kitchens should be located so as to avoid overheating (e.g. on the 
eastern and not western side of the building). Living spaces that are 
used predominately in the evening should be located on the 
western side of the building to take advantage of the evening sun. 
Bedrooms generally require less heat and can be located according 
to preference. Bedroom window size should be kept to a minimum 
and provide for the option of passive ventilation;
•	
Overhangs, like eaves, can help to minimize heat gain/loss, 
particularly for poorly oriented buildings that receive a great deal of 
direct sunlight on south, east and west exposures;
•	
In order to maximize the benefits of direct sunlight in winter, 		
the longest elevation of the building should be oriented towards 
the south;
•	
To minimize unwanted solar gain in the summer, designs should 
minimize window or wall area oriented east or west. East or 
west-facing windows should be limited in size and should be 
protected by overhangs or trees;
•	
A minimum 25 per cent cover by vegetation should be maintained 
on the property (excluding roof area) and, where possible, existing 
trees should be preserved before and during construction.
ICLR would like to acknowledge Lintack Architects Incorporated for assistance 
in reviewing this publication.
Richard F. Lintack, B.E.S., B. Arch., OAA, MRAIC, LEED® AP
Clayton U.H. Payer, M. ARCH., OAA, MRAIC
Sarah L. Brown, Dipl. Arch. – Senior Technologist
Example of a green roof
14
Protecting your home from 
extreme heat
A	 Leafy (deciduous) shade trees and 
other vegetation should be planted 
near windows, particularly on south, 
east and west-facing exposures.
B	 A minimum 25 per cent tree cover 
should be maintained on the property 
(excluding roof area).
C	 Windows and glass doors can be 
shaded with permanent design 
elements, like covered porches, 
awnings, brise-soleils, roof overhangs, 
and/or vertical or horizontal louvres.
D	 Products that can be used to shade 
windows may include insulated 
exterior roll shutters, exterior window 
screens, roll out awnings and heat 
control window films.
E	 Roofs (with or without attics), above 
and below grade (i.e. foundation) 
walls and slabs should be properly 
insulated.
F	
Good quality, energy efficient 
windows (double or, better, triple-
paned) with low U-Values should be 
installed.
G	 The number of windows used should 
be kept at a minimum and should be 
small, particularly on exposure sides 
(south, east and west).
H	 When replacing older roof covering 	
or choosing covering for an addition 
or new build, homeowners might 
consider installing a cool roof.
C
A
B
D
F
C
G
E
H
15
Measuring the risk of exposure 
of your home to extreme heat
Assign yourself the indicated number of points for each question. The fewer the 	
points you score, the more protected your family and property are against extreme heat. 
If a question does not apply to your home, assign a score of 0.
General
Does the area you live in experience 
many days that are hotter than 30°C?
No
Yes
5
20
Do you find that the interior of your 
home gets uncomfortably hot during 
high-heat days?
No
Yes
5
20
Landscaping
Do you have deciduous trees that shed 
leaves in winter, shading windows on 
south, east and west exposures?
No
Yes
20
5
Is your property landscaped with 
‘evergreen’ coniferous trees or hedges 
to provided a windbreak or filter 
against harsh winds, particularly in 
winter?
No
Yes
20
5
Does your property have a minimum 
25 per cent tree cover (excluding    
roof area)?
No
Yes
20
5
Windows
Are your windows single, double or 
triple-paned glass?
Single
Double
Triple
20
10
5
Do none, some, or all of your windows 
open for improved ventilation?
None
Some
All
20
10
5
16
Window shading
Are none, some or all of your 
windows (particularly on south, east 
and west exposures) shaded, either 
with permanent fixtures (e.g. covered 
porches, brise-soleils, louvres) or other 
products (eg. exterior roll shutters, 
exterior screens, roll out awnings, 
window films)?
None
Some
All
20
10
5
Lighting
Is the interior of your home  
adequately lit by natural light during 
daylight hours?
No
Yes
20
5
Roofing
Does your home have a ‘cool roof’ or 
a green roof?
No
Yes
20
5
Insulation
Is the insulation in your exterior walls 
and attic adequate to control heat 
gain/loss in your home?
No
Yes
20
5
My total risk score is
Low 21 or less, Moderate 21-29
High 30-35, Extreme 35 or more
17
Important contact information
Insurance company
Address	
	
Postal code
Telephone	
Alternative telephone
E-mail	
Website
Contact person 	
Contact person
Insurance broker or agent
Address	
	
Postal code
Telephone	
Alternative telephone
E-mail	
Website
Contact person 	
Contact person
Municipal government
Address	
	
Postal code
Telephone	
Alternative telephone
E-mail	
Website
Contact person 	
Contact person
Contractor
Address	
	
Postal code
Telephone	
Alternative telephone
E-mail	
Website
Contact person 	
Contact person
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Institut de prévention des sinistres catastrophiques
Toronto office 
20 Richmond Street East
Suite 210
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
M5C 2R9
416-364-8677
416-364-5889
info@iclr.org
www.iclr.org
www.PIEVC.ca
youtube.com/iclrinfo
twitter.com/iclrcanada 
facebook.com/instituteforcatastrophiclossreduction
Search: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR)
London office
Western University 
Amit Chakma Building, Suite 4405
1151 Richmond Street
London, Ontario, Canada
N6A 5B9
519-661-3234
519-661-4273
With Federal funding support through Natural Resources
Canada’s Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Program.
Natural Resources	
Ressources naturelles
Canada	
Canada
