FireSmart, Intelli-feu and other associated Marks are trademarks of the Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre (CIFFC).
FIRESMART
BEGINS AT 
HOME GUIDE
Designed for safer living®
Designed for safer living® is a program 
endorsed by Canada’s insurers to promote 
disaster-resilient homes.
Protect your home from
Wildfire
TM
About the Institute
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR), established in 1997, 
is a world-class centre for multidisciplinary disaster prevention research 
and communication. ICLR is an independent, not-for-profit research 
institute founded by the insurance industry and affiliated with 	
Western University.
The Institute’s mission is to reduce the loss of life and property caused 
by severe weather and earthquakes through the identification and 
support of sustained actions that improve society’s capacity to adapt to, 
anticipate, mitigate, withstand and recover from natural disasters.
ICLR’s mandate is to confront the alarming increase in disaster losses 
caused by natural hazards and to work to reduce disaster deaths, 
injuries and property damage. Disaster damage has been doubling 
every five to seven years since the 1960s, an alarming trend. 	
The greatest tragedy is that many disaster losses are preventable. 
ICLR is committed to the development and communication of disaster 
prevention knowledge. For the individual homeowner, this translates 
into the identification of natural hazards that threaten them and their 
home. The Institute further informs individual homeowners about 	
steps that can be taken to better protect their family and their home.
The purpose of this handbook is to outline actions that homeowners 
can take to protect their homes from wildfire damage. Some of these 
measures are simple and free; others cost money. All contribute to 
reducing the risk of wildfire damage.
Published by: The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Waiver: ICLR accepts no responsibility of liability for:
•	 any loss or damage that any person may sustain as a result of the information in, or anything done or 
omitted in reliance on, this pamphlet; and
• 	any personal injury or bodily injury, including death, and any loss or damage caused by hail to insured or 
uninsured structures and/or property as a result of actions outlined in this document.
Copyright ® 2024 The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
To find out more about CIFFC and FireSmart
TM contact:
general@firesmartcanada.ca
Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre Inc. assumes no responsibility or liability 
and expressly disclaims responsibility or liability for any loss or damage that any 
person may sustain as a result of the information in, or anything done or omitted in 
reliance on this pamphlet; and any personal injury or bodily injury, including death, 
and any loss or damage caused by a wildland fire to insured or uninsured structures 
and/or property where FireSmart principles have been applied.
Wildland fires are a natural part of our ecosystems. Without them, 
the landscape loses its diversity. Wildland fires recycle nutrients, 	
help plants reproduce, and create a mosaic of vegetation that 
provide habitats for a variety of wildlife. 
By extending our lifestyles and communities further into forested 
areas, also referred to as the Wildland Urban Interface, we become 
more exposed to the danger of wildland fire, and this may put your 
home at risk. It is possible, however, to live safely with this natural 
event! The recommendations in this guide will help you reduce 	
the risk of wildland fire to your home and neighbourhood.
Wildland fire reality
2
3
The Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) is the area where 
human development meets or intermingles with the 
natural environment. Over time, our communities and 
lifestyles increasingly extend further into forested areas. 
As such, we find interface communities all over Canada in 
both remote rural locations, and in urban centres. 	
When we live, work, and play in WUI zones, we become 
more exposed to the danger of wildland fire, but it is 
possible to live safely with this natural event.
Wildland urban interface
4
Wildland fuels and built fuels all have different burning 
characteristics. When combined, they create uniquely 
complex conditions that affect the ignition and spread of 
fire that are very different than the conditions created by an 
isolated structural or wildland fires. This is called the WUI 
fuel complex. By understanding the complexities of these 
combined fuels, along with considering the topographic 
and weather conditions that affect the combustibility of 
these fuels, we can better appreciate the unique and often 
overwhelming challenges that a WUI fire presents, especially 
when it comes to suppression attempts.
5
Understanding fire behaviour
Fire + Fuel = Why homes burn
FireSmart-mitigated property
Unmitigated property
Fuels include trees, woodpiles, 
structures, fences, plants, etc.
6
How wildland fires spread
Embers & sparks
Embers and sparks can blow up to two 
kilometres ahead of a wildland fire. 
They can ignite materials on or near 
your home causing severe damage.
Extreme heat
Radiant heat from a wildland fire can 
melt vinyl siding, ignite your home, 
and even break windows. Extreme 
heat can come from flames within 		
30 metres of your home.
Direct flame
As wildland fires spread toward 
homes, they ignite other flammable 
objects in their path. To stop wildland 
fire from directly affecting your home, 
create breaks in this path, especially 
close to your home.
7
Factors influencing the spread 
of wildland fire
Dense continuous forests 
Wildland fire can spread quickly in forests where trees are 	
near each other. Fire spreads directly from tree to tree, and can 
produce sparks and embers that may travel distances of two 
kilometres. These embers may land on trees or homes well 
ahead of the fire and create multiple fire situations. It is 
important to be aware of the dangers of sparks and embers 
when creating a FireSmart property.
TREE-TO-TREE
IGNITION
FINE FUELS GENERATE
HEAT & EMBERS
FLAMES TRAVEL
QUICKLY
8
Slope
Fire moves fastest uphill. The steeper the slope, the faster 
a wildland fire will spread. Homes on hills, or at the top of 
hills, face the greatest risk from wildland fire. If your home is 
located on a hill, consider taking extra measures, like removing 
trees adjacent to the slope and planting fire resistant plants. 
If you are planning to build a new home, consider having it 
set back at least 10 metres from the crest of any hill or slope, 
as well as the landscaping around it. Maintain a 1.5 metre 
non-combustible surface in the Immediate Zone, including any 
attachments, such as decks.
FIRE TRAVELS
FASTEST UPHILL
Coniferous trees are highly 
flammable.
Deciduous trees are less 
flammable.
9
How FireSmart treatments 
influence the spread of 
wildland fire
Wildland fire can follow a path from the 
forest or grassland to your home. A wildland 
fire moving via the tops of trees can be 
slowed if the trees are spaced. It can be 
further slowed by flame-resistant plants and 
shrubs in your yard. As plants have different 
flammability, consider spacing your plants to 
increase your home’s ability to withstand a 
wildland fire.
10
Yard spacing
Intermediate zone
1.5 m to 10 m
Immediate zone
0 m to 1.5 m
Changes within 10 metres of your home will have the biggest impact.
Tree spacing
Spacing trees at least 3 metres 
apart will help reduce the 
intensity of a wildland fire.
Prune trees 
Prune all tree branches within 	
2 metres from the ground.
3 m
2 m
11
HOME 
IGNITION
ZONE
Extended zone
10 m to 30 m
Intermediate zone
1.5 m to 10 m
Immediate zone
0 m to 1.5 m
12
The Home Ignition Zone (HIZ) is the area within 30 metres of your home 
and structures. It is made up of three priority areas: The Immediate Zone, 
Intermediate Zone, and Extended Zone.
The HIZ shows how you can minimize your home and property’s vulnerability 
to wildland fire by addressing threats in each of the three priority zones, 
starting with the most vulnerable area, the Immediate Zone,
and working your way outward.
13
Begin your FireSmart journey
Each section of this guide will help you to focus on the changes 
that protect your home from wildland fire. Start from your home 
and work your way outward. Changes made to the area closest 
to your home, and your home itself, have the greatest impact in 
reducing your risk of wildland fire damage.
Intermediate zone
1.5 m to 10 m
Immediate zone
0 m to 1.5 m
A minimum 1.5 metre non-combustible 
surface should extend around the 	
entire home and any attachments, 	
such as decks.
This should be a fire-resistant area, 
free of all materials that could easily 
ignite from a wildland fire.
14
Extended zone
10 m to 30 m
Making the most of your time
Home renovations and upgrades can be costly and time-
consuming. FireSmart principles focus on what is realistic for 
you to achieve to limit the risk of wildland fire to your home. 
Integrate FireSmart into your long-term renovation plans and 
incorporate regular yard cleanup to reduce your risk of damage 
from wildland fire.
Thin and prune evergreen trees to reduce 
hazards in this zone. Regularly remove 
accumulations of fallen branches, and 
dry grass/needles to eliminate potential 
surface fuels.
Look for opportunities to create a fire 
break by creating space between trees 
and vegetation. Thinning and pruning 
is effective here as well. These actions 
will help reduce the intensity of a 
wildland fire.
15
The Immediate Zone is a non-combustible area that starts at 
the house and extends to a 1.5 metre perimeter around the 
home and attached structures, including decks. Reduce the 
chance of wind-blown embers igniting your home by starting 
with proactive measures outlined in this guide.
Immediate zone
0 m to 1.5 m
Roof
Material
A Class-A fire-rated roof assembly 	
offers the best protection. Metal, 
asphalt, clay, and composite rubber 
tiles are all options. Untreated wood 
shakes create a dangerous combination 
of combustible material and crevices 
for embers or sparks to enter. Refer to 
manufacturers’ guidelines to maintain 
the fire resistance of your roof.
Maintenance
Every inside-corner of your roof is a 
place where debris and embers can 
collect. Regularly clean your roof of 
combustible materials.
Windows
Tempered or thermal (multi-paned) 
windows are recommended. Single-
pane windows provide little resistance 
to heat from an advancing wildland fire.
Doors
All doors into your home should be 
fire-rated and have a good seal. This is 
true for your garage doors, as well as 
entry doors.
16
Chimney
A spark arrestor on your chimney will 
reduce the chance of sparks and embers 
from escaping and starting fires.
Gutters
Regularly remove debris from your 
gutters, as sparks and embers can easily 
ignite these dry materials. Consider 
screening your gutters with metal mesh 
to reduce debris that can accumulate.
Eaves and vents
While vents play an important role in 
removing moisture from attics, they 
create an opening for sparks and 
embers. Install vents made of non-
combustible material with 3 millimetre 
screening, or ASTM fire-rated vents. 
Open eaves also create a surface for 
embers and direct heat. Properly fitted 
soffits and fascia help to reduce the risk 
of embers and heat from reaching the 
wooden rafters of your home. 
Siding
Stucco, metal, brick, concrete, and 
fiber cement siding offer superior fire 
resistance. Logs and heavy timbers are 
also reasonably effective. Untreated 
wood and vinyl siding offer very little 
protection against wildland fire. 
Ground-to-siding 	 	
clearance
Siding is vulnerable when it ignites 
and when flames or embers get into 
the cavity behind it. With inadequate 
ground-to-siding clearance, accumulated 
embers can ignite combustible siding 
directly. 15 centimetres of ground-to-
siding non-combustible clearance is 
recommended.
Decks
It is important to sheathe-in the base 
of decks, balconies, and houses, as 
embers and sparks can collect under 
these spaces. Use fire-resistant material 
to reduce the risk of sparks and embers 
from igniting your home.
Other
Attachments to your home
Wooden fences or boardwalks create a 
direct path from the fire to your home. 
Separating your house from a wooden 
fence with a metal gate can slow the 
advance of fire. Remember to cut the 
grass along your fence line, as long, dry 
grass easily ignites.
Sheds and outbuildings
Give sheds and outbuildings the same 
FireSmart considerations as you do for 
your home. 
17
Implementing FireSmart principles to your regular 
yard work routine will make a big impact in reducing 
your risk to wildland fire. Measures taken within 	
10 metres of your home will have the biggest impact.
Fire embers may seem small, but should not be 
underestimated. An estimated 90% of homes 
damaged or destroyed by wildland fire are ignited 
by sparks and embers. Regular maintenance and 
cleaning in the corners and crevices of your home 
and yard where needles and debris build up will 
leave nothing for embers to ignite. Remember to 
remove any windblown leaves under decks, as well 
as any flammable debris from balconies, and patios. 
Maintain a 1.5 metre non-combustible surface around 
your home and any attachments, like decks.
YOUR YARD
Intermediate zone
1.5 m to 10 m
Elements in the Intermediate Zone are managed so they don’t 
transmit fire to your home. There are many actions you can take 
to reduce your home’s vulnerability in the Intermediate Zone.
18
A FireSmart yard includes making smart choices for your plants, shrubs, 
grass, and mulch. Selecting fire-resistant plants and materials can increase 
the likelihood of your home surviving a wildland fire.
Plant low-density, fire-resistant plants and shrubs. Avoid having any woody 
debris, including mulch, as it provides potential places for fires to start. 
Make sure that you maintain a 1.5 metre non-combustible zone around 
your entire home and any attachments.
Landscaping within 10 metres
•	
Moist, supple leaves
•	
Accumulates minimal dead 
vegetation
•	
Water-like sap with little odour
•	
Low amount of sap or resin 
material
Characteristics of 	
fire-resistant plants
•	
Leaves or needles are aromatic
•	
Accumulates fine, dry, dead 
material
•	
Contains resin or oils
•	
Loose, papery, or flaky bark
Characteristics of 
highly flammable plants
•	
Cedar
•	
Juniper
•	
Pine
•	
Tall grass
•	
Spruce
Plants to avoid
A mowed lawn is a fire-resistant lawn. 
Grasses shorter than 10 centimetres in 
height are less likely to burn intensely.
Grass
Bark mulches are
highly flammable.
Firewood piles should be stored at 
least 10 metres from your home. 
19
Bark mulch and 
pine needles 
Do not use bark or pine needle 
mulches within 10 metres of your 
home, as they are highly combustible. 
Gravel mulch and decorative crushed 
rock mulch significantly reduce the 
risk of wildland fire. 
Firewood piles 
Wood piled against a house is a major 
fire hazard. Moving your firewood 
pile may be the factor that allows 
your home to survive a wildland fire. 
Move firewood piles to the Extended 
Zone (10 – 30 metres from your 
home), or into a FireSmart-mitigated 
building.
Burn barrels and fire pits 
Burn barrels should be placed as far as 
possible from structures and trees. 	
Keep the area within 3 metres of the 
burn barrel free of combustible material. 
Always ensure that your burn barrel has 
proper ventilation and is screened with 	
6 millimetre or finer wire mesh.
Check with your local municipality 
regarding specific requirements and 
restrictions for backyard fire pits.
Fire permits for both burn barrels and 	
fire pits are required in many 
jurisdictions.
On-site fire tools
Every home should have readily 
accessible shovels, rakes, axes, garden 
hoses, sprinklers, and ladders to assist 
in suppressing wildland fires.
Power lines
Power lines should be clear of 
branches and other vegetation. 
Contact your local utility company 
to discuss removing any branches or 
vegetation around overhead 	
electrical installations.
6 mm or finer wire mesh
3 m
20
Include debris clean-up in spring and fall as part of your yard maintenance.
Dry leaves, twigs, and branches are flammable and should be removed from 
your yard and gutters.
Older deciduous trees can have rot and damage that make them susceptible 
to wildland fire. An arborist or forester can help assess the condition of 
mature trees.
Remove combustible shrubs from the drip line of trees.
Maintenance
Remove debris easily ignited 
by sparks and embers.
21
Trees to plant 
Deciduous trees (leafy) are resistant to 
wildland fire and include:
•	
Poplar
•	
Birch
•	
Aspen
•	
Cottonwood
•	
Maple
•	
Alder
•	
Ash
•	
Cherry
Trees to avoid 
Coniferous trees (with cones and needles) 
are highly flammable and should not be 
situated within 10 metres of your home. 
These include:
•	
Spruce
•	
Fir
•	
Pine
•	
Cedar
A FireSmart yard can include trees. We often choose 
to live surrounded by the natural environment, and 
trees are a cherished part of our relationship with 
nature. By following the recommendations in this 
guide, you can have a lush, green yard that is also 
resistant to wildland fire.
Trees
22
The goal in the Extended Zone is not to eliminate fire, but to reduce 
its intensity. If your property extends into this zone, there are many 
proactive measures you can take.
3 m
Coniferous tree spacing 
Because coniferous trees are particularly flammable, it is important to measure 
the distance between the outermost branches of these trees. There should be a 
minimum of 3 metres between them.
Tree-to-tree spacing 
Once fire moves into the treetops, it can easily move into neighbouring trees and 
increase the overall intensity of the fire. Spacing trees at least 3 metres apart will 
reduce the risk of this happening.
3 m
Extended zone
10 m to 30 m
23
Prune branches within 	
2 metres from the ground.
When to prune 
You can prune dead branches at any time of year, but it is best to prune coniferous 
trees in late winter when they are dormant.
How to prune 
Prune branches close to the tree trunk, 
but not so close that you damage the 
main trunk and bark of the tree.
Never remove more than 1⁄3 of the 
canopy of a tree. Doing so may harm it.
Tree pruning 
A surface fire can climb trees quickly. Removing all branches within 2 metres 	
from the ground will help stop surface fires from moving into the treetops.
Pruning all trees within 30 metres of your home is recommended. If possible, 	
prune all trees within 100 metres of your home.
Second cut
First cut
Final cut
24
Taking FireSmart actions beyond 30 metres from your home will influence how a 
wildland fire approaches your home. You can change the dynamics of wildland fire 
behaviour by manipulating vegetation in this space. FireSmart treatments within the 
Immediate, Intermediate, and Extended Zones can influence the amount of work 
necessary beyond 30 metres.
Just as in the other zones, slope is a consideration. If your home is on a slope, 
consider extending this area further, as fire moves fastest uphill. Factor in slope 
stability when removing trees.
The goal in this area is to reduce the intensity and rate of spread of a wildland 
fire. This is done by thinning and pruning coniferous trees and reducing excess 
vegetation and branches.
•  	
Remove low-hanging branches within 2 metres from the ground.
•  	
Space trees 3 metres from branch tips to reduce the intensity and rate of 
spread of fire.
•  	
Remove smaller evergreen trees that can act as a ladder for fire to 	           
move into the treetops.
•  	
Clean woody debris and combustible shrubs from the ground.
Large yards
30 m+
In an emergency, you and your family may need to leave your neighbourhood 
while emergency responders enter. In order for this to happen safely and efficiently, 
consider the following tips:
•  	
Clearly mark your address.
•  	
Clear vegetation from access routes to and from your home. Target trees and 
branches that would make it difficult for a fire truck to approach your home.
•  	
If you have a large property, make sure your driveway has a spot to turn 
around and, when possible, provide two access routes to your home.
Roadways and driveways
25
Many of the recommendations in this guide assume that 
you have direct control over the property within 30 metres 
of your home. Even if that is not the case, FireSmart 
recommendations still apply. Chat with your neighbours 
about FireSmart. Shared information, along with mutual 
cooperation and planning can help.
The FireSmart Canada Neighbourhood Recognition 
Program recognizes neighbourhoods that:
•	
Complete a neighbourhood hazard assessment and 
create a FireSmart plan
•	
Organize a local FireSmart committee
•	
Work with a Local FireSmart Representative to host a 
FireSmart event, like a clean-up day
•	
Contribute in-kind or provide monetary support 
toward FireSmart actions
Concerned about your community’s risk to wildland fire? 
Ask your elected official, planning department, or fire service 
about how they are integrating FireSmart into their plans.
www.firesmartcanada.ca
FireSmart in your neighbourhood
THERE’S MORE!
Learn about all our programs and resources online
26
HOME IGNITION ZONE
SELF-ASSESSMENT
How resilient to wildland fire is your home and property? Walk 
around your home and answer the questions below. Then consider 
implementing the recommended actions as you perform maintenance 
and renovations in each of the three Home Ignition Zones.
Immediate zone
0 m to 1.5 m
The Immediate Zone should be a non-combustible area that starts at the 
house and extends to a 1.5 metre perimeter around the home and any 
attachments. Treat outbuildings to the same standards as your home.
NO
1.  Does the structure have acceptable fire-rated roofing material? 
A Class-A fire-rated roof assembly offers the best protection. Metal, 
asphalt, clay, and composite rubber tiles are all options. Untreated 
wood shakes create a dangerous combination of combustible material 
and crevices for embers or sparks to accumulate and enter. Refer to 
manufacturers’ guidelines to maintain the fire resistance of your roof.
YES
Extended zone
10 m to 30 m 
Intermediate zone
1.5 m to 10 m
Immediate zone 
0 m to 1.5 m
27
NO
2.  Are the roof and gutters non-combustible and clean of debris?
Every inside-corner of your roof is a place where debris and embers 
can collect. Regularly check and clean combustible debris, like needles 
and leaves, from the roof and gutters. Consider installing commercial 
screens or covers over gutters to reduce debris accumulation.
YES
NO
3.  Are the eaves enclosed?
Open eaves create a surface for embers and radiant heat. Consider 
enclosing eaves with properly fitted soffits and fascia to reduce the risk 
of embers and heat from reaching the wooden rafters of your home.
YES
NO
4.  Are the vents non-combustible and screened?
Unscreened vents can allow embers to enter a building. With the 
exception of dryer vents, install non-combustible vents with 3 mm 
metal screening in order to limit embers from accessing your home. 
Ensure dryer vents are clean and operational.
YES
NO
5.  Is exterior siding non-combustible or ignition-resistant?
Some types of construction material, like vinyl siding, can melt when 
exposed to high temperatures allowing the fire to reach the 	
underlying wall components and penetrate the interior of the building. 
Stucco, metal, brick, concrete, and fibre cement siding offer superior 
fire resistance.
YES
NO
7.  Are windows multi-pane or tempered glass?
Single pane glass windows are highly vulnerable to breakage 	
from radiant heat exposures that can occur during wildland fires. 
Multi-pane windows are less vulnerable and tempered glass windows 
are least vulnerable.
YES
NO
6.  Is exterior siding free of gaps, holes, or other areas where 
embers can accumulate?
Examine your siding for locations where embers could accumulate or 
lodge. Be sure to fix any holes and gaps in exterior siding in order to 
prevent embers from igniting your home.
YES
28
NO
8.  Are exterior doors non-combustible, or fire-rated?
All doors into your home should be fire-rated, or non-combustible 
and have a good seal. This is also true for garage doors.
YES
NO
9.  Are exterior walls protected with a minimum 15 cm vertical 
non-combustible ground-to-siding clearance?
Creating a non-combustible vertical ground-to-siding clearance 
can be achieved by lowering the level of the ground to expose the 
foundation walls. It can also be achieved by replacing the first 	
15 cm of combustible siding with non-combustible siding material 
or flashing. This will limit the risk of siding igniting as a result of 
ember accumulation at the base of the building. 
YES
NO
10.  Is the deck/porch enclosed?
Consider enclosing the underside of the deck or porch with non-
combustible sheathing, as this will act as a shield against embers. 
Moving combustible materials stored underneath the deck to the 
Extended Zone, or storing inside a FireSmart-mitigated building, will 
limit potential for those materials to ignite.
YES
NO
11.  Is the deck/porch made with fire-rated materials?
Non-combustible, or fire-rated deck or porch materials are ideal 
when it comes to reducing your wildland fire risk. A non-combustible 
surface should be under the deck and extend for 1.5 metres out from 
its perimeter.
YES
NO
12.  Are there combustible materials and landscaping products 
immediately surrounding your home? 
Reduce the chance of wind-blown embers igniting materials near your 
home. A non-combustible surface should extend around the structure 
and any attachments such as decks. Creating a non-combustible 
surface can be as easy as clearing flammable materials and vegetation. 
No grass or plants of any type should be present in this zone.
YES
Extended zone
10 m to 30 m 
Intermediate zone
1.5 m to 10 m
Immediate zone 
0 m to 1.5 m
29
Intermediate zone
1.5 m to 10 m
1.  Is the lawn cut to a length of 10 cm or less?
Mowing and maintaining the lawn to a height of 10 cm or less will 
limit flame intensity and/or spread.
YES
NO
Elements in the Intermediate Zone are managed so they don’t transmit fire 
to your home.
NO
2.  Is the yard free of combustible debris?
Regularly remove accumulations of combustible debris like needles, 
leaves, and branches. Ensure that all combustible materials, like 
woodpiles, building materials, patio furniture, recreation vehicles etc., 
are moved into the Extended Zone, or a FireSmart-mitigated building.
YES
NO
3.  Are garden beds lined with crushed rock/decorative gravel?
Organic mulch like bark or pine needles are highly combustible. 
Crushed rock or decorative gravel significantly reduce the risk of 
damage from wildland fire.
YES
NO
4.  Does landscaping include fire-resistant plants?
Create a landscape that will not easily transmit fire to your home. 
Selecting fire-resistant plants can increase the likelihood of your home 
surviving a wildland fire. 
YES
NO
5.  Are coniferous trees pruned to a height of 2 metres?
A surface fire can climb trees quickly. Removing all coniferous branches 
within 2 metres from the ground will help stop surface fires from 
moving into the treetops.
YES
NO
6.  Are coniferous trees spaced at least 3 metres apart? 
Spacing coniferous trees at least 3 metres apart from crown-to-crown 
will reduce the risk of tree-to-tree fire transmission.
YES
30
NO
1.  Are all firewood piles and other combustible materials located 
within the Extended Zone?
Firewood and combustibles are major fire hazards. Moving all 
combustible material into the Extended Zone, or into a FireSmart-
mitigated building, is critical to reducing wildland fire risk.
YES
Extended zone
10 m to 30 m
The focus in the Extended Zone is not to eliminate fire, but to reduce its intensity.
What’s next?
NO
2.  Are coniferous trees pruned to a height of 2 metres?
A surface fire can climb trees quickly. Removing all coniferous branches 
within 2 metres from the ground will help stop surface fires from 
moving into the treetops.
YES
NO
3.  Are coniferous trees spaced at least 3 metres apart? 
Spacing coniferous trees at least 3 metres apart from crown-to-crown 
will reduce the risk of tree-to-tree fire transmission.
YES
NO
4. Have accumulations of fallen branches, dry grass, and needles on 
the ground been removed?
Cleaning up accumulations of fallen branches, dry grass, and needles 
will reduce potential surface fuels.
YES
The Home Ignition Zone Self-Assessment is a great step to help you on the 
path to wildland fire resiliency, but there are many factors that can influence 
your level of preparedness! So, what else can you do to be prepared?
Take FireSmart 101, our free online course, for a deeper dive into FireSmart 
and how homes ignite.
Create an evacuation plan. Find the Last–Minute Checklist on our website.
Contact your FireSmart Liaison or Local Program Coordinator for a 
professional assessment of your home or neighbourhood. 
Reach out to general@firesmartcanada.ca with any questions.
31
Toronto office 
30-34 Duncan Street
Toronto, Ontario
M5V 2C3
T	 416-364-8677
London office
Western University 
Amit Chakma Building, Suite 4405
1151 Richmond Street
London, Ontario, Canada
N6A 5B9
T	 519-661-3234
F	 519-661-4273
With Federal funding support through Natural Resources
Canada’s Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Program.
Natural Resources	
Ressources naturelles
Canada	
Canada
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Institut de prévention des sinistres catastrophiques
info@iclr.org
www.iclr.org
www.PIEVC.ca
youtube.com/iclrinfo 
twitter.com/iclrcanada 
facebook.com/instituteforcatastrophiclossreduction
Search: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR)
