TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 1 of 39 
REPORT FOR ACTION 
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 
Date:  November 19, 2021 
To:  Infrastructure & Environment Committee 
From:  Deputy City Manager, Corporate Services 
Wards:  All 
 
SUMMARY 
 
The climate crisis grows more urgent every year. The window to make significant and 
lasting change is disappearing.  Action must happen immediately and it must be at the 
necessary scale required to respond to this crisis.      
 
In 2017, TransformTO was unanimously approved by City Council demonstrating 
Toronto’s commitment to a global call for action to limit global temperature rise in line 
with international goals. Since 2017, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) has shown that to limit global temperature rise to below 1.5 degrees Celsius, 
cities globally need to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 and halve global emissions by 
2030.  
 
City Council’s 2019 declaration of a global climate emergency shifts Toronto’s focus to 
align with the IPCC's recommended pathway - net zero by 2050 or sooner. 
 
This Report recommends that Toronto adopt a new net zero by 2040 goal.  By doing so, 
Toronto will ensure alignment with the 2030 trajectory to meet the necessary scientific-
based commitments to keep the planet's temperature habitable. 
 
Technical modelling of Toronto's net zero pathway shows us that in order to reach net 
zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050 or sooner, Toronto must first be on the 
correct trajectory for achieving its 2030 City Council adopted goal of 65 per cent 
emissions reduction from 1990 levels. Without aligning our action and implementation to 
that steeper trajectory, net zero by 2040 or 2050 will be out of reach.  
 
The City is taking action to tackle Toronto's emissions through established programs 
and major policy achievement such as the Net Zero Existing Building Strategy, Net Zero 
Carbon Plan for City-owned buildings, an update to the Toronto Green Standard, the 
Electric Vehicle Strategy, advancing the City's Cycling Plan, and greening City and TTC 
fleets. Steady progress has been made to reduce emissions in recent years and 
community-wide GHG emissions have decreased since 1990. Toronto is on track to 
achieve its 2020 GHG emissions target of a 30 per cent reduction from 1990 levels.  
Despite population growth, community-wide emissions continue to decline while 
Toronto's gross domestic product (GDP) rises. The decrease in GHG emissions in 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 2 of 39 
recent years can be attributed to a less carbon intensive electricity grid and lower 
transportation emissions from gasoline and diesel fuels.   
 
Toronto's current 2019 greenhouse gas inventory shows that our emissions are 
currently tracking on the trajectory of an 80 per cent reduction by 2050, from 1990 
levels, however, emissions have not decreased fast enough in recent years.  Data 
shows that acting incrementally will not be enough to put us on the net zero trajectory. 
Rapid action to scale up existing programs, additional authorities for the City of Toronto 
(City) to implement nimbly and effectively, significant levels of investment and 
coordinated action with other levels of government will be needed to match City 
Council's ambition.  
 
TransformTO Net Zero Framework 
The TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report approach is presented in 
the following parts:  
 
• This staff report outlines the rationale, roles and opportunities needed for successful 
delivery on climate action, and presents an overview of the actions the City will take 
to reach the 2030 interim targets 
• Attachment A is the TransformTO Net Zero Strategy Short-Term Implementation 
Plan 2022 to 2025. 
• Attachment B is the TransformTO Net Zero Strategy, which includes the rationale 
behind the net zero pathway and opportunities needed to successfully reach the net 
zero target. 
• Attachment C is the TransformTO Net Zero Framework Technical Report, which 
provides details on the pathway and specific actions that can be taken by the City, 
other governments, residents, and businesses. 
• Attachment D provides highlights of Toronto's programs that are reducing emissions. 
• Attachment E provides a summary of public and stakeholder consultations from 
2018 to 2021 that have supported the development of this strategy and actions. 
• Attachment F responds to a City Council request on the impact of small engine law 
and garden equipment. 
 
Achieving net zero is not simply a technology solution. The combination of attentive 
urban design, city planning, active transportation, and transit systems, changes in 
consumptive behaviour and supportive net zero consumer choices, will all need to work 
in step to cumulatively increase the efficiencies of corresponding urban systems. 
 
No municipal government has the legislative tools or fiscal capacity to achieve 
ambitious targets on its own. Reaching net zero by 2040 will require additional authority 
or action from other levels of government, the private sector, and resident action. For 
example, the City of Toronto does not regulate electric vehicle sales targets, but the City 
can enable uptake through providing charging infrastructure. Similarly, implementation 
of the Existing Buildings Strategy to retrofit homes and buildings will require additional 
legal authority to set performance standards from the provincial government. 
 
The Net Zero Strategy presents a set of 2030 interim targets for community-wide 
emissions as well as City of Toronto corporate targets to demonstrate leadership by 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 3 of 39 
example. These targets are designed to reduce emissions by 6.8Mt in the next eight 
years. This is equivalent to about 2 million cars off the road.  The 2030 targets 
presented in the Strategy are: 
 
1. 100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built to be near zero greenhouse 
gas emissions;  
2. 50 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from existing buildings, from 
2008 levels; this means that approximately 100,000 buildings must be retrofitted in 
the next 8 years, or approximately 12,500 buildings per year; 
3. 50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from renewable or low-carbon 
sources; this will mean that approximately 35 million MWh of energy will need to be 
sourced from renewable or low carbon sources 
4. 25 per cent of commercial and industrial floor area is connected to low carbon 
thermal energy sources 
5. 75 per cent of school/work trips under 5km are walked, biked or by transit 
6. 30 per cent of registered vehicles in Toronto will be electric; this means that by 
2030, an estimated 332,000 vehicles will need to be electric 
7. Identify pathways to more sustainable consumption in City of Toronto operations 
and in Toronto's economy 
8. 70 per cent residential waste diversion from the City of Toronto’s Integrated 
Waste Management System  
9. Reduce corporate emissions by 65 per cent, over 2008 levels, to demonstrate 
leading by example; this will mean that approximately 330 kt of emissions will need 
to be reduced cross-corporately 
 
Achieving these 2030 targets requires action now. A summary of thirty (30) near-term 
actions to be implemented between 2022 and 2025 are listed below. More detailed 
descriptions of each action including their timeline for report back is included in the 
TransformTO Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025 (Attachment A) and in the 
Net Zero Strategy (Attachment B). 
 
Meeting Targets 
Achieving the targets in the Net Zero Strategy will not just be the work of the City 
government. The City of Toronto Corporation can control only a small portion of 
Toronto's community-wide emissions directly -- nearly 5 per cent according to recent 
greenhouse gas inventories. 
 
However, the City plays a clear role in defining the ways we build, travel, and consume 
and when policies are effectively implemented and programs are easily accessed to 
realize maximum uptake and engagement, our municipal government can have a 
greater impact on the community's emissions.   
 
In order to meet the 2030 targets, the City will use its influence to regulate, advocate 
and facilitate rapid transformation in five critical steps: 
 
• Demonstrate carbon accountability locally and globally by establishing a 
carbon budget – Leading by example, the City will establish a carbon budget to 
track climate actions against annual emission limits to drive accountability. The City's 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 4 of 39 
actions will be measured against these limits each year until net zero is achieved, 
with any gaps in action identified and solutions proposed so we stay on course.  
 
• Accelerate a rapid and significant reduction in natural gas use – Toronto will 
take further action to limit the use of natural gas.  Natural gas use for water and 
space heating represents over half of Toronto’s total greenhouse gas emissions. In 
addition to new buildings eliminating natural gas use through the Toronto Green 
Standard, the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy articulates ambitious targets to 
replace conventional heating systems with more efficient electric heat pumps 
drawing from a green provincial electricity grid.  
 
• Establish performance targets for existing buildings – Toronto will establish 
mandatory emissions performance reporting, disclosure, and emissions performance 
targets for buildings so we can better understand and limit emissions from our 
homes and buildings. These mandatory targets will be preceded by voluntary 
targets. Catalyzing the electrification of building heating systems, as a preferred 
alternative to the use of fossil-fuel heating systems, will be key. 
 
• Increase access to low carbon transportation options, including walking, 
biking, public transit and electric vehicles – Toronto will increase the use of 
active and public transportation reduces greenhouse gas emissions, energy use and 
congestion while promoting equity and health benefits. The City will also advance 
options to incentivize electric vehicle adoption and disincentivize the use of carbon-
polluting gasoline and diesel vehicles, through supporting the transition to electric 
vehicles.  
 
• Increase local renewable energy to contribute to a resilient, carbon-free grid – 
Toronto will work in step with Toronto Hydro to successfully support the growth and 
prosperity of the city through reliable, uninterrupted electric service provision.  By 
increasing opportunities for local renewable generation to be located within the City's 
boundary, Toronto will be more resilient and will contribute to a decarbonized 
provincial electricity grid. 
 
Although these five steps will put the community on the correct path to 2030, it is critical 
that these steps be sustained through to the year 2040 in order to achieve net zero 
emissions by 2040.  Technical modelling suggests that if every single resident, 
business, non-commercial institution, industry and the City of Toronto government itself 
was enabled to choose net zero choices now, 2040 is achievable.  
 
Summary of Short Term Implementation Plan Actions (2022-2025) 
100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built to be near zero 
greenhouse gas emissions, by 2030 
1 
Ensure near zero emissions for all new construction 
2 
Evaluate and limit impacts of embodied carbon in construction 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 5 of 39 
Greenhouse gas emissions from existing buildings are cut in half, from 2008 
levels, by 2030 
3 
Advance Implementation of the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy 
50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from renewable or low-carbon 
sources & 25 per cent of commercial and industrial floor area is connected to 
low carbon thermal energy sources, by 2030 
4 
Work with industry experts to explore limiting the expansion of natural gas systems and reversing 
system growth, where feasible, and limiting installation of natural gas equipment 
5 
Support adoption and mainstreaming of net zero, resilient energy sources for new and existing 
developments 
6 
Address barriers and develop strategies to increase the deployment of renewable energy and 
storage technologies, including but not limited to solar, wind, biomass, geothermal, waste heat 
recovery and heat pumps 
7 
Actively support, advocate to and partner with Toronto Hydro, as well as the Provincial and 
Federal governments and agencies, to decarbonize the provincial electricity grid, promote energy 
conservation and enable local renewable energy generation 
75 per cent of school/work trips under 5 km are walked, biked, or by transit, by 
2030 
8 
Expand biking and pedestrian infrastructure, including the rollout of cycling routes, bicycle parking 
and bike share at or near TTC stations 
9 
Increase existing bus and streetcar service levels to encourage shifts to low-carbon, sustainable 
transportation 
10 
Update and accelerate implementation of city-wide Transportation Demand Management 
Strategy 
11 
Develop tools to address emissions of greenhouse gases and air pollutants on an area or project 
level 
30 per cent of registered vehicles in Toronto are electric, by 2030 
12 
Align the City’s Electric Vehicle (EV) Strategy to the net zero goals and implement the EV 
Strategy 
13 
Determine options to incentivize EV adoption and disincentivize use of gas and diesel vehicles 
14 
Encourage the adoption of electric commercial and freight vehicles, including EVs and e-bikes for 
last mile deliveries 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 6 of 39 
Identify pathways to more sustainable consumption in City of Toronto 
operations and in Toronto's economy 
15 
Continue to pursue policy and programmatic interventions that help the City reach its aspirational 
goals of zero waste and a circular economy, and which identify pathways to more sustainable 
consumption in both municipal operations and in all sectors of the economy 
70 per cent residential waste diversion from the City of Toronto’s Integrated 
Waste Management System 
16 
Continue implementation of the City’s Long Term Waste Management Strategy which sets a goal 
of diverting 70 per cent of waste managed from City customers away from landfill, by focusing on 
waste reduction, reuse and recycling activities that promote resource conservation and reduce 
environmental impact 
Develop and implement strategies to improve greenspace infrastructure to 
build climate resilience  
17 
Increase canopy cover and biodiversity and enhance greenspaces 
Ensure equitable implementation and ongoing improvement of engagement 
and reporting 
18 
Support resident-led climate action and engagement 
19 
  
Work with Indigenous rights holders and urban Indigenous communities to share knowledge and 
learnings 
20 
Develop and implement youth engagement strategy 
21 
Design and launch a climate advisory group for 2022 and beyond to ensure implementation of the 
Net Zero Strategy is equitable and reflects the priorities and interests of the community 
22 
Develop equity indicators to be reported out as part of the TransformTO implementation status 
update 
23 
Encourage the growth of green industry to provide the products and services needed to enable a 
net zero cit 
24 
Leverage Live Green Toronto to develop and implement a city-wide climate action awareness 
campaign 
Lead by Example – City of Toronto corporate greenhouse gas emissions are 
reduced by 65 per cent over 2008 base year 
25 
Develop and apply a Climate Lens in decision-making 
26 
Design and implement a Toronto Carbon Budget 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 7 of 39 
27 
Ensure net zero City-owned buildings 
28 
Reduce emissions from City and Agency-owned vehicles 
29 
Encourage City staff to adopt sustainable and climate positive practices at work and in their 
commute 
30 
Lead by example in managing waste and producing renewable energy from biogas at City 
facilities 
 
City staff will begin further analysis and engagement on the thirty (30) short-term actions 
outlined in Attachment A as the City transitions to implementation.  
 
Before 2030, two short-term implementation plans will be presented to Council -- the 
first one identifies actions to be delivered 2022 to 2025 (Attachment A), and the second 
one covering the period from 2026 to 2030 will outline additional actions that will ensure 
that we are on track to reach the 2030 target. Detailed reports outlining 
recommendations for bylaws, policies, and new programs will be brought back to City 
Council for consideration starting in 2022 and continuing over the following four years.  
Included in this report back will be an assessment of our progress towards the goal of 
net zero by 2040.   
 
For the most part, the short-term actions do not require Toronto to pursue dramatically 
new climate actions -- they require Toronto to do them faster and at a larger scale. 
Existing strategies and plans such as Electric Vehicle Strategy, the Toronto Green 
Standard, the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy, Corporate Real Estate 
Management's Net Zero Carbon Plan for City-owned buildings, and the TTC Green Bus 
Program are examples of plans that identify detailed steps and considerations to get to 
net zero.  
 
The 2030 greenhouse gas emission reduction targets and short term actions have been 
developed through extensive consultation across City divisions and agencies, and with 
stakeholders and the public. Since 2019, the City has engaged over 5,000 residents, 
businesses, and other stakeholders to understand key priorities, opportunities and 
challenges. Consultations from recent years, particularly in 2021, have highlighted the 
issue of responding to the climate crisis with urgency.       
 
Current City Plans and Investments 
The City has approved a number of ambitious plans and targets to reduce emissions 
from its own operations, including the Corporate Real Estate Management's Net Zero 
Carbon Plan which was adopted earlier this year.  The Net Zero Carbon Plan focuses 
on City-owned buildings. Beginning with the 2023 Budget, staff will be integrating the 
Net Zero Carbon Plan for City-owned buildings into the capital planning process 
synchronously with the application of a Climate Lens and Financial Planning's Asset 
Management Strategy. The City will continue to make investments every year to 
achieve City Council-identified emissions reduction targets and net zero emissions 
status in its buildings. Like the Net Zero Carbon Plan for City-owned buildings, the 
Sustainable Fleets Plan, the TTC Green Bus Program, and other key City plans will 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 8 of 39 
follow a similar process. Implementation of these plans is underway and will go a long 
way to reduce emissions from City operations. 
 
For the first time in Toronto's history, a Climate Lens was utilized in the 2021 budget 
process. Initial data reported through the Climate Lens identified that Toronto invested 
$611.3 million on capital projects that have components related to GHG reduction or 
climate resilience in 2021. As 2021 reflected the first year of this initiative, data has not 
yet been collected across all divisions and agencies and these figures excluded climate 
investments made by key services such as Toronto Water, Toronto Community Housing 
Corporation (TCHC) and the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC). The 2022 Budget 
Process builds on the 2021 Budget process to evidence progress in cross corporate 
culture change including projects being flagged by programs that did not do so last year.  
City staff are working to capture investments directly related to climate action in the 
2022 budget. For example, the recommended 2022 Rate-Supported Budgets for water, 
solid waste, and parking identify climate related investments. In addition to this 
investment, the City is making significant capital investments in the TTC – the 2021-
2030 10-year Capital Plan totals $11.907 billion and includes $1.576 billion alone for 
vehicles such as buses, streetcars and subway cars, including the acquisition of electric 
buses to enable residents to reduce their transportation related GHG emissions.  
Further, Toronto has also issued $630 million in Green Bonds which have financed a 
range of key climate projects targeting mitigation and resilience activities such as 
extending subway lines and expanding the local cycling network, to energy retrofits in 
social housing and flood protection projects. 
 
Collaboration  
Many challenges outside of the City's control have also been identified through 
consultation, including the slow pace of market transformation, labour force training and 
matching expertise for implementation, consumer education and awareness, education 
of service providers, strong provincial and federal policy and financial support for 
decarbonization.  
 
This report emphasizes that in order to be successful, bold leadership and collaboration 
will be required from public and private stakeholders.  Furthermore, innovative 
partnerships and business models must be supported and evolve and traditional 
economic priorities must include environmental cost-benefit analyses and climate 
outcomes.  To summarize, climate action means collective action.  
 
Lastly the opportunities to avoid 'lock in' of carbon emissions in city systems are being 
missed.  Achieving the targets set out in this report, the TransformTO Short-Term 
Implementation Plan 2022-2025 (Attachment A) and the Net Zero Strategy (Attachment 
B) will require a different means of delivery and decision-making will need to be re-
oriented so that the net zero choice becomes the best choice now and in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 9 of 39 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The Deputy City Manager, Corporate Services recommends that: 
 
1. City Council endorse the targets and actions outlined in Attachment B entitled 
TransformTO Net Zero Strategy (December 2, 2021) from the Director, 
Environment & Energy. 
 
2. City Council approve the following community-wide greenhouse gas reduction 
targets: 
 
a) 45 percent reduction in community-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 
2025, from 1990 levels, and;  
 
b) net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2040. 
 
3. City Council direct the Director, Environment & Energy to report back: 
 
a) in the second quarter of 2025, with a status update on progress in 
meeting the City of Toronto's 2030 corporate and community-wide 
greenhouse gas reduction targets, as outlined in recommendation 2 and 
Attachment B titled TransformTO Net Zero Strategy dated (December 2, 
2021) from the Director, Environment & Energy. 
 
b) in the second quarter of 2025, with a four year implementation plan for 
2026-2030 on any additional actions and authorities required to achieve 
the City of Toronto's 2030 greenhouse gas reduction target. 
 
c) annually on progress towards achieving community-wide greenhouse 
gas reduction targets and 2030 goals. 
 
 
4. City Council direct the City Manager, in consultation with all appropriate 
Divisions Heads, including the City Solicitor, or their designates, to develop and 
implement a plan that outlines how to refer to TransformTO Net Zero Strategy 
goals and targets as and where appropriate in all relevant: 
 
a) submissions that the City of Toronto makes or the City of Toronto staff 
make in federal and provincial public comment processes; and 
 
b) filings that the City of Toronto makes in proceedings before federal and 
provincial regulatory bodies, administrative tribunals and courts. 
 
5. City Council authorize the Deputy City Manager, Corporate Services, or their 
designate, until December 31, 2030, to negotiate and enter into agreements, as 
may be required, to support the implementation of the City Council-adopted 
recommendations presented in the TransformTO Net Zero Strategy, dated 
December 2, 2021 with non-profit, public, and private sector organizations to:  
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 10 of 39 
a) enter into non-competitive procurements under Toronto Municipal Code 
Chapter 195, Purchasing;   
b) collaborate on projects or initiatives;  
c) provide in-kind and/or financial support from the approved Environment 
& Energy Division budget on projects or initiatives; and/or  
d) receive funding,  
 
on terms and conditions acceptable to the Deputy City Manager, Corporate 
Services, in consultation with the Director, Environment & Energy, and in a form 
satisfactory to the City Solicitor.  
 
6.  City Council authorize the Deputy City Managers to negotiate and enter into 
non-competitive agreements, including those with a value exceeding $500,000 
for which City Council approval would normally be required under City of Toronto 
Municipal Code Chapter 195, Purchasing, with companies that have won Climate 
Champion status through the MaRS Discovery District's Mission from MaRS 
Climate Impact Challenge, on the following conditions: 
  
a.  that the provision of goods or services from the company will assist the 
City to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and is aligned with the City's 
Net Zero Strategy; 
b.  that any agreement is within the budget of the respective Division 
within the Deputy City Manager's Service Area; 
c.  that the agreement is on such terms and conditions satisfactory to the 
Deputy City Manager; and  
d.  that the agreement is in a form satisfactory to the City Solicitor  
  
7.  City Council direct that the Chief Procurement Officer report, as part of the 
Annual Controller's Report, on any non-competitive agreement that the Deputy 
City Managers enter into with companies that have won Climate Champion 
status through the MaRS Discovery District's Mission from MaRS Climate Impact 
Challenge. 
 
8. City Council authorize the City Solicitor, in consultation with the City Clerk, to 
submit a Bill to Council to codify the currently Council-adopted targets, strategies, 
policies, programs and initiatives pertaining to green energy and climate change, 
in the first instance from this report, as additional articles in Chapter 669 of the 
City of Toronto Municipal Code, as and where appropriate. 
 
9. City Council direct the City Manager and Deputy City Managers, in 
consultation with the Director, Environment & Energy to report back by the first 
quarter of 2023 on:  
 
a. what aspects of existing City programs and/or by-laws aimed at 
reducing natural gas use in new and existing buildings need to be 
strengthened or accelerated; and  
 
b. what additional programs and/or by-laws aimed at reducing natural gas 
use in new and existing buildings need to be developed and implemented. 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 11 of 39 
 
in order to achieve the greenhouse gas emission reduction targets as outlined in 
recommendation 2 and Attachment B entitled TransformTO Net Zero Strategy 
dated (December 2, 2021) from the Director, Environment & Energy Division. 
 
10. City Council direct the Director, Environment & Energy, in consultation with 
the the Controller, the Director, Accounting Services, the General Manager, 
Transportation Services, the Chief Planner and Executive Director, City Planning 
and other appropriate City Divisions, to report in 2023 with options for financial 
and other incentives that the City could provide to encourage uptake of personal 
electric vehicles and disincentives to discourage use of fossil-fueled personal 
vehicles within the City of Toronto boundaries. 
 
11. City Council direct the Director, Environment & Energy in consultation with 
the Controller, the Director, Accounting Services, the Chief Planner, and 
Executive Director, City Planning, Chief Building Official and Executive Director, 
Toronto Buildings, and other appropriate City Divisions, and with Toronto Hydro, 
to report back in the first quarter of 2023 on options for additional financial 
incentives, disincentives and other mechanisms to further encourage deep 
retrofits of existing buildings. 
 
12. City Council direct the Director, Environment & Energy and the Chief 
Financial Officer and Treasurer to report back in the first quarter of 2023 on 
design and implementation options for a Toronto Carbon Budget covering 
corporate and community emissions in Toronto, with a goal of implementation by 
no later than 2025. 
 
13. City Council request the Government of Ontario and provincial agencies and 
corporations to: 
 
a) Develop and implement new or amend existing legislation, regulations, 
policies and/or programs in order to prioritize:  
 
(i)  demand response and conservation as sources of electricity 
generation in IESO generation selection; and 
(ii) increase the share of renewable electricity generated on the provincial 
electricity grid.  
 
b) Implement legislation, regulations, policies/or programs to encourage 
the transition to electric vehicles (EVs), including: 
  
(i) financial incentives for new and used EVs;  
(ii) financial incentives for home, workplace and fleet EV charging 
infrastructure;  
(iii) establish a provincial sales mandate for Zero Emission Vehicles 
("ZEVs" are battery-electric vehicles, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles or 
hydrogen fuel cell vehicles) that meets or exceeds any federal sales 
mandate for ZEVs; 
(iv) support and encourage EV-ready new construction;  
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 12 of 39 
(v) funding for publicly-accessibly EV charging infrastructure; and  
(vi) maintain existing benefits for EV drivers (e.g. HOV lane access on 
provincial highways);  
 
c) Require all new and replacement equipment for building heating 
systems to be greater than 100 per cent efficiency. 
 
14. City Council request the Government of Canada and federal agencies and 
corporations to: 
 
a) Create and enforce a national clean electricity standard to ensure 
decarbonization of the electricity grid as soon as possible; 
 
 
b) Ensure all new and replacement equipment for building heating 
systems be greater than 100 per cent efficient as soon as possible 
 
c) Implement new and maintain existing financial incentives to encourage 
the transition to electric vehicles, including: 
 
(i)  maintain purchase incentives for new electric vehicles and providing 
purchase incentives for used electric vehicles;  
(ii) provide financial incentives for home, workplace and fleet electric 
vehicle charging infrastructure; and  
(iii) provide funding to provinces and municipalities for public electric 
vehicle charging infrastructure;  
 
d) Create and fund a national workforce and skills development strategy to 
enable a just net zero transition. 
 
e) Conduct a strategic review of international and national supply chain 
requirements and issues to ensure that municipalities have sufficient 
access to all goods and services necessary to enable a transition to the 
net zero emission economy. 
 
f) Provide mechanisms and tools to lower the risk to lenders or similar 
entities involved with financing projects that enable decarbonization at 
scale. 
 
15. City Council direct the Director, Environment & Energy, in coordination with 
Executive Director, Social Development, Finance & Administration and the Chief 
Procurement Officer, Purchasing and Materials Management Division, to identify 
ways that the City can support the reduction of the greenhouse gas emissions 
associated with food the City of Toronto procures, in alignment with the City's 
Cool Food Pledge and the C40 Good Food Cities Declaration, and to report back 
in the second quarter of 2025 on the status of corporate food-related emissions 
and recommended actions for the TransformTO 2026-2030 short-term action 
plan. 
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 13 of 39 
FINANCIAL IMPACT 
 
There are no additional financial impacts expected to the 2022 Budget Year arising from 
the recommendations contained in this report, however, significant future budget 
impacts are expected from affected divisions as the implementation of existing 
programs continue or are accelerated and as new actions are initiated. Any financial 
impacts associated with the short-term implementation actions for 2022-2025 identified 
in the Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025 (Attachment A) will be included in the 
2022 Budget for Council's consideration as part of the 2022 budget process and will be 
included in future year Budget submissions.  
 
The full financial impacts of achieving the proposed 2025 GHG reduction target, the 
2030 GHG target, and the net zero by 2040 target to the City of Toronto is unknown. 
Technical modelling estimates that the full investment required by the entire community, 
including the City, businesses, other levels of government, and residents, is $57 billion 
over the next thirty years. For its part, the City will have to identify appropriate funding 
models and financial mechanisms to make these needed investments, which will 
include partnership with community organizations and businesses and other orders of 
government.     
 
See Table 1 below for planned report back and budget cycle timing for the short-term 
actions that may require additional resources. The Environment and Energy Division is 
also exploring funding opportunities provided by other levels of government and 
associated programs to support the implementation of the Net Zero Strategy. 
 
Short-term Action 
Report 
Back 
Date 
Proposed 
Implemen
tation 
Timeline 
Expected 
Budget 
Year  
(new or 
enhanced) 
Divisions with 
potential budget/ 
resource impacts 
Buildings 
Evaluate and limit impacts of embodied carbon 
in construction 
Q1 
2023 
Ongoing 
TBD 
City Planning 
Advance Implementation of the Net Zero 
Existing Buildings Strategy (Refer to the Net 
Zero Existing Buildings Strategy, adopted by 
City Council in July 2021 for a detailed financial 
impacts and timing) 
2022 
Ongoing 
2022 
Environment & 
Energy, Toronto 
Buildings, 
Municipal 
Licencing and 
Standards, City 
Planning, Social 
Development, 
Finance and 
Administration  
Energy 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 14 of 39 
Work with industry experts to explore limiting 
the expansion of natural gas systems and 
reversing system growth, where feasible, and 
limiting installation of natural gas equipment 
Q2 
2022 
TBD 
2023 
Environment & 
Energy 
Address barriers and develop strategies to 
increase the deployment of renewable energy 
and storage technologies, including but not 
limited to solar, wind, biomass, geothermal, 
waste heat recovery, and heat pumps 
Q4 
2022 
TBD 
TBD 
Environment & 
Energy 
Transportation 
Expand biking and pedestrian infrastructure, 
including the rollout of cycling routes, bicycle 
parking, and bike share at or near TTC stations 
N/A 
Ongoing 
2023 
Transportation 
Services, TTC 
 
Increase existing bus and streetcar service 
levels to encourage shifts to low-carbon, 
sustainable transportation 
2022 
Ongoing 
TBD 
Transportation 
Services, City 
Planning, TTC 
Update and accelerate implementation of city-
wide Transportation Demand Management 
Strategy 
2022 
 2023 
 2023 
Transportation 
Services, 
Environment & 
Energy 
Develop tools to address emissions of 
greenhouse gases and air pollutants on an 
area or project level 
2023 
2024 
2024 
Transportation 
Services, City 
Planning 
Align the City’s Electric Vehicle (EV) Strategy 
to the net zero goals and implement the EV 
Strategy 
Q4 
2022 
Ongoing 
2023 
Environment & 
Energy, 
Transportation 
Services, Toronto 
Parking Authority, 
Toronto Hydro, 
City Planning, 
Fleet Services, 
Municipal 
Licencing and 
Standards, Social 
Development, 
Finance and 
Administration, 
Corporate Real 
Estate 
Management, 
Economic 
Development and 
Culture 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 15 of 39 
Determine options to incentivize EV adoption 
and disincentivize use of gas and diesel 
vehicles 
Q4 
2022 
2023 
2023 
Environment and 
Energy, 
Transportation 
Services, Toronto 
Parking Authority, 
City Planning 
Encourage the adoption of electric commercial 
and freight vehicles, including e-bikes and EVs 
for last mile deliveries 
N/A 
ongoing 
TBD 
Transportation 
Services, City 
Planning, Toronto 
Parking Authority, 
Toronto Hydro, 
Environment and 
Energy, Fleet 
Services 
Waste 
Conduct a consumption based emissions 
inventory and identify targets that would 
meaningfully reduce consumption based 
emissions 
Q2 
2023 
2024 
2023 
Environment & 
Energy 
Engagement 
Support resident-led climate action and 
engagement 
N/A 
Ongoing 
2023 
Environment and 
Energy 
Develop and implement youth engagement 
strategy 
N/A 
2022 
2023 
Environment and 
Energy 
Design and launch a climate advisory group for 
2022 and beyond to ensure implementation of 
the Net Zero Strategy is equitable and reflects 
the priorities and interests of the community 
N/A 
2022 
2023 
Environment and 
Energy 
Encourage the growth of green industry to 
provide the products and services needed to 
enable a net zero city 
Q3 
2024 
Ongoing 
2023 
Economic 
Development and 
Culture 
Leading by Example 
Ensure net zero City-owned buildings 
TBD 
Ongoing 
2023 
Corporate Real 
Estate 
Management 
Reduce emissions from City and Agency-
owned vehicles 
N/A 
Ongoing 
TBC 
Fleet Services 
TTC, Corporate 
Real Estate 
Management 
 
The Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer has reviewed this report and agrees with the 
financial impact information. 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 16 of 39 
 
EQUITY IMPACT STATEMENT 
 
This strategy has the potential to have a significant positive equity impact, but only if 
multiple needs are addressed and implementation is done with equity at the core. 
 
Locally, the impacts of climate change will be felt by everyone, but some of us will feel 
its impacts more than others. We also know that the outcomes of the delivery of climate 
action can provide significant opportunities to improve equity, economic prosperity, 
resilience and health.  
 
Systemic discrimination and past policy decisions, including Toronto's land use and 
transportation policies, have contributed to the continuing oppression of Indigenous 
people, racialized and other disproportionately impacted communities. As a result, 
certain communities are more impacted by issues of poverty, lack of services, and 
unequal opportunities. Moving forward, City policies need to work to address this. This 
Net Zero Strategy intends to understand these challenges as they relate to fighting 
climate change and inequity, and work to address them throughout implementation.  
 
Ensuring that those facing the greatest impacts are meaningfully represented in 
program and policy development. Thoughtful program and policy design will also ensure 
that the benefits of our climate actions are felt by communities that have been hit 
hardest by social and economic injustices.  
 
Reducing the emissions from our buildings means we will have to build new buildings to 
a high performance standard and retrofit and upgrade all buildings to ensure they are 
energy efficient. Building to this level of performance and retrofitting existing buildings 
will cost money up front. While these costs can save money in the long term, the upfront 
costs can be out of reach for some small businesses and low-income households. It will 
be important to ensure that costs of upgrades are not passed down to tenants and 
owners who cannot afford them.  
 
The Net Zero Strategy intends to dramatically reduce greenhouse gas emissions from 
transportation by encouraging people to walk, cycle and use transit as much as 
possible, and by electrifying personal or commercial vehicles that are needed for any 
remaining trips. It is clear, however, that access to safe, continuous and inviting walking 
and biking infrastructure is not easily available for everyone in the city. Moreover, the 
cost to purchase a new electric vehicle can be high and not all buildings have charging 
available. As we transform our transportation system, it will be crucial that we ensure 
equitable access to safe, easy and affordable ways for everyone to get around. 
 
As individual policies and programs recommended in the Net Zero Strategy undergo 
detailed design, thorough equity analysis will be conducted to ensure that they improve 
equity and support equity-deserving groups as we move towards a net zero future. 
 
 
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 17 of 39 
DECISION HISTORY 
 
On July 14, 2021, City Council adopted several measures relevant to the present report.  
 
Council adopted recommendations based on the findings of the Net Zero Existing 
Buildings Strategy (ExB Strategy). The ExB Strategy charts a path to a decarbonized 
and net zero emissions building sector. It presents the background information and set 
of recommended building-scale actions and city-wide policies necessary for the City of 
Toronto to transform its existing building sector, to achieve the City’s climate targets 
while maximizing potential co-benefits and minimizing potential harms to owners and 
tenants. 
(http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2021.IE23.1 )  
 
City Council considered the ExB Strategy and the Building Net Zero Emissions City 
Buildings: Corporate Real Estate Management's (CREM's) Net Zero Carbon Plan item 
together. CREM's Net Zero Carbon Plan was received for information by City Council. 
This plan describes how buildings in the City's portfolio will achieve net zero emissions 
status , contribute to the city-wide reduction of greenhouse gas emissions based on City 
Council-set targets, and lead by example, supporting the broader strategic work of 
TransformTO. The Plan identifies fuel switching and efficiency retrofits as the primary 
means of reducing emissions.  
(http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2021.IE23.2 ) 
 
Also on July 14, 2021, City Council adopted the Toronto Green Standard (TGS) Version 
4 performance measures, a three-tier framework for new development with a focus on 
carbon reductions and green infrastructure enhancements. Changes made in TGS 
Version 4 are consistent with recommendations in the Building Net Zero Emissions City 
Buildings: Corporate Real Estate's Net Zero Carbon Plan and the Net Zero Existing 
Buildings Strategy. TGS v4 updates the standard to incorporate zero emissions 
buildings at the highest-performing voluntary tier, conducting materials emissions 
assessments of upfront embodied carbon from structural and envelope components, 
enhanced electric vehicle infrastructure requirements in certain building types, and 
restructuring the TGS to prioritize green infrastructure objectives.  
 
Finally, on July 14, 2021, City Council endorsed the call for a Fossil Fuel Non-
Proliferation Treaty. Council requested the City Manager to send a letter to the Prime 
Minister of Canada requesting the Federal Government to negotiate a global treaty for 
the non-proliferation of fossil fuels. Council also affirmed its ongoing commitment to the 
goals of the Paris Climate Agreement and the greenhouse gas reduction targets and 
aspires to meet its proportionate greenhouse gas reductions. 
(http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2021.MM35.29 )  
 
On February 18, 2021, City Council approved the 2021 Capital and Operating Budgets. 
City Council directed the Environment and Energy Division (EED) to report back to the 
Infrastructure and Environment Committee in the third or fourth quarter of 2021 on 
delayed climate emergency commitments currently deemed "ongoing". Council 
requested that EED report back to the Infrastructure and Environment Committee in the 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 18 of 39 
third quarter of 2021 on a climate lens that evaluates the climate impacts of major City 
decisions as part of the 2022 City Budget. 
(http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2021.EX21.2) 
 
On January 29, 2020, City Council approved the Electric Vehicle Strategy focused on 
the electrification of passenger vehicles. Council requested the Director of Environment 
and Energy to oversee engagement, implementation, and evaluation for the strategy.  
(http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2020.IE11.17) 
 
On October 2, 2019 City Council declared a climate emergency and strengthened 
Toronto's carbon-reduction goal by establishing a net-zero greenhouse gas emission 
target for Toronto by 2050 or sooner. In that decision, City Council committed to 
accelerating the implementation of TransformTO climate actions at every opportunity. 
City Council requested staff to report back in the second quarter of 2020 on a number of 
specific items, and include others in a TransformTO implementation plan.  This report 
responds to those requests. Council's request to report back in the fourth quarter of 
2020 on actions to achieve net zero will be the focus of a future Net Zero Strategy 
report.  
(http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2019.MM10.3)  
 
On July 4, 2017, City Council unanimously adopted TransformTO: Climate Action for a 
Healthy, Equitable and Prosperous Toronto. TransformTO is the City's climate action 
strategy to meet Council's long-term, GHG-reduction target while creating an equitable, 
healthy, prosperous and resilient Toronto that benefits all.  
(http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2017.PE19.4)  
 
On December 13, 2016, City Council adopted the first short-term implementation plan 
for TransformTO. It set out actions to be taken by the City over 2017-20 to address 
climate change.  
(http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2016.PE15.1) 
 
In July 2007, Toronto City Council unanimously adopted the 64 consolidated actions 
proposed in the Climate Change and Clean Air Action Plan (item 2007.EX10.3) and the 
following community-wide greenhouse gas reduction targets:  
• 6 per cent reduction against 1990 levels by 2012;  
• 30 per cent reduction against 1990 levels by 2020; and  
• 80 per cent reduction against 1990 levels by 2050.  
 
COMMENTS 
 
This TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report brings together the 
results of detailed technical emissions modelling and three years of public, stakeholder 
and internal divisional consultation to focus on five critical steps where accelerated 
emissions reduction action is imperative. 
 
It then outlines in the attached "Strategy" (Attachment B) how these themes are 
translated into specific 2030 targets based on Toronto's current emissions state and the 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 19 of 39 
highest carbon emitting sectors -- buildings, transportation and waste. Without aligning 
our targets and actions to match the steeper trajectory of 2030, net zero by 2040 or 
2050 will be out of reach; therefore, the 2030 targets are the focal point and are further 
broken down into specific actions that put Toronto on an accelerated 2030 timeframe.   
 
The key message here is that Toronto's climate actions were always the right ones -- 
they just need to be done much faster and at a much bigger scale. 
 
Even though the scale of the global climate emergency extends beyond the City of 
Toronto’s jurisdiction, achieving our climate goals will be an important contribution to 
this global effort.   
 
Toronto's Action on Climate to Date 
Implementation of TransformTO is well underway. In 2018, City Council fully funded the 
implementation of the TransformTO 2017-2020 short-term strategies which accelerated 
existing climate action and established new programs and policies that further engaged 
residents and local businesses.    
 
A recent review of Toronto's financial commitment to climate action found that in the 
City's 2021 Capital Budget, 429 capital projects totalling $611.3 million had some 
climate component related to the work while at the same time carrying out the regular 
and necessary business of the City.   
 
A number of recently adopted policies which target buildings emissions (57 per cent of 
community-wide emissions) begin the process of phasing out natural gas through 
conservation, electrification, and renewable energy.  Similarly, the 36 per cent of 
emissions from the transportation sector are predominantly being addressed through 
electrification of personal vehicles through the City's recently adopted Electric Vehicle 
Strategy.   
 
To date, Toronto has also issued $630 million in Green Bonds which have financed a 
range of key climate projects targeting mitigation and resilience activities such as 
extending subway lines and expanding the local cycling network, to energy retrofits in 
social housing and flood protection projects. 
 
 
More information of some of the key policies and programs that have been implemented 
to date can be found in Highlights of Toronto's Programs to Date (Attachment D). 
 
Developing the Strategy 
The TransformTO Net Zero Strategy was developed over the course of 2019-2021 and 
consisted of two main components: technical modelling, and extensive internal and 
external consultation. 
 
A.  Technical Modelling: 
In 2020, the Environment and Energy Division retained a consultant team to undertake 
an update to the scenario modelling from TransformTO (2017) to align actions to match 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 20 of 39 
the Climate Emergency Declaration’s targets of achieving net zero emissions by 2050 
or sooner.  
 
The combination of detailed technical modelling, a comparative financial analysis of 
costs and benefits of four different scenarios, and insights on the feasibility of 
implementing climate actions have informed the 2030 targets presented in this report 
and Net Zero Strategy for the highest emitting sectors - buildings, energy, transportation 
and waste.   
 
A full report outlining the modelling process and analyses can be found in Attachment C 
or at www.toronto.ca/transformto 
 
B. Community and Stakeholder Engagement  
The actions presented in this report and Strategy have been developed through 
extensive consultation across City divisions and agencies, and with stakeholders and 
the public. Since 2019, the City has engaged over 5,000 residents, businesses, and 
other stakeholders to understand key priorities, opportunities and challenges of 
delivering on climate action. Several opportunities for engagement found that residents 
prioritize aggressive GHG reduction targets and implementation strategies that 
encourage immediate climate action. There continues to be considerable emphasis on 
ensuring that climate actions are equitable and affordable, particularly for seniors, 
renters and equity-deserving communities. 
 
Consultations from recent years, particularly in 2021, have raised the issue of 
responding to the climate crisis with urgency.     
 
The Net Zero Strategy is consistent with the recommendations of the Toronto Office of 
Recovery and Rebuild. Both emphasize the need to move Toronto forward (to build 
back better) rather than simply returning to the pre-COVID-19 state. 
 
A summary of this consultation can be found in Attachment E – Summary of 
Engagements (2019 Reference Panel, 2019 Consultation Summary, TORR 
engagement, 2021 Engagement Summary) and reports on other consultation findings 
can be found online at www.toronto.ca/transformTO. 
  
TransformTO Net Zero Strategy 
The TransformTO Net Zero Strategy focuses on achieving an ambitious 2030 GHG 
emission-reduction target, a critical milestone on the path to net zero by 2040. 
 
Achieving the 2030 Target is a Necessary Milestone on the Pathway to Net 
Zero 
Nine million tonnes – this is where we need to be in 2030.  
 
Toronto’s latest published greenhouse gas inventory shows that despite emissions 
reductions since 1990, Toronto's emissions are currently at 15.6 million tonnes.  While 
this is 38 per cent lower than 1990 levels and puts Toronto on track to achieve our 2020 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 21 of 39 
target of a 30 per cent reduction ahead of schedule, it means that by 2030, we will need 
to halve our emissions to achieve a 65 per cent reduction.   
 
This means that we must decline by an average of 1 million CO2e per year to reach the 
2030 target1. 
 
Figure 1 shows that buildings remain the largest source of GHG emissions in Toronto 
and are responsible for just over half (57 per cent) of GHGs emitted, primarily from 
natural gas used to heat space and water. Transportation is responsible for just over 
one third (36 per cent) of local GHG emissions, mainly from gasoline in personal 
vehicles. Waste is responsible for an estimated 7 per cent of GHG emissions, largely 
from landfills. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 - GHG Emissions 1990-2019 
 
Defining Net Zero 
In this report, net zero means zero. Net zero emissions are achieved when 
decarbonization reduces GHG emissions to as close to zero as possible, and any 
remaining human-driven emissions are balanced out by an equivalent amount of carbon 
removals. Carbon removals are achieved through carbon sequestration, which focus on 
restoring natural systems (including vegetation, land, soil) or through direct air capture 
and storage technology. Achieving net zero emissions is also referred to as carbon 
neutrality. 
 
                                              
1 Emissions are tracked in CO2e, a unit that allows emissions of different GHGs (such as carbon dioxide 
(CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O)) to be expressed as a single unit of measurement. 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 22 of 39 
Although the specifics of how to achieve net zero may vary by sector, this Net Zero 
Strategy takes the approach that first and foremost, Toronto must reduce all human-
caused carbon pollution as fast as possible and then, when emissions mitigation and 
carbon sequestration activities are exhausted, the use of offsets or technological 
sequestration activities can be explored.  
 
Achieving Net Zero 
In 2020, technical modelling was undertaken to understand exactly what would be 
needed to achieve net zero by 2050 and 2040.   
 
Four different scenarios were considered bundling and implementing a package of 
actions across key emitting sectors -- buildings, transportation and waste -- with varying 
levels of ambition. The four scenarios are:  
 
• "Do Nothing" = What happens if the City makes little to no additional effort or 
investment in climate action? 
• "Business as Planned (BAP)" = What happens if Toronto implements current plans 
that are already approved? Approved projects considered include district energy 
expansion, transit expansion, personal vehicle and City fleet electrification and the 
Toronto Green Standard (TGS). This scenario shows the benefit of approved plans, 
and the future trajectory that Toronto would be on, given current approved plans and 
authorities, without implementation of the Net Zero Strategy.  
• "Zero by 2050" = What actions can reduce GHG emissions that can be implemented 
to their fullest? 
• "Zero by 2040" = What happens if the actions in Net Zero by 2050 are implemented 
more quickly? 
 
 
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 23 of 39 
Figure 2 below illustrates the aggregated results of the modelling: 
  
  
Figure 2 - Overview of the net zero modelling process 
 
Some key observations from Figure 2 are: 
 
• No scenario reaches net zero through actions alone; a remaining residual will need 
to be 'zeroed' out through the purchase of carbon offsets, renewable energy credits 
or through carbon capture/storage technologies. 
• The BAP scenario, our current trajectory, will not achieve existing 2030 City Council 
adopted GHG target of 9 million tonnes of CO2e. 
• Today, Toronto's emissions are approaching the 80 x 50 trajectory, Council's 
existing target of an 80 per cent reduction by 2050 from 1990 levels. Significant 
additional, new actions and authorities, as outlined in the Net Zero Strategy, are 
needed to reduce Toronto's future emissions from the BAP scenario to meet the 
2030 target and any of the net zero trajectories. 
• Only the most ambitious net zero by 2040 pathway will put Toronto on a sufficient 
enough trajectory to reach Toronto's 2030 target of 9 million tonnes CO2e emitted 
that year. 
 
The modelling also examined a "zero carbon grid", which shows Toronto's greenhouse 
gas emissions trajectory if the provincial electricity grid eliminated the use of fossil fuels 
in electricity generation.  Currently, there are no commitments to ensure that the 
provincial electricity grid in Ontario will become zero emissions by 2050 or sooner. A 
key finding from the modelling was that with a clean provincial grid "close to zero" 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 24 of 39 
emissions is possible with only 0.2 million tonnes, the equivalent of 60,000 gas powered 
cars on the road, remaining in 2050.  
 
As demonstrated by Figure 2, the 2030 target requires immediate and bold action 
implementation to be realized.  If we wait much longer, the curve will steepen and the 
actions will need to be even more ambitious.  
 
To further support this point, an additional GHG reduction target of 45 percent reduction 
in community-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 2025, from 1990 levels, is also being 
recommended, in response to City Council's direction to determine feasibility of setting 
interim targets.  A 2025 target will serve as an interim checkpoint on our progress to net 
zero by 2040.  
 
Also by 2025, Toronto's Carbon Budget will provide details on the greenhouse gas 
reduction impact of City-led actions to forecast whether Toronto is on track to achieve 
annual greenhouse gas emissions limits and to understand what further actions will be 
necessary to fill gaps. The Carbon Budget is described in more detail below.  
 
While this modelling provides high-level direction for policy, it does not examine all 
technical details of a certain energy system. A second phase of more granular level 
modelling of greenhouse gas reduction actions will be undertaken to support precision 
in understanding the actions necessary to deliver on Toronto's GHG reduction targets. 
 
For further details on the Net Zero Technical Modelling please refer to the technical 
report (Attachment C) which is also available at www.toronto.ca/transformto.   
 
Five Critical Steps - Toronto's 2030 Plan 
One outcome of the technical modelling is the story that it tells about where Toronto is 
best positioned to exert its influence when designing and implementing climate action.  
 
In reality, the City corporation can control only a small portion of Toronto's community-
wide emissions directly -- nearly 5 per cent according to recent greenhouse gas 
inventories.  However, when policies and programs are designed with equity at their 
core and are easily accessed, maximum uptake and engagement can be achieved and 
result in meaningful impact on the community's emissions, improved air quality, 
improved building occupant comfort, and quality of life.   
 
Climate action presents opportunities to develop a more equal and inclusive city by 
improving building quality, increasing access to transportation infrastructure, creating 
economic benefits for equity-deserving communities, reducing household costs, 
improving quality of life, and increasing access to daily needs including employment 
options. 
 
The City plays a clear role in defining the ways we build, travel, and consume and in 
order to meet the 2030 targets, must use its influence to regulate, advocate and 
facilitate rapid transformation in five critical steps below.  
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 25 of 39 
Actions in these five critical areas must be sustained over the long term in order to meet 
any goal, whether it be 2030, 2040, or 2050. Actions, priorities and targets within these 
critical steps will likely change over time as technology, innovative ways of working and 
achievements are realized. This report, the TransformTO Short-Term Implementation 
Plan 2022-2025 (Attachment A) and the Net Zero Strategy (Attachment B) set out the 
first series of targets within the 2030 timeframe. They identify that Toronto will need to 
check-in and course correct in 2025 and again in 2030.  Annual reporting to City Council 
on progress will create opportunities to adjust actions as needed. 
 
In the attached Strategy, each 2030 target is further paired with a set of actions that 
advance the work towards one of the critical steps.  
 
 
Critical Steps  
2030 Targets  
1 
Demonstrate carbon 
accountability locally 
and globally by 
establishing a carbon 
budget 
Design and implement a Toronto Carbon Budget with 
a goal of implementation no later than 2025 
2 
Accelerate a rapid and 
significant reduction in 
natural gas use 
100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built 
to be near zero greenhouse gas emissions;  
 
GHG emissions from buildings will be cut in half, from 
2008 levels;  
 
25 per cent of commercial and industrial floor area is 
connected to low carbon thermal energy sources 
3 
Establish performance 
targets for existing 
buildings 
GHG emissions from buildings will be cut in half, from 
2008 levels;  
4 
Increase access to low 
carbon transportation 
options, including 
walking, biking, public 
transit and electric 
vehicles 
30 per cent of registered personal vehicles in Toronto 
will be electric  
 
75 per cent of school/work trips under 5km are 
walked, biked, or by transit 
5 
Increase local 
renewable energy to 
contribute to a 
resilient, carbon-free 
grid 
50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from 
renewable or low-carbon sources 
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 26 of 39 
1. Demonstrate carbon accountability locally and globally by establishing a 
carbon budget 
 
To achieve the 2030 community-wide target, transparency, accountability and informed 
decision-making must be core to our plan. 
 
A strong, overarching “Climate Governance” regime fills the gap between ambitious 
GHG reduction on the one hand and robust policy roadmaps on the other hand.  
 
Jurisdictions that demonstrate climate leadership in ambition and delivery all have a 
strong climate government structure in common. 
  
 
To ensure effective Climate Governance, City staff will take a leading-edge approach 
by:  
 
• Enabling a Climate Lens program to give staff the resources, tools and support 
necessary to make informed climate decisions both at the project-level (especially 
capital projects) and the strategic level (especially policies, programs and by-laws 
with city-wide effect); and  
• Designing a Toronto Carbon Budget to track action against annual emission limits 
and drive accountability 
• Requiring City staff to provide annual updates regarding the City's progress toward 
Toronto's GHG reduction targets, including corporate emission targets, as part of a 
Carbon Budget report produced in tandem with financial budget proposals and 
reported in the City's climate-related disclosures included in the annual consolidated 
financial statements. 
 
The City of Toronto does not currently institutionalize climate change mitigation and 
adaptation considerations into decision-making processes. Doing so requires 
standardization of practices, integrating coordinated oversight and building climate 
literacy across the corporation. 
 
Climate Lens  
 
It is anticipated that the Climate Lens will spur an organizational culture shift at the City 
by facilitating the mainstreaming of climate considerations into operations and capital 
project planning, management and executions. The Climate Lens program will aim to 
achieve the following objectives and outcomes: (1) Integrate climate considerations into 
strategic decision-making; (2) Build staff climate competency and leadership; (3) 
Increase climate accountability; (4) Increase transparency through reporting; and (5) 
Monitor climate performance. The Climate Lens program has already inserted reporting 
requirements regarding greenhouse gas emissions and climate change risks into the 
budget process - this will continue and become more detailed over the next few years. 
 
The Climate Lens program will initially focus on ensuring GHG and climate risk 
assessments are conducted on new/enhanced capital projects and operating programs 
by 2022, to ensure future investments are aligned with the City's GHG reduction goals 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 27 of 39 
and climate risk adaptation needs. Resources, tools and training will be provided to City 
staff through an internal “Climate Hub” website expected to be operational in 2022.  
 
The Climate Lens program resources will also be utilized to assess the GHG impacts of 
and climate risks associated with all existing City assets as part of the asset 
management planning process pursuant to the Asset Management Planning for 
Municipal Infrastructure Regulation, O. Reg. 588/17, and Toronto's Corporate Asset 
Management Policy (section 8.1.6 (iv)). This will be done in alignment with the regulated 
deadline for asset management planning, which is currently 2024. 
 
Toronto Carbon Budget 
 
A Toronto Carbon Budget would take the approach every municipality already uses to 
track, review, manage and control financial expenditures and apply it to GHG emissions 
instead of dollars. It allows decision-makers to think in terms of revenues (annual GHG 
emission limit), expenses (actual GHG emissions) and deficits/surpluses (annual GHG 
emission limit minus actual GHG emissions). A carbon budget for the City would set out 
annual emission reduction limits; identify and quantify governmental actions that reduce 
GHG emissions (everything from procurements of electric buses to by-laws regulating 
emissions from buildings); and project whether upcoming annual emission limits will be 
respected. For each emission reducing action the carbon budget would clearly state the 
costs and the City divisions and/or agencies accountable for implementation and 
reporting. Ideally the City's carbon budget would be reported in parallel with the fiscal 
budget, thereby increasing public awareness of climate action in Toronto which 
supports accountability. Alignment with the City's annual budgeting process would also 
ensure that the City is preparing for added costs that may result from the City's failure to 
meet the annual GHG emission limit, preparation to achieve the annual GHG emission 
limit, or other related risks. Finally, by highlighting gaps in Toronto's climate action on an 
annual basis, the City can make timely course corrections to ensure its GHG reduction 
targets do not slip out of reach. This latter point is critical as significant emission 
reductions are needed year-after-year to achieve net zero emissions.  
 
Key dependencies for a Climate Lens program and a Toronto Carbon Budget include: 
(i) consistent staffing resources so that the programs can be built up and iterated over 
time, in alignment with best practices that continue to evolve across other Canadian and 
international municipalities; (ii) dedicated prioritization of climate issues from senior 
leadership, ideally through a permanent body of Director-level representatives that meet 
periodically to provide direction on climate priorities to staff; and (iii) organization-wide 
support in identifying, monitoring, and reporting on the City's progress toward GHG 
reduction targets through the annual Carbon Budget report and the use of climate-
related disclosures in the City's annual consolidated financial statements 
 
Co-benefits of effective Climate Governance include long-term cost savings from 
adapting Toronto’s long-term financial plans, infrastructure and programs to climate 
impacts before they occur; clarity and predictability regarding the GHG emission 
reductions that must be planned for across corporate operations; anticipating and 
addressing climate-related risks on a proactive basis to minimize the risk associated 
with service interruptions, reductions in Toronto's quality of life, or unanticipated costs; 
providing transparent and relevant reporting to City Council and members of the public; 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 28 of 39 
and demonstrating continued climate leadership among Canadian and international 
municipalities and global climate action oriented groups, such as CDP Global. 
 
2. Accelerate a rapid and significant reduction in natural gas use 
To achieve the 2030 community-wide emissions reductions target, natural gas, which is 
primarily used for heating in buildings will need to be on a clear path to phase out.  In 
2019, approximately 50 per cent of all GHG emissions in Toronto originated from 
natural gas use. 
 
The specific 2030 targets proposed in the Strategy signal that any new buildings must 
be designed without reliance on natural gas as a fuel before they are even built, that 
existing buildings will need to be retrofitted and fuel switched away from natural gas by 
using heat pumps and electrically fuelled appliances, and that carbon free district 
energy systems will network commercial and industrial properties in the City.  
 
The targets which address this Critical Step are: 
 
• 100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built to be near zero greenhouse 
gas emissions;  
• GHG emissions from buildings will be cut in half, from 2008 levels;  
• 25 per cent of commercial and industrial floor area is connected to low carbon 
thermal energy sources 
 
The implications of phasing out natural gas may entail limiting the expansion of natural 
gas systems and reversing connections, where feasible.  
 
In the near term, the phase out of natural gas connections and equipment will require 
well timed intervention by all levels of government; at the City level, program support will 
need to coincide as much as possible with the end of useful life and planned 
replacement of equipment.    
 
According to the modelling, to reach net zero by 2040, this means that installations of 
natural gas furnaces will need to be prohibited by 2030, at the latest, in order to phase 
out the stock of natural gas furnaces by 2040.  It takes on average, ten years for the 
stock of equipment to turn over.  
 
Some of the already adopted existing programs or policies requiring accelerated 
implementation:  
• Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy to decarbonize all existing residential, 
commercial and institutional buildings within the next 30 years 
• Net Zero Carbon Plan to reduce emissions in City-owned buildings 
• Toronto Green Standard to achieve net zero emissions in new development by 
2030.  
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 29 of 39 
3. Establish performance targets for existing buildings  
To achieve the 2030 community-wide emissions reduction target, building performance 
targets will need to be established to an extent where sufficient scale of this action 
achieves a reduction in building emissions by half in the next eight years.   
 
The 2030 target which addresses this Critical Step is: 
• GHG emissions from buildings will be cut in half, from 2008 levels. 
 
57 per cent of local GHG emissions comes from energy use in buildings -- in residences 
for heating and cooking and for heating and other end uses in manufacturing and 
industry. Natural gas for heating continues to be the largest single source of emissions, 
accounting for approximately 50 per cent of all GHG emissions in Toronto.  
 
In July 2021, City Council passed the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy (ExB 
Strategy), which sets out a plan to decarbonize all existing residential, commercial, and 
institutional buildings by 2050. The Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy identifies fuel 
switching and a clean electricity grid as the two most significant technical requirements 
for achieving net zero emissions buildings which are consistent with the five critical 
steps identified in this report and the Net Zero Strategy (Attachment B).   
 
The ExB Strategy takes the approach of first introducing voluntary programs and 
policies in the near-term, followed by a transition to mandatory requirements in the 
medium to long-term. Lessons learned from the operation of voluntary programs, along 
with detailed discussions with partner City Divisions and further stakeholder 
engagement, will inform the specific design details and implementation plans for any 
mandatory requirements. A key aspect of this work includes analysis of equity and 
affordability impacts and development of implementation strategies that mitigate 
negative impacts and enable positive ones for equity-deserving groups. 
 
Other key insights from the ExB Strategy focus on a thorough equity and affordability 
analysis which have highlighted that: 
 
• The cost of the needed retrofit actions represent a significant net investment for 
building owners and these measures do not pay back on their own. 
• Financial supports will be needed to enable market transformation. 
• The City does not have all of the authorities needed to unilaterally implement the 
ExB Strategy in full. Dialogue with the province will be necessary. 
 
The first step is to establish a system of performance reporting. Energy and emissions 
performance reporting, ratings and labels are critical data management tools that can 
be used to inform decision-making. For home and building owners, energy and 
emissions ratings provide information on how their building is performing in comparison 
to others and how changes to their buildings either through renovation, maintenance or 
operating behaviour, can impact their buildings' performance. 
 
Displaying or disclosing energy ratings is a key next step because it informs choice for 
tenants and future buyers when deciding to lease, rent or purchase a space.  Knowing 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 30 of 39 
in advance what your energy bills are going to look like in the future helps decision-
making.   
 
Lastly, for the City and other levels of government, the information disclosed can be 
used to design more targeted programs specific to either building sectors or 
geographical areas of the city where the most need for improvement can be identified. 
 
The ExB Strategy report also recommends looking at additional ways to accelerate this 
work through financial or other incentives that the City could provide to encourage 
uptake of deep retrofits, including electrification of building heating systems and 
disincentives to discourage use of fossil-fuel heating systems. 
 
Retrofitting existing buildings to net zero poses significant challenges due to the 
diversity of buildings by age, size, system and type. To achieve the 2030 community-
wide GHG reduction target, Toronto will need a massive scaling up of deep retrofits and 
fuel switching in the coming years, with tens of thousands of Toronto's 436,000 homes 
undergoing deep retrofits every year. 
 
Over the next several months, implementation will focus around development of new 
standards for emission-focused audits, re-commissioning and retrofit roadmaps and an 
interim reporting framework for building owners to voluntarily report.  
 
For more information on the implementation plan, please refer to the Net Zero Existing 
Buildings Strategy Staff Report. 
 
Already existing programs or policies requiring implementation and acceleration:   
• Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy to decarbonize all existing residential, 
commercial and institutional buildings within the next 30 years 
 
4. Increase access to low carbon transportation options, including walking, 
biking, public transit and electric vehicles 
 
Increasing the use of active and public transportation reduces greenhouse gas 
emissions, energy use and congestion while promoting equity and health benefits. 
When a car is still required, the City supports the transition to electric vehicles by 
advancing options to incentivize electric vehicle adoption and disincentivize the use of 
carbon-polluting gas and diesel vehicles.  
 
According to the most recent greenhouse gas inventory, transportation is the second 
largest source of GHG emissions, accounting for 36 percent of total emissions with 
approximately 97 per cent of all transportation emissions originating from passenger 
cars, trucks, vans, and buses. Gasoline accounts for about 30 per cent of Toronto’s total 
GHG emissions.  
 
The 2030 targets which address this Critical Step are: 
• 75 per cent of school/work trips under 5km are walked, biked, or by transit 
• 30 per cent of registered personal vehicles in Toronto will be electric  
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 31 of 39 
These targets recognize that mobility choices might differ depending on type of trip or 
availability of infrastructure, but that low carbon options should be available for any type 
of trip:   
 
• For short trips, under 5 km - increasing access for all mobility types should be 
provided so that walking, cycling and transit are the most convenient, safe, desirable 
way to travel 
 
• For trips greater than 5 km - provision of low-carbon transit as the most convenient 
and inexpensive way to travel should be prioritized and where needed, personal 
vehicle owners should be encourage and supported to switch to an electric vehicle  
 
 
Complete compact communities 
Land use has a critical impact on transportation emissions. In 2021, City Planning 
launched consultation on Our Plan Toronto: the review and update of the City's Official 
Plan policies. Environment, climate change, sustainability and the need for a healthy 
and resilient community have been repeatedly identified as one of the key challenges 
for the City's future.  
 
Through Our Plan Toronto, the City of Toronto is undertaking an intensification strategy 
to satisfy the A Place to Grow: Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe (2019) 
policies. This intensification strategy is intended to direct Transit Oriented Development 
and prioritize growth where transit and other infrastructure currently exists or is planned, 
including in Major Transit Station Areas, Urban Growth Centres, and other Strategic 
Growth Areas. The draft polices will be consulted on in early 2022 and be before 
Council for adoption late spring 2022. 
 
The draft polices will be consulted on in early 2022 and be before Council for adoption 
late spring 2022. 
 
Electrifying transportation 
 
Electric vehicles are currently more expensive for most households but this is changing 
rapidly. The Government of Canada has recently set a mandatory target for all new 
light-duty cars and passenger trucks sales to be zero-emission by 2035, accelerating 
Canada's previous goal of 100 percent sales by 2040 and has invested over $1 billion to 
support increased zero-emission vehicle adoption.   
 
Toronto can complement this federal sales targets by accelerating its plans to advance 
a network of public charging installations across the city while encouraging EV uptake 
through incentives, and disincentivizing the use of gasoline and diesel vehicles. 
Incentives and disincentives may be financial and/or non-financial. Financial incentives 
for purchasing EVs help with the initial higher purchase price point while non-financial 
incentives such as preferred parking or EV only lanes have been shown to encourage 
EV ownership.  Cities have used disincentives such as congestion charges and parking 
charges for gasoline vehicles as ways to discourage fossil-fuel powered vehicles. The 
City will explore these and other options, evaluate equity impacts and report back to 
City Council in 2023 with recommendations on opportunities to encourage EV adoption. 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 32 of 39 
 
For those not able to purchase a private electric vehicle, the electrification of our public 
transit fleet enables a long distance carbon free ride. Currently, subways and streetcars 
are virtually emissions free while the TTC's Green Bus Program, approved by the TTC 
Board in November 2017, will see the procurement of only zero-emission buses starting 
in 2025 and achieving an entirely zero emissions bus fleet by 2040.  By 2032, the TTC 
bus fleet will be almost 50 per cent converted. 
 
Some of the already existing programs or policies requiring implementation and 
acceleration:   
• Cycling Network Plan  
• Toronto Electric Vehicle Strategy 
• TTC Green Bus Program 
• RapidTO Bus & Streetcar Priority Plan 
• Bike Share Toronto 
• TTC’s 5-Year Service Plan & 10-Year Outlook   
• Transportation Demand Management Strategy 
 
5. Increase local renewable energy to contribute to a resilient, carbon-free grid   
To achieve the 2030 community-wide target, expanding local renewable energy 
generation in Toronto alongside energy storage will be critical.  
 
The 2030 target which addresses this Critical Step is: 
• 50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from renewable or low-carbon sources 
 
Reaching net zero requires reducing energy consumption, electrifying the consumption 
that remains, and ensuring that the electricity available from the provincial grid and 
locally is net zero carbon. This will involve expanding local renewable energy generation 
in Toronto along with energy storage. The benefits of this approach go beyond limiting 
climate change - local renewable energy generation will increase resilience to power 
outages from extreme weather and other causes 
 
As a city, we use a lot of energy but generate very little of our own.  Most of Toronto's 
electrical energy comes from the provincial electricity grid.  
 
Toronto's plans for reaching net zero are predicated on electrifying heating and 
transportation fuels through the use of key technologies -- heat pumps and electric 
vehicles -- because they are extremely energy efficient. Electric vehicles can go further 
per unit of energy than gasoline vehicles. Similarly, heat pumps are three times more 
efficient than natural gas heating. 
  
But switching our energy consumption from fossil fuels to electricity is exceeding less 
effective if Toronto does not draw from a zero-carbon, resilient electricity supply.  While 
conservation of electricity is the cheapest option to dampen the demand for electricity, it 
will not be enough to meet all of our consumptive need. 
 
Furthermore, even though Ontario currently has a relatively low emission grid compared 
to other provinces, grid emissions are expected to rise starting in 2023 due to an 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 33 of 39 
increase in gas fired electricity generation when nuclear stations come offline.  This 
trend has wide-ranging implications for Toronto’s ability to rapidly reduce GHG 
emissions. Currently, there are no commitments to ensure that the provincial electricity 
grid in Ontario will become zero emissions by 2050 or sooner.  
 
If the provincial grid is not decarbonized, Toronto will need to generate its own electricity 
renewably to achieve net zero.   
 
To set us on this path, the City will work with Toronto Hydro, the Province, and other 
partners to ensure that electricity supply is enhanced by local generation. This will entail 
addressing barriers and developing strategies to increase deployment of renewable 
energy and storage technologies. These technologies include solar, wind, biomass, 
geothermal, waste heat recovery, and heat pumps. 
 
This will entail addressing barriers and developing strategies to increase deployment of 
renewable energy and storage technologies. Permitting and connection processes were 
identified as key opportunities to reduce installers’ and therefore, customers’ permitting 
costs and timelines for installation for both small-scale residential and large-scale 
commercial installations. Affordability was identified as a barrier that needs to be 
addressed in order to rapidly expand distributed renewable energy generation in 
Toronto. While the cost of solar generation has declined over the years, the payback 
period is still relatively long, which deters further uptake particularly for residential 
projects, highlighting the need for financial incentives.  
 
These challenges and opportunities illustrate the need for coordination and problem-
solving with Toronto's local utility.  This work will include direct focus on promoting and 
acceleration local adoption of renewable energy generation through a review of 
regulatory options, potential incentives, and permitting and connection processes as 
well as other identified restrictions.  
 
The renewable energy sector brings multiple benefits with respect to job creation and 
resiliency. It is estimated that for every megawatt (MW) of solar generated, 25 to 35 jobs 
are created in the sector. During grid outages, resilient renewable energy systems such 
as “solar plus storage” provide critical emergency power that can help people in need 
and ease demand on emergency fuel supplies.  
 
Achieving Net Zero by 2040 
City Council's Climate Emergency Declaration requested staff to report back on the 
feasibility of achieving net zero by 2040. Technical modelling demonstrates that 
achieving net zero by 2040 is feasible, but dependent on significant acceleration of 
climate actions and well-coordinated efforts at local, regional, national and global levels.  
 
To achieve net zero emissions by 2040 governments, residents and businesses will 
need to take bold action. This will include all homes and buildings undergoing deep 
energy retrofits and using heat pumps for space and water heating, eliminating natural 
gas appliances, and electrifying all public transit and personal and commercial vehicles. 
Please refer to the TransformTO Net Zero Framework Technical Report for more details 
(Attachment C).  
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 34 of 39 
 
The actions the City government will take to lead, enable, and advocate for climate 
change to achieve the net zero will be aligned with the actions presented in this report. 
Getting to net zero by 2040 will require the City to continue taking bold action to reduce 
GHGs from buildings, transportation and waste. The approach on how to implement 
these actions will change depending on the progress Toronto has made, available 
technology and innovations, and leading practices. This report includes specific actions 
that the City will deliver from 2022 to 2025 found in Attachment A. Detailed reports 
outlining recommendations for bylaws, policies, and new programs will be brought back 
to City Council for consideration starting in 2022 and continue over the following four 
years.   
 
Dependencies to Achieving Net Zero 
Although the recommendations in this report and the Net Zero Strategy (Attachment B) 
are intended to support action-oriented delivery of a net zero future, a number of 
'dependencies' need to be addressed in order to realize our targets: 
 
• Action must begin now and must focus on equity: Achieving the 2030 GHG 
target requires that all existing climate actions continue and for additional bold action 
to begin as soon as possible. A focus on equity in program and policy design and 
delivery will maximize participation of all Toronto residents so that benefits can be 
realized sooner and last longer. 
 
• Action from all levels of government will also need to align and accelerate: 
Provincial and federal policy and resources are required to enable Toronto’s ability 
to realize a net zero future. Aligned action will also amplify local efforts so that 
financial returns are realized sooner and GHG emissions reductions start earlier.  
 
• The electricity system needs to be carbon free: The emissions intensity (amount 
of GHG emitted per unit electricity) of Ontario's electricity grid is projected to 
increase. For Toronto to get to net zero, the grid needs to carbon free.  Failing this, 
the city can only rely on the “net” part of the target and will need to purchase carbon 
offsets or renewable energy certificates, both of which add significant cost to 
becoming net zero.  Ensuring that electricity generation does not produce carbon 
pollution also addresses the scale of the global challenge.  
 
At a local level, while it is important to decarbonize the grid (reducing the carbon or 
GHG emissions of Ontario’s electricity supply), the electricity system needs to be 
able to adapt to new demands as heating and transportation are electrified. 
Focusing on conservation first can reduce electricity consumption and is the most 
inexpensive way to provide additional electricity capacity; however, additional work 
will be necessary to fully understand how to enable large-scale electrification of 
transportation and buildings and manage peaks in electricity demand.  
 
• The labour market must shift and local supply chains must be developed: The 
labour market must shift and new critical supply chains need to be developed to 
bring down costs. The skills mix and capacity of the labour force will need to scale 
up rapidly and new robust supply chains for new technologies, such as heat pumps 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 35 of 39 
and electric vehicles, will need to be in place in order to deliver the actions required 
to achieve net zero. 
 
• Innovative and adaptive delivery mechanisms must be adopted to scale up: 
Although all actions presented in the strategy are technologically feasible, 
conventional delivery mechanisms are likely too slow and costly to deliver the rapid 
transformation envisioned to achieve the 2030 target. City processes will need to be 
nimble, as already demonstrated in the quick implementation of new programs in 
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. ActiveTO is one of those programs where 
dedicated road space facilitated active transportation for essential trips and physical 
activity keeping residents safe and healthy during the pandemic.  ActiveTO 
demonstrated a quick response to support a crisis by "instituting priority bus lanes, 
improved cycling infrastructure, expansion of bike share and weekend recreational 
street closures, among others."   
 
Similarly, quick action will need to be applied to the volume of building retrofits 
needed to reach Toronto's proposed targets.  The current model of retrofitting one 
house at a timewill  need to be replaced by a bulk retrofit program where many 
houses are improved at once. To do this, municipal processes and programs will 
need adapt and be aligned in order to address barriers that households might face. 
For instance, a household wishing to undertake a retrofit or use an electric vehicle 
should not face any barriers in terms of information or action that might result from 
conflicting municipal, provincial or utility policies.  
 
• Impacts on material and land resources should be accounted for: The economy 
will need to produce large numbers of electric vehicles and deliver building retrofits 
and renewable energy in short order. Supplying or manufacturing these resources 
creates demand for concrete, wood, insulation, batteries, and land. The 
environmental, social, and economic implications will need to be carefully 
considered to ensure this does not result in additional GHG emissions and negative 
impacts to the environment. Indigenous worldviews and circular economy principles 
are required to minimize impacts on resources and ensure principles of global 
sustainability are maintained.   
 
It is also crucial to note that we will only achieve a successful implementation through a 
respectful approach to the land, water and air, collaboratively with the diverse 
communities across Toronto. In 2010, the City adopted the Statement of Commitment to 
the Aboriginal Communities of Toronto, and in 2015 City Council, in consultation with 
the Aboriginal Affairs Committee, identified eight Calls to Action from the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission's final report as priorities for implementation by the City. 
Included in this, is the Call to Action for the federal, provincial, territorial, and municipal 
governments to fully adopt and implement the United Nations Declaration on the Rights 
of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) as the framework for reconciliation.  
 
Meaningfully working with members of Toronto's Indigenous communities, and including 
an Indigenous worldview in the Net Zero Strategy, are important to the ongoing 
relationship with Indigenous communities on climate issues and the successful 
implementation of the Net Zero Strategy.  
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 36 of 39 
Coordination and Partnerships 
No municipal government has the legislative tools or fiscal capacity to achieve 
ambitious targets on its own. Almost all of the key actions in the Strategy require 
additional approval, authority, or action from other levels of government to enable our 
success. For example, implementation of the Existing Buildings Strategy to retrofit 
homes and buildings will require additional legal authority to set performance standards 
from the provincial government. 
 
The recommendations in this report identify that transformative policy to phase out 
natural gas and to clean up the way that electricity is generated in the province are 
critical enablers to our success. In other recommendations, Toronto has identified 
where coordinated support will need to align with provincial and federal policy to 
enshrine net zero emissions in building requirement and to accelerate EV uptake.  
 
Federal and provincial government support 
 
There is already alignment being signalled at the federal level.  Of note are: a signal that 
the price on carbon pollution will rise by $15 per year from 2023 to 2030 reaching $170 
per tonne by 2030; a mandatory target that at least 50 per cent of new light duty 
vehicles will be required to be "zero emission vehicles" by 2030, with 100 per cent by 
2035; and 100 per cent net zero emitting electricity system by 2035.  
 
Toronto will need a matching workforce poised with the necessary communication, 
technical and business skills to meet accelerated job growth in these areas. 
  
Continued and increased funding and financial incentives to encourage consumer 
uptake from both the provincial and federal governments will be necessary to drive 
climate retrofits of buildings. 
 
Leadership and Innovation 
 
Toronto is considered a leader amongst its peers but is also a member of a coalition of 
more than 1,000 cities are delivering their science-based commitments and solutions as 
part of the C40 Cities Race to Zero initiative. As part of Cities Race to Zero, Toronto is 
contributing to the largest ever coalition of any order of government committed to and 
delivering on the 1.5 degree objective of the Paris Agreement. More information about 
Toronto's programs can be found in Attachment D: Highlights of Toronto's Programs To 
Date.   
 
In addition to being a leader, Toronto is seeking opportunities to innovate through 
collaborative relationships with organizations such as the MaRS Discovery District and 
their Mission from MaRS Climate Impact Challenge.  The Mission from MaRS Climate 
Impact Challenge is a national challenge made up of prequalified companies 
showcasing climate-tech solutions with the highest potential to reduce GHG emissions 
with the goal of widespread adoption of new technology. The City intends to leverage 
these types of solutions to drive down our own emissions while encouraging others to 
do the same.    
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 37 of 39 
Achieving Co-Benefits from Climate Action 
In 2017, TransformTO proposed guiding principles for the design and delivery of climate 
action so that public benefit is maximized and harm is minimized.  These guiding 
principles remain as the driving force behind the development and implementation of 
the Net Zero Strategy:  
 
• Advance social equity;  
• Improve affordability particularly for vulnerable residents;  
• Protect low-income residents;  
• Contribute to poverty reduction;  
• Enhance and strengthen the local economy;  
• Maintain and create good quality local jobs; 
• Improve public health; and  
• Create resilient communities and infrastructure.  
 
To ensure that implementation continues to be guided by these principles, an Advisory 
Group of public members will be convened, and designed to ensure that the 
implementation of the Net Zero Strategy is equitable and reflects the priorities, interests 
and values of the broader community. The Environment & Energy Division will convene 
the advisory group of community members, including youth and Indigenous 
representation, in 2022 to ensure equity is integrated and supported through the 
implementation of actions as outlined in the TransformTO Short-Term Implementation 
Plan 2022-2025 (Attachment A) and the Net Zero Strategy (Attachment B). 
Investing in a Net Zero Toronto 
Climate change, climate resilience, and the economy are deeply connected. Recent 
events, including the COVID-19 pandemic and increasing incidences of extreme 
weather, have demonstrated the impacts that unexpected events can have on the 
economy.  
 
Impact on Toronto's economy 
 
Existing climate action has already strengthened Toronto's economy. Toronto's green 
industries are one of the fastest growing sectors of Toronto's economy.  The sectors’ 
employment continues to grow twice as fast as the overall employment in Toronto (3.9 
per cent vs.1.6 per cent annually between 2015 and 2019) and contributed an estimated 
$6.55 billion to the local GDP in 2018. 
 
Transitioning to a low- or zero-carbon economy will continue job growth and is expected 
to impact labour markets in four ways: additional jobs will be created in emerging 
sectors, some employment will be shifted (e.g., from fossil fuels to renewables), certain 
jobs will be reduced or eliminated (e.g., combustion engine vehicle mechanics), and 
many existing jobs will be redefined. Technical modelling shows that pursuing the net 
zero by 2040 pathway will add an additional 1.2 million person-years of employment. 
This amounts to approximately 40,000-50,000 jobs annually with the majority in building 
retrofits and infrastructure projects. 
 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 38 of 39 
Financial analysis suggests that achieving a net zero Toronto will cost $57 billion to the 
entire community over the next 30 years. If broken down annually, these investments 
are equal to approximately 5 per cent of Toronto's GDP until declining to zero in 2040. 
After 2040, investments are expected to generate a net annual savings. The greatest 
costs come from required investments in transit infrastructure and building retrofits.  
 
Financial Impact on Toronto households 
 
For households, the energy transition will be experienced most directly in how we heat 
and cool homes, and how we move around the city. Net zero pathways show the share 
of Toronto households' income spent on energy services (home heating, electricity, and 
transportation) could decrease by an average of 70 per cent as we move to net zero, 
with an average reduction of nearly $1,200 per household per year compared to the 
status quo. More information and a detailed financial analysis is available in Attachment 
C - TransformTO Net Zero Framework Technical Report.   
 
Conclusion 
The Net Zero Strategy provides detailed targets and a strategy to reach net zero 
greenhouse gas emissions for the City of Toronto by focusing on the near term Council 
adopted target of a 65 per cent reduction by 2030 in order to meet net zero greenhouse 
gas emissions by 2040.  Investments in infrastructure, building retrofits, electric mobility, 
and new energy technologies in present time will result in reduced GHG emissions, 
create new jobs, improve resident health and quality of life, as well as open up 
numerous innovative economic opportunities for years to come.  
 
The pathway to net zero represents a transformation of the energy system and the built 
environment, which will require a coordinated mobilisation of the City and the Toronto 
community at a scale where there are few precedents.  
 
The impacts and total costs of climate change will be determined by how quickly actions 
are implemented and by how deeply GHG emissions are reduced over the next decade.  
For instance, each year, new investments are made in carbon-intensive infrastructure 
and technologies "lock us" into a carbon-intensive pathway. Undoing these investments 
to upgrade or retrofit them at a later date not only delays the expense, it delays the 
benefits that the community can receive and will likely be the more costly option in 
future potentially increasing or prolonging the city's exposure to damage.  
 
While this Strategy requires continued and additional support from all levels of 
government, neighbouring municipalities and regions, utilities, businesses, academia, 
and residents alike, it also requires the City of Toronto to commit to making net zero 
choices at any juncture in decision-making starting from now. 
 
The City of Toronto will continue to pursue actions within its own jurisdiction and 
authority. It is clear that achieving the climate targets required to maintain 1.5 degree 
warming pathways requires considerable collaboration and shared investment amongst 
all three levels of government. Toronto will need to take on stronger advocacy efforts to 
federal and provincial governments to attain additional authorities that will be necessary 
for implementation. 
TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040 Report  
 Page 39 of 39 
 
In addition, an important consideration in the implementation of this Net Zero Strategy is 
that increased reliance on electricity for transportation and heating of buildings could 
mean more vulnerability if the electricity supply is for any reason jeopardized. Key 
resilience strategies in the near and long term will need to focus on ensuring a 
continuous and reliable supply of electricity to homes, businesses and institutions. 
Reduction of electricity consumption and demand management to reduce pressure on 
the current grid capacity and distribution network, and the diversification of electricity 
generation through widespread local renewable energy and storage, will be critical to 
meet the increased demand for electricity forecasted in this Strategy. 
 
Toronto is part of a larger community of cities committing to a net zero by 2050 or 
sooner pathway.  Toronto continues to be viewed as a climate leader by showcasing 
our innovation and entrepreneurship, but also as a contributor deep emission reductions 
worldwide.  
 
Achieving the targets set out in this report will require a different means of delivery and 
decision-making that prioritizes emissions reduction at every possible opportunity.  
 
CONTACT 
 
Nancy Ruscica, Interim Director, Environment & Energy Division 
416-392-2984, Nancy.Ruscica@toronto.ca 
 
Cecilia Fernandez, Acting Manager, Policy & Research, Environment & Energy Division 
416-338-5469, Cecilia.Fernandez@toronto.ca  
 
SIGNATURE 
 
 
 
 
 
Josie Scioli 
Deputy City Manager, Corporate Services 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
Attachment A - TransformTO Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025 
Attachment B - TransformTO Net Zero Strategy: A Climate Action Pathway to 2030 and 
Beyond 
Attachment C - TransformTO Net Zero Framework Technical Report 
Attachment D - Highlights of Toronto's Programs to Date  
Attachment E - Summary of Public and Stakeholder Consultations (2018-2021) 
Attachment F - Small Engine Lawn and Garden Equipment  
 
