RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | INTRODUCTION
 1
TOOLKIT
Neighbourhood resilience is based on 
collaborative problem-solving, and built 
at the speed of trust.
The Resilient Neighbourhoods Program is a collaboration 
between community-based organizations, the City of 
Vancouver, and other partners. We’re working together to 
build resilience by supporting neighbourhood-level efforts 
to address shocks and stresses.
This toolkit is designed for community organizations 
looking to support their neighbourhood, but can also be 
used by individuals looking to expand their knowledge 
about resilience.
Resilient  
Neighbourhoods
FORMING A 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE TEAM
ASSESSING 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE
MAPPING 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE
PLANNING 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE ACTION
READYING 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
DISASTER RESPONSE
Contents
01
02
03
04
05
..... 7
..... 9
..... 21
..... 31
..... 38
INTRODUCTION
..... 3
APPENDIX
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
PROGRAM BACKGROUND
..... 83
..... 86
..... 87
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | INTRODUCTION
 3
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Acknowledgement of the Traditional, Unceded Territory of the 
Musqueam, Squamish and Tsleil-Waututh People 
As Vancouver is on the unceded territories of the xʷməθkʷəy̓ əm 
(Musqueam), Sḵwx̱ wú7mesh (Squamish) and səl̓ ilwətaɁɬ/sel̓ íl̓ witulh (Tsliel-
Waututh) Nations, it’s essential that we continue to build reciprocal 
relationships that recognize the generous and resilient cultures of the 
First Peoples who’ve been here for millennia and to take their direction. 
Vancouver’s Reconciliation journey is just beginning, and this work is 
inextricably linked to resilience in our community.
Acknowledgement of Contributors 
This toolkit was developed through the Resilient Neighbourhoods 
Program pilot from October 2017 and April 2019 by the City of Vancouver 
and four community partners: 312 Main, Britannia Community Services 
Centre, Collingwood Neighbourhood House and Dunbar Community 
Centre Association. 
It is important to note that many components of this toolkit draw 
directly from resources used in, and created by, generous organizations, 
researchers and practitioners around the world. We wish to express our 
deepest gratitude to all of the individuals and organizations who shared 
their knowledge, expertise and resources with us, and allowed us to 
adapt them to Vancouver’s own context. We wish to extend a particular 
thanks to San Francisco’s Empowered Communities Program for 
sharing their Resilientville mapping exercise with us, the Wellington 
Regional Emergency Management Office for sharing their Community 
Emergency Hub guides with us, and the creators of the Communities 
Advancing Resilience Toolkit for all allowing us to adapt their work. 
Thank you for supporting our Resilient Neighbourhoods Program. This 
work would not have been possible without you. 
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | INTRODUCTION
 4
What is Resilience? 
Resilience is the ability to survive, adapt and thrive in the face of challenges. 
In cities, challenges may include acute shocks such as earthquakes, floods, 
and fires, or chronic stresses such as affordability, aging infrastructure, 
and social isolation. Building resilience in your neighbourhood involves 
thinking about all of these issues, and how they relate to each other, and 
finding solutions that can have multiple benefits. 
Why Resilient Neighbourhoods? 
For many of us, our neighbourhood is more than where we spend the 
majority of our time. It is our community. Neighbourhoods are also where 
we often experience major challenges, including the impacts of shocks 
(such as earthquakes) and impacts of stresses (such as social isolation). 
Working together within neighbourhoods enables us to create innovative, 
grassroots solutions―often well-before governments have time to act. 
Neighbourhoods are physically and socially diverse, and the people who 
live and work in them are full of unique knowledge, skills, assets, networks 
and capacity. 
Resilient neighbourhoods build on these qualities to help their communities 
thrive day-to-day, and leverage them to better take care of each other 
during emergencies and disasters. The Resilient Neighbourhoods Program 
is based on the idea that resilience is everyone’s responsibility, and involves 
collaboration across neighbours, organizations, sectors and communities.
INTRODUCTION
y
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | INTRODUCTION
 5
What is the relationship between Emergency Preparedness 
and Resilience?
Emergency Preparedness is an important part of resilience! It involves 
planning for disasters and emergencies, and includes actions like building 
an emergency kit or making a plan with your family in case of emergencies.
Community resilience is a broader umbrella that includes many types 
of community effort that builds social, ecological, economic and health 
wellbeing.
In this toolkit, we focus on collaborative problem-solving, and use disaster 
and emergency scenarios to frame many of the activities. Resilience 
involves neighbours, informal groups, local organizations, businesses and 
government agencies working together to survive, adapt and thrive in 
the face of challenges. As a result, it’s not only about adapting to and 
preparing for difficulties but―where possible―looking to solve them 
before they happen, or planning for long-term recovery after the fact.  
What is the relationship between Sustainability and 
Resilience? 
Sustainability and resilience are different but complementary and 
connected. Sustainability is about thoughtfully managing resources to 
ensure the needs of the present don’t compromise our ability to meet our 
needs in the future. 
We must continue to work towards a sustainable future. Building resilience 
is part of this: ensuring we look at potential risks so we can continue to 
thrive in the face of unforeseen disruptions.
Who can use this Toolkit?
This toolkit is designed to be used by neighbourhood-based organizations 
such as non-profits, charities, social enterprises, cooperatives and 
associations. 
This toolkit contains a series of activities and templates to help local 
organizations map, plan for and respond to shocks and stresses. Each 
activity helps build a shared understanding of the types of risks the 
community may face, and how the community can address them.
Organizations can use this toolkit regardless of the sector they are 
in; whether you provide homelessness services, skill development to 
immigrants, offer arts and cultural programming or support sustainability 
and climate action. 
We know that organizations such as yours build resilience in our city every 
day, especially by building important social connections and networks, and 
by supporting vulnerable community members. This toolkit is designed 
to build your organizational capacity to anticipate and reduce risks, and 
continue to serve community members no matter what happens. 
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | INTRODUCTION
 6
How to use this Toolkit
The tools, resources and activities in this toolkit can benefit your organization and neighbourhood 
regardless of whether an emergency event takes place. They are designed to foster collaboration, 
develop group problem-solving, and build capacity to collectively address community challenges 
and changes―no matter what they may be. 
Any part of the toolkit can be used on its own, or as part of the larger, step-by-step process. 
Similarly, any part of the tooklit can―and should―be adapted by you to meet the needs of your 
organization. You may wish to change questions in Q&A documents; use particular exercises over 
others; or focus on particular challenges. 
This is a living document. Suggestions and revisions are welcomed. All we ask is that you cite this 
work and keep attributions listed for each component of the Toolkit to the original authors. If you 
make a change to any component of this toolkit that makes it better or more effective, let us know 
by emailing us at resilience@vancouver.ca.
Resilient Neighbourhoods Toolkit Cycle
Ideally this tooklit will be revisited on an annual basis, based on your organization’s needs. Doing 
so allows you to reconnect once again in community, while re-assessing particular elements of your 
plan based on new information or challenges.
FORM A TEAM
ASSESS 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE
IMPLEMENT 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN
MAP 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE
RESPOND TO/
RECOVER FROM 
EMERGENCIES/
DISASTERS IF  
AND WHEN  
THEY HAPPEN
PLAN 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE 
ACTIONS
PREPARE  
DISASTER  
SUPPORT HUB
ENGAGE 
COMMUNITY 
MEMBERS 
THROUGHOUT
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | FORMING A NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE TEAM
 7
Neighbourhood resilience cannot be built by one person or organization 
alone. Resilience requires collaboration from people with different skills, 
knowledge and perspectives.
Building a team is an opportunity to connect and align priorities across 
departments and organizations, and foster collaborative problem-solving!
Where possible, we recommend establishing a committee of individuals 
who represent either different departments within your organization and/
or multiple organizations within your neighbourhood.
Some possible backgrounds or qualities of team members could be―but 
are not limited to: 
•	 Staff members who represent departments already working to 
support social connection, health and wellness, arts and culture, 
sustainability, food, or emergency preparedness; 
•	 Members of other neighbourhood organizations with specific 
knowledge or expertise around social connection, health and 
wellness, arts and culture, sustainability, food, or emergency 
preparedness;
•	 Community members who bring unique perspectives such as seniors, 
youth, newcomers and immigrants, local business owners, etc.  
Team sizes can vary, but we recommend 5–7 people, each committed 
to the process. However, more people than these will be included in the 
overall project.
Your core team will work together to organize and facilitate workshops or 
events, and lead the implementation of action plans. 
Equity, Diversity and Inclusion are critical to building resilience for the 
neighbourhood as a whole. While a manageable team size is quite small, 
the members of the team should approximately mirror the makeup of the 
neighbourhood. 
FORMING A 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE TEAM
01
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES 
FOR MODULE 1
1. Forming a Team
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | FORMING A NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE TEAM
 8
A truly representative group will better understand community needs and 
bring essential perspectives to each project. Broad representation also 
builds trust within communities.
Many many activities in the toolkit should include community involvement, 
so your team will need to actively work to encourage community members 
to participate. 
Questions to ask to ensure your team is reflective of your neighbourhood 
may be: 
•	 Who is impacted by this work? 
•	 Who benefits from this work?
•	 Who is included on the proposed team and who is left out? 
Consider age, race, socio-economic factors, abilities, gender, etc. 
•	 Who needs to be added to the team?
•	 What support might individuals need in order to participate? 
Consider meeting locations, languages used, etc.
Once you have identified your team members, your next step should be 
to determine what you hope to achieve as a group. Use the “Forming a 
Team” template to get started! 
*Tip: Forming a team can take longer than you might think. Give yourself lots of time to 
identify the right people and get their buy-in.
FORMING A TEAM
 8
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES  
FOR MODULE 1
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 9
Now that you have formed your team, the next step is to collect data on 
your neighbourhood’s resilience strengths, opportunities and challenges. 
This process itself will generate foundations of resilience―creating 
dialogue, unlocking cooperative potential and improving awareness of 
needs and opportunities. 
The Neighbourhood Resilience Assessment contains tools to gather 
perceptions from community members about strengths and weaknesses 
and shocks and stresses of your neighbourhood. It is an opportunity to 
discuss what matters most with your community. The perceptions you 
glean from this assessment will be the foundation of your Neighbourhood 
Resilience Action Plan (Module 4 in the toolkit). At the end of this activity 
you will have a Neighbourhood Resilience Report Card with core strengths, 
weaknesses, shocks, and stresses that you can address through planning 
and action.
There are two main components to this process:
COMPONENT 1: SHOCKS AND STRESSES ASSESSMENT
Determining which shocks (sudden events) and stresses (chronic, 
ongoing challenges) are of greatest concern in your neighbourhood.
Neighbourhoods will likely have different concerns around shocks and 
stresses, depending on how likely they are to happen, and the potential 
impact if they do. There’s no way to accurately predict all future shocks, 
but this assessment helps community members learn more about 
what they do know, and what challenges they could or currently face. 
 
Remember, while shocks are often described as disasters, stresses can be 
slow-moving disasters that erode communities over time, such as opioid 
crises or lack of affordability.
COMPONENT 2: NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE BASELINE ASSESSMENT
Determining your neighbourhood’s current state of resilience, or baseline. 
ASSESSING 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE
02
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES 
FOR MODULE 2
1. Neighbourhood 
Shocks and Stresses 
Assessment
2. Neighbourhood 
Resilience Baseline 
Assessment (Individual)
3. Neighbourhood 
Resilience Baseline 
Assessment (Collective)
4. Neighbourhood 
Resilience Report Card
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 10
This tool is designed to understand community perceptions of the 
conditions foster resilience in the neighbourhood. 
Some of the most important foundations of community resilience are:
1.	 Community teamwork – people pursuing common goals, sharing, 
communicating, cooperating and learning; 
2.	 Community structures, networks and organizations – groups of 
individuals that weave the social fabric of the neighbourhood, and;
3.	 Personal resilience of community members – individual values, 
perseverance and access to resources.
BASELINES AND QUALITATIVE INDICATORS
A baseline provides a reference point for the condition of something at 
a moment in time. This assessment focuses on establishing a baseline of 
resilience within your community, which allows you to track changes over 
time and determine their size and direction (whether they are improving 
or degrading).
Information is gathered through survey questions answered by community 
members. However, a community may decide to include quantitative (e.g., 
# of hospitals) questions―which can largely be done through Mapping 
Neighbourhood Resilience (Module 3) of this toolkit.
ASSESSMENT PROCESS
STEP 1: CHOOSE YOUR SCOPE
Decide the specific population or geographical area you hope to assess 
and determine who or what is within the scope of your assessment.
Some questions to help this include: 
•	 What is your organization’s mission and who do you serve  
day-to-day?
•	 Does your organization serve a specific population or demographic 
(like women or seniors)? Or does your organization serve an area 
within the neighbourhood?
•	 Will you also survey staff and volunteers of your organization, or 
just service users?
•	 If your organization serves a geographic area, will you survey 
people throughout the neighbourhood? Or will you choose a 
smaller area around your facility like a 10 block radius? 
Make sure you consider how to ensure different groups within the 
community have the opportunity to participate. For example, some 
people may not use email, or a segment of the population may not speak 
English. Understanding the demographics of your community will help 
you design an appropriate assessment process.
 10
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 11
STEP 2: DECIDE HOW YOU WILL CONDUCT THE ASSESSMENT AND 
DETERMINE QUESTIONS
Next, consider how best to gather information from community 
members. Think of how you will reach the most people and consider how 
representative of the community those people are. It may be useful to 
use more than one method. Of course, it is impossible to survey every 
single person, but an attempt should be made to ensure that the range 
of community perspectives and experiences will be represented by the 
responses.
You may also wish to ensure specific people participate because they 
have particular knowledge or expertise about an issue. These people 
may be community leaders, neighbourhood members, professionals or 
representatives of other community organizations.
Some options for collecting responses may include: 
•	 In-person interview or interviews 
•	 Online survey 
•	 Paper survey
•	 Door-to-door survey
•	 Workshop 
•	 Informal conversations at events
When deciding which method of evaluation to use, consider the time and 
resources it will take to gather, enter and analyze responses. Consider 
whether you will need to print materials, book meeting rooms, or offer 
translation or child care services. 
Your assessment should contain two parts (see Appendix for editable 
templates):
1.	 The Shocks and Stresses Assessment: These questions gather 
important community perspectives to help you create high-level 
goals and objectives in your action plan, and will support your 
Disaster Support Hub planning in step 5 of this toolkit.
2.	 The Neighbourhood Resilience Baseline Assessment. There are two 
sets of questions to choose from when designing the assessment. 
One asks respondents about their frequency of participation in 
events, the other asks participants to evaluate their neighbourhood 
to the best of their knowledge. Decide which type of survey you 
would like to conduct and shorten the assessment to a short-list 
of questions (known as indicators) which are most important for 
capturing attributes of resilience for your neighbourhood.
Each of the Assessment Tools ends with a long-form response question to 
learn more about what people in your neighbourhood value most.
 11
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 12
Below are key considerations when drafting the list of survey questions: 
•	 Select a few (2-3) questions from each of the Resilience 
Dimensions (see below). Choose questions that are most important 
to your organization and neighbourhood. Revise or add to these 
questions, as needed. 
•	 Keep it relatively short and simple―the less time it takes to 
complete, the more likely people are to complete it. We suggest 
using around 21 questions total. 
•	 Test the survey questions with colleagues or friends to ensure 
questions are easily understood and to determine how long it takes 
to complete the survey.
•	 Change the ranking system if you need to―some organizations 
may choose to use a scale of 1-4. Tip: Avoid odd-numbered scales 
as respondents are likely to choose the middle response instead of 
thinking more critically about their answer.
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE DIMENSIONS
HEALTH AND 
BASIC NEEDS
SOCIAL 
CONNECTION  
AND CARING
LOCAL 
LEADERSHIP
TECHNOLOGY AND 
INFORMATION
PHYSICAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE
LOCAL  
ECONOMY
ENVIRONMENT
 12
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 13
STEP 3: CONDUCT THE SURVEY
WHAT TO INCLUDE
Prepare a short, simple introductory statement that you will use to invite 
people to participate in the survey. The introduction should include 
information about your organization and the purpose of the survey.
Explain how the results of the survey will be used and provide details 
about whether or not responses will be kept anonymous. Identifying or 
personal information is not necessary to collect, but you may choose to 
have a section for people to provide you with their contact information 
should they wish to come to future workshops or get involved in building 
neighbourhood resilience. If so, this information should be kept private. 
SENDING THE SURVEY
Ensure you send the survey to people from different backgrounds and 
perspectives. Consider whether you need to translate the survey, help 
people to fill it out etc. Consider whether youth, elders, people with 
disabilities, Indigenous Peoples and People of Colour, newcomers and 
people with low-incomes are well represented in who you send it to―and 
how accessible the survey is. Some digital platforms you may wish to use 
include Survey Monkey or Google Surveys.
Include a deadline by which you expect responses to ensure people 
complete the survey in time.
Other organizations may be willing to send your survey out so that you can 
reach a more diverse group of people within your community.
Once the survey is sent, send follow-up requests for responses at least 
once, and in accordance with a deadline you establish.
EXAMPLE INTRODUCTION:
WELCOME TO THE [ORGANIZATION NAME] 
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE SURVEY!
Thank you for taking part in this important survey 
to measure resilience in [neighbourhood name]. 
This survey will help us understand some of 
our opportunities as a community to make our 
neighbourhood more resilient, and address some 
of the challenges we face. 
The survey should take approximately [length of 
time] to complete. There are no right or wrong 
answers: if you don’t know answers to some of the 
questions, respond to the best of your knowledge.
 13
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 14
STEP 4: ANALYZE AND SUMMARIZE RESULTS
It may be helpful to use guiding questions to help review results. They should 
be used in conjunction with a more in-depth analysis (described below). 
These guiding questions below may also be useful in Step 5, Generating 
your Neighbourhood Resilience Report Card. You may also choose to review 
survey results from My Health, My Community, which provides an overview 
of health and wellbeing indicators at the community level.
GUIDING QUESTIONS
1.	 Do any of these results surprise you? Which ones and why? 
2.	 Do the results reaffirm what you intuitively knew to be true? Which 
ones and how? 
3.	 Could any of the questions be interpreted differently by different 
people? If yes, how does that difference in interpretation affect the 
assessment outcomes? 
ANALYSIS 
Shocks and Stresses Assessment: Gather responses from all of the 
Shocks and Stresses Assessment sheets. Respondents may have already 
indicated the top 3 shocks and top 3 stresses they are concerned about. If 
not, calculate the top 3 shocks and top 3 stresses by assigning a numerical 
value (from 0 to 3) next to each response (see table below). Total the 
points for each section, and select the 3 highest scoring shocks and 
stresses for each survey. Combine the top ranking shocks and stresses 
for all surveys and determine the most common 5 shocks and stresses.
How likely do you 
think it is that each of 
the following shocks  
will occur?
How serious would the 
potential impacts of each of 
the following shocks be for 
your community?
How concerned are you 
about each of the following 
shocks affecting your 
community?
Not at all likely
0  
points
Low Impacts
0  
points
Not at all concerned
0  
points
Not very likely
1  
point
Moderate Impacts
1  
point
Not very concerned
1  
point
Somewhat likely
2  
points
Considerable Impacts
2  
points
Somewhat concerned
2  
points
Very likely
3  
points
Extreme Impacts
3  
points
Very concerned
3  
points
Neighbourhood Resilience Baseline Assessment: A simple analysis of 
survey responses includes calculating the percentage of respondents who 
have indicated a particular ranking. This helps you to see how popular a 
particular answer was, and how many in your community agree. You can do 
this by assigning points to each response. For example, using the ranking 
scale mentioned above where 1=strongly disagree and 4=strongly agree, 
you can count the number of respondents who agree (those who indicate 
they agree or strongly agree) with a particular indicator. If a majority of 
respondents circle agree or strongly agree, this is an area of strength in 
the community. If a majority select disagree or strongly disagree, this is an 
area for improvement. A community profile can be developed based on 
these results.
 14
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 15
Gather together responses from all of the Baseline Assessment sheets. 
Calculate the average for each Resilience Dimension. Determine which 
Resilience Dimension had the most negative ratings (strongly disagree), 
and which had the most positive ones (strongly agree). Use a scale from 
1–4 for “strongly disagree to “strongly agree”, and 0 for “don’t know” (see 
table below). Add up the numbers for each response. Total the points 
for each “Resilience Dimension” area. This will help paint a picture of the 
conditions of resilience in your neighbourhood.
Example
Dimension
Indicator
Response
e.g. Health and 
Basic Needs
e.g. My neighbourhood 
supports programs for 
children and families
strongly 
disagree 
 
1
 
diagree 
 
2
 
agree 
 
3
strongly 
agree 
 
4
don’t 
know 
 
0
STEP 5. GENERATE YOUR NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE REPORT CARD
Use the Neighbourhood Resilience Report Card (see Appendix) to 
capture a summary of the results. This tool can be used to report back to 
participants on results of the survey, and is an important foundation for 
your Neighbourhood Resilience Action Plan. 
STEP 6: REVISE OR REFINE YOUR NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE REPORT 
CARD 
Develop a description of the current condition of neighbourhood 
resilience. The aim is to distill from the summary results with the key 
resilience characteristics of your neighbourhood across all dimensions 
of resilience, and identify your top shocks and stresses. This illustrative 
summary of your neighbourhood constitutes the baseline. 
 15
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 16
SHOCKS AND STRESSES QUICK FACTS 
As you embark on discussions about shocks and stresses in your 
neighbourhood, it may be helpful to use some of the facts below to 
highlight the many intersecting risks we face. Our knowledge of our shocks 
and stresses is constantly changing, but at the time of the development 
of this toolkit, these facts are accurate. 
You could use these facts informally when discussing each element of the 
process, or in your own materials and worksheets.
EARTHQUAKES
There is a 100% chance Vancouver and the Lower 
Mainland will be hit by a damaging earthquake; we just 
don’t know when. The last earthquake in our area to 
register magnitude 9.0 or larger happened in 1700 and 
was experienced by local First Nations who have oral 
histories of this event.
Less than half of Vancouverites report being prepared for 
an earthquake. 
The concentration of earthquakes in this region is due 
to the presence of active faults, or breaks, on the earth’s 
crust that make up the Pacific Ring of Fire—where 
approximately 90% of the world’s earthquakes occur. 
The plates that make up the earth’s crust are moving 
constantly at a speed of 2 to 10cm per year—about how 
fast our fingernails grow. 
An earthquake occurs when plates slide against each 
other. The west coast of BC has unique risk because it is 
one of the few areas in the world where all three types 
of plate movements occur. Plates either slide past one 
another, collide towards each other or diverge, each 
creating different types of earthquakes, which affect 
buildings differently. 
Hundreds of thousands of people in the region would be 
displaced by a major earthquake, with up to $100 billion 
in damages.
Learn more here:  
vancouver.ca/home-property-development/earthquake.aspx
SEA LEVEL RISE 
AND COASTAL 
FLOODING
Conservative models predict a minimum sea level rise of 
1m by 2100 that will impact 13 km2 of land in Vancouver—$7 
billion of land, buildings and infrastructure. 
Sea level rises will also increase the frequency and 
severity of coastal flooding and storm surges, threatening 
shoreline habitats, parks and low-lying urban areas and 
infrastructure. 
Approximately $1 billion of flood management 
infrastructure will be needed to deal with the sea level rise 
by the year 2100. 
In 2019, City Council declared a climate emergency and 
sought appropriate actions to ensure the City of Vancouver 
is doing our part to mitigate this damage. 
Learn more here: 
vancouver.ca/green-vancouver/sea-level-rise.aspx
 16
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 17
EXTREME 
WEATHER AND 
TEMPERATURES
Climate change is causing hotter, drier summers. By 
2050:
•	 Warm days will be 4°C hotter and heat waves 
more frequent.
•	 We will experience double the number of days 
above 25°C compared to 2019.
•	 There will be 20% less rain, resulting in increasing 
duration and frequency of droughts that will 
impact wildlife, vegetation and trees.
Climate change is also causing warmer, wetter winters in 
Vancouver, which includes:
•	 Intensity of heavy rainfall increases by 35%
•	 21% increase in rainfall on wettest days
•	 58% decrease in snowpack on the north shore 
•	 72% decrease in frost days
•	 Extreme heat and cold are already impacting 
Vancouverites.
Learn more here: 
vancouver.ca/green-vancouver/climate-change-adaptation-
strategy.aspx
FOREST FIRES 
AND AIR QUALITY
2017 and 2018 were the worst fire seasons recorded in 
BC. 
In 2017 alone, 1.2 million hectares of land burned, over 
$568 million was spent on fire suppression, and over 
65,000 British Columbians were displaced, with many 
evacuees coming to Vancouver for support and shelter. 
The number of climate refugees will increase and air 
quality will worsen for Vancouverites as a result of 
regional fires, and risk of more localized forest fires will 
increase.
Learn more here:  
www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/safety/wildfire-status
REGIONAL 
FLOODING
The Lower Mainland is at significant risk of flooding from 
the Fraser River and coastal storm surge events that 
threaten significant regional infrastructure and supply 
chains. 
Worst case flooding today is estimated to cost $19 billion 
for coastal flooding and $22 billion for riverine flooding. 
Without active risk reduction measures, this is projected 
to increase to $24 and 32 billion respectively by 2100.
Parts of the Fraser River have flooded before, in 1894 and 
1948, the first of which was the largest Fraser River flood 
on record. It was caused by rapid snowmelt and flooded 
between Harrison and Richmond. The 1948 flood was the 
second largest but caused more damage because of the 
increase in settlement along the flood plain. This flood 
triggered the evacuation of 16,000 people, damaged 
or destroyed 2,000 homes, and cost $210 million in 
damages. 
Learn more here:  
fraserbasin.bc.ca
 17
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 18
OPIOID 
POISONING CRISIS
The ongoing opioid emergency is one example of a 
public health emergency. A poisoned opioid supply has 
resulted in thousands of lives lost and millions of dollars 
re-directed towards response. Exacerbated by stigma, 
a shock occurs every time a new poisoned supply is 
released in Vancouver. Approximately 1,489 people died 
of drug overdose in B.C. in 2018. 
Learn more here: 
vancouver.ca/people-programs/drugs.aspx
OIL SPILLS
Marine and pipeline oil spills increase in likelihood with 
increased shipping. 
A worst-case marine oil spill may cost over $1 billion to 
the local economy and in clean up, and may expose a 
significant number of people to toxic fumes. 
A 2014 study indicates Vancouver’s US$31 billion brand 
value could be impaired by US$3 billion from a major oil 
spill.
Learn more here: 
vancouver.ca/home-property-development/oil-spill-
response.aspx
HAZARDOUS 
MATERIALS
Hazardous materials move regularly through Vancouver 
via road, sea and rail. Many are concentrated around port 
and industrial lands. HazMat incidents contaminate soil, 
air and water, threatening human and ecological health. 
For example, in 2015 a container fire spread toxic smoke 
across parts of East Vancouver for 2 days before being 
extinguished. 
Learn more here: 
www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/air-land-water/
spills-environmental-emergencies
RESIDENTIAL 
FIRES
Vancouver Fire and Rescue Services responds to 
hundreds of fires annually. Each year 20–30 of these 
require an Emergency Social Services (ESS) response 
to provide basic needs support to evacuees with no 
alternative shelter or support networks.
Learn more here: 
vancouver.ca/your-government/vancouver-fire-and-rescue-
services.aspx
 18
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 19
STRESSES FACT SHEET
AFFORDABILITY
Consistently identified as the least affordable city in 
North America, unaffordable commercial and residential 
properties, coupled with low average incomes, and rising 
costs of food and services fuel the affordability crisis. 
Employers are challenged to attract and retain talent, 
while young families are moving away from the city.
Learn more here:  
vancouver.ca/people-programs/housing-vancouver- 
strategy.aspx
FOOD INSECURITY
In Vancouver 10% of households experience food 
insecurity, with single mothers having the highest rates of 
any household type at 34% food insecure (5 times higher 
than couples with no children). 
Food insecurity has life-long impacts on health and 
wellbeing of individuals and communities. Food security 
is also threatened by a decline in culturally-appropriate 
foods. For example, 56% of food service retailers in 
Chinatown were lost between 2009 and 2016. 
Learn more here:  
vancouver.ca/people-programs/vancouvers-food- 
strategy.aspx
HOMELESSNESS
The 2018 homeless count identified 2,181 homeless 
people in Vancouver. Indigenous people are vastly 
overrepresented in these numbers. 
In 2018 and 2019, modular housing has been constructed 
as a temporary response to this crisis. 
Learn more here:  
vancouver.ca/people-programs/homeless-and-low-income-
resources.aspx
POVERTY
More than 1 in 5 children in Metro Vancouver live in 
poverty, including more than 40% of children in single-
parent homes. 
Nearly half of residents in Vancouver do not earn a living 
wage, while 70% of people in the Downtown Eastside are 
considered low income.
Learn more here:  
engage.gov.bc.ca/bcpovertyreduction
SOCIAL 
ISOLATION
According to the 2017 Vancouver Foundation Connect 
and Engage report, around half of respondents find 
it difficult to make friends, and approximately 1/4 of 
respondents find that they are alone more often than they 
would like. 
Learn more here:  
vancouverfoundation.ca/our-work/initiatives/connections-
and-engagement
 19
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ASSESSING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 20
NEIGHBOURHOOD SHOCKS AND STRESSES ASSESSMENT
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE REPORT CARD
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE BASELINE ASSESSMENT (INDIVIDUAL)
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE BASELINE ASSESSMENT (COLLECTIVE)
 20
The Neighbourhood Resilience Baseline Tool is largely adapted with 
generous permission from the Communities Assessing Resilience Toolkit 
(CART) Integrated System1. We wish to extend our deepest gratitude 
to Betty Pfefferbaum, Rose Pfefferbaum, and Maggie Montgomery for 
allowing us to adapt their work. We also wish to extend a heartfelt thank 
you to Kate Menzies who researched and adapted the CART as part of 
her practicum placement with the City of Vancouver’s Resilience Office. 
1 Pfefferbaum RL, Pfefferbaum B, and Van Horn RL (2011). Communities Advancing Resilience 
Toolkit (CART): The CART Integrated System. Oklahoma City, OK: Terrorism and Disaster Center 
at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES  
FOR MODULE 2
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
MAPPING 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE
03
BACKGROUND
Our neighbourhoods are home to incredible social 
and physical assets, local knowledge and lived 
experience. Neighbourhood asset mapping can 
serve many purposes. It can identify individuals, 
organizations, programs and services, and other 
unique physical characteristics of a neighbourhood. 
It can foster communication, collaboration and 
connection between individuals and groups. It can 
serve as an exercise that helps people problem-solve 
as a group, no matter what the problem might be.
The following activities use emergency situations to 
help identify the assets that we need and use every 
day, and understand where those assets are located in 
the neighbourhood. While resilience isn’t only about 
disasters and emergencies, these types of scenarios 
can help illustrate how neighbourhood assets are 
related and facilitate dialog about how assets can 
transform to meet changing community needs.
DOCUMENT OVERVIEW
This guide is organized into three parts: 
Part 1: Preparing for a Workshop
Part 2: Workshop Activities and Materia
Part 3: Maintaining your Asset Map
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES 
FOR MODULE 3
1. Asset Icons
2. Neighbourhood Map 
(Printed)
BACKGROUND
Our neighbourhoods are home to incredible social and physical 
assets, local knowledge and lived experience. Neighbourhood 
asset mapping can serve many purposes. It can identify individuals, 
organizations, programs and services, and other unique physical 
characteristics of a neighbourhood. It can foster communication, 
collaboration and connection between individuals and groups. 
It can serve as an exercise that helps people problem-solve as a 
group, no matter what the problem might be.
The following activities use emergency situations to help identify 
the assets that we need and use every day, and understand 
where those assets are located in the neighbourhood. While 
resilience isn’t only about disasters and emergencies, these types 
of scenarios can help illustrate how neighbourhood assets are 
related and facilitate dialog about how assets can transform to 
meet changing community needs.
At the end of this activity you will have a physical and/or digital 
map of your neighbourhood with assets plotted on the map.
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 22
WORKSHOP PLANNING
Events can be hosted in formal workshop settings with invited participants, at community events 
or at a neighbourhood resident’s home.  It is best to do these activities in groups, with people 
from diverse backgrounds and perspectives. A workshop requires a coordinator who is dedicated 
to delivering the workshop and ensuring that changes to the digital asset map are documented 
following the workshop.
PREPARING 
FOR A 
WORKSHOP
02
Neighbourhod resilience depends on physical as well as 
social assets.  By hosting a workshop you can:
• 
Identify physical assets such as objects, buildings, parks, 
natural environment and infrastructure
• 
Identify social assets such as people with skills and/or 
knowledge, community groups, programs and services
• 
Support and advance neighbourhood planning efforts 
• 
Connect to volunteers and other organizations
• 
Ensure that your asset maps are up to date
• 
Facilitate community-led emergency response and 
recovery efforts 
• 
Foster collaboration and group problem-solving
Materials Needed
F
F One printed neighbourhood map per 
group - using a neighbourhood map with 
civic buildings marked may be helpful
F
F One printed set of pages 6-12 per group  
F
F Pens and pencils
F
F Notepad
F
F Felt-tip markers
F
F Double-sided tape or glue
F
F Printed sheets of asset icons	
Workshop Follow Up
F
F As a group, create a plan for distributing 
and regularly updating your map. It can 
be helpful to identify one or a few map 
stewards to lead this process
Event Organization
F
F Determine your target audience and how 
many participants you’d like to have.  
If you plan to have a large number of 
participants, make sure you have one 
facilitator per group.   
F
F Set a date and secure a venue.  
Depending on the size of your group 
you’ll want to allocate +/- 3hrs to 
complete all of the asset mapping 
activities.
F
F If you have a large group, look for 
volunteer facilitators and confirm their 
availability and attendance. 
F
F Send out invitations. Ensure you give your 
participants sufficient time to RSVP after 
sending out the invitation.
F
F Create a welcoming atmosphere by 
organizing food and refreshments. You 
may choose to have a caterer, a potluck 
or something else!
F
F Determine how to make the workshop 
accessible for all people. You may need to 
offer transit stipends, translation services 
and ensure the space is physically 
accessible for mobility aids.
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 23
WORKSHOP 
ACTIVITIES 
AND 
MATERIALS
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS PROGRAM ASSET MAP
Asset maps collect information about local shelter, 
food and water, transportation, communication 
hubs, waste disposal, medical care and both people 
who can offer help, and people who may need 
help. Maps are a helpful way to think through the 
unique skills, resources and knowledge organizations 
and community members can contribute in 
their neighbourhood can contribute in your 
neighbourhood. 
This section contains instructions and materials 
for conducting an Asset Mapping Workshop. It’s 
designed to be like a game so think creatively, 
respect all ideas and have fun! 
We begin with mapping workshop instructions. The 
instructions guide you through the four different 
workshop activities. They will help your group 
develop an asset map for your neighbourhood. You 
may choose to complete each activity independently 
or sequentially. 
Note that the instructions are suitable for both small 
and large workshops. An asterix* indicates what 
instructions are specifically for large workshops with 
several small groups.
The instruction sheet is followed by the game 
materials required for each of the four activities. 
After you complete the four activities, you will 
have a list of neighbourhood assets, a map with 
asset locations, experience working through a 
neighbourhood response to a shock, and reflect on 
where your neighbourhood could build resilience.
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 24
  
Come to a shared definition of asset. 
Brainstorm what physical and social 
assets you have in your neighbourhood. 
Think creatively. Assets can range from 
First Aid training to a spare sofa-bed. 
Record Keeper, list and number 
the assets on the Asset Inventory 
worksheet. 
Tape or glue the asset icons on to 
the Asset Inventory worksheet to 
categorize your assets. This will become 
a legend for your asset map.
 * Record Keeper, share how the group 
defines assets with the large group.
Materials Needed
 
F
Asset icons
 
F
Double-sided tape or glue
 
F
List your Assets worksheet (pg. 8)
 
F
Pen or pencil
 
F
Notepad
Begin by printing your neighbourhood map. We suggest using 
VanMap for your initial map as you will easily be able to show 
civic buildings, road and parks and print to your desired scale. 
Once you create a digital version of your map, you may choose 
to print that copy.
Chose an appropriate scale to show the boundaries of your map. 
A group from a larger community may have larger extents than 
a group from a smaller community. 
Next, draw your neighbouhood boundary to determine the area 
that your asset map will address
Tape or glue location-based assets on to the Neighbourhood 
Map using the asset icons. Number each map icon to match the 
icon number on the Neighbourhood Response sheet. 
Consider the following questions and have the Record Keeper, 
track the discussions that follows.
Are there any gaps in your neighbourhood?
Are there places that you need more information about? 
Who do you need to talk to in order to access these assets?
Materials Needed
 
F
Asset icon sheets
 
F
Double-sided tape or glue
 
F
Neighbourhood Map
 
F
Felt-tip markers
 
F
Notepad
 
F
Pen or pencil
Use the Post-shock Debrief Card to 
summarize the lessons learned about 
your community’s ability to respond 
to a shock.
* Record Keeper, share the findings 
with the larger group.
Materials Needed
 
F
Post-shock Debrief Card
 
F
Pen or pencil
These activities use shocks (emergency situations) as a way 
to understand daily needs, and build an understanding of how 
assets can transform to meet changing needs.
Record Keeper, take notes on the Neighbourhood Response 
sheet and Neighbourhood Map as you create your response.
Materials Needed
 
F
Create a Neighbourhood Response activity guide (pg. 9)
 
F
Neighbourhood Map
 
F
Neighbourhood Response Sheet (pg. 10)
 
F
Pen or pencil
* For large workshops with small groups
2.   List Your Assets
1.   Assign Roles
3.   Plot Your Assets
4.   Create a Neighbourhood Response
5.   Reflect
Choose one person on your team to act as the Record Keeper.  
The Record Keeper will be responsible for recording ideas and for 
*reporting back to the broad group at the end of the activity.  
Mapping 
Workshop
Instructions
Start Here
Begin by printing your neighbourhood map. We suggest using 
VanMap for your initial map as you will easily be able to show 
civic buildings, road and parks and print to your desired scale. 
Once you create a digital version of your map, you may choose 
to print that copy.
Chose an appropriate scale to show the boundaries of your map. 
A group from a larger community may have larger extents than 
a group from a smaller community. 
Next, draw your neighbouhood boundary to determine the area 
that your asset map will address.
Start Here
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 25
List Your Assets
Asset Inventory
Britannia Community Secondary School 
has a large gymnasium which could 
provide overnight shelter for about 
150 people. They have a large kitchen 
and bottled water in the cafeteria. The 
principal would need to be involved.
Example: 
#
Print as many of these sheets as needed. List your 
assets on this sheet. Glue or tape asset icon(s) 
beside each asset to label what it provides, and 
then number your assets.
Icon Key:     
Shelter
Water
Food
Transport
Communication
Health and Wellness
People
Waste Disposal
Other
?
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 26
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS PROGRAM ASSET MAPPING GUIDE
 9
EARTHQUAKE
A 7.3 magnitude Georgia 
Strait earthquake has struck 
Vancouver. Bridges, roads and 
telecommunications systems 
are impacted. Fires have broken 
out across the city and some 
buildings have collapsed. 
Downed power lines and broken 
gas lines have left hazards in 
streets. Every other street is 
blocked by debris, limiting travel. 
40% of residential units are no 
longer safe to occupy. 11% of 
buildings are no longer usable. 
Families are trying to reunite 
but cellular communication is 
unreliable. People are unable 
to access city water and have 
limited food supplies.  
POWER OUTAGE & 
BLIZZARD 
Vancouver is experiencing a 
record-breaking winter snowfall 
and power is out across the 
city.  Extreme cold and icy 
conditions have limited mobility.  
Homeless people are especially 
at risk.  Many homes in your 
neighbourhood are now without 
heat.  The City is working to clear 
snow and reconnect electricity, 
but your neighbourhood is 
expected to be without power for 
an indeterminate amount of time. 
In the meantime, 45% of homes 
are without electricity including 
heat and people who cannot 
navigate icy, snow-covered roads 
and sidewalks are unable to 
travel outdoors. 
HEATWAVE, 
DROUGHT & AIR 
QUALITY ADVISORY
A month long heat-wave is 
now causing water restrictions 
in Vancouver. Afternoon 
temperatures are reaching 
35°C and evening temperatures 
are remaining as high as 25°C. 
Forest fires in the interior 
are causing a significant 
deterioration in air quality. 
Authorities are recommending 
that people stay indoors and 
seek shelter in air-conditioned 
spaces. Homeless people, 
seniors, children, and people 
with chronic health conditions 
are especially vulnerable to heat 
related illness and respiratory 
challenges.
Create a Neighbourhood Response
Selena just moved to Vancouver to take an 
English course. English is not her first language. 
She lives alone in a micro-apartment.
Aubree and Thomas just 
had baby Ben. Their family 
lives in a rental apartment. 
Their landlord doesn’t live 
in Vancouver. 
Elaine lives alone in her 
home. Her kids still live in 
Vancouver, but on the other 
side of the city. She has 
mobility challenges and is 
supported by a walker to get 
around. 
1.   Choose a shock & read it aloud
2.   Meet some of your neighbours
Everyone has different functional needs that must be 
met day-to-day, and during emergencies. Think about 
yourself and your neighbours. In the event of a disaster, 
what might you need help with? What might your 
neighbours need help with?  
Brainstorm with your group who might need additional 
help or support during an emergency, and how they 
might be impacted by the particular scenario you have 
chosen.
 9
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 27
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS PROGRAM ASSET MAPPING GUIDE
 10
3.   Solve the shock 
challenges
You will need to rely on your neighbourhood’s social and physical assets in 
the event of a shock. There will be a number of challenges that you will have 
to consider to find shelter, food and water, medical care, transportation, 
skilled people, waste disposal, and up-to-date communications. Use your 
assets to create a neighbourhood response to the shock challenges. 
 
F
Work as a team and use the prompts to solve these shock challenges
 
F
Fill in the blank spaces with a numbers that are manageable for your group
 
F
Record your conversation on the Neighbourhood Response sheet and 
annotate your Neighbourhood Map with any insights
Stay on track! Don’t get distracted by details that aren’t related to the 
scenario. Use the information you have to the best of your ability.
SHELTER
WATER
TRANSPORT
HEALTH & 
WELLNESS
WASTE &
DEBRIS
PEOPLE
Provide shelter for ___ people 
for ___________.
Example: Provide shelter for 100 
people for and indefinite period 
of time.
Provide transportation solutions 
to help ___ people connect with 
their loved ones and find shelter 
over the next ___________.
Identify people with skills and/or 
knowledge that you would rely 
upon in a shock.
Develop information and 
communication hubs for 
the community to serve as 
central information centres for 
volunteering and finding people.
Develop a waste disposal 
system for garbage, human 
waste and/or debris for the next 
___________. 
Provide health and wellness 
services to ___ people. This 
may include medical aid, 
pharmaceuticals, spiritual 
counseling, and/or mental health 
support.
Provide drinking water for ___ 
people for ___________.
Provide hot meals for ___ 
people for ___________.
FOOD 
COMMUNICATION
OTHER
What other resources might you 
need? Keep track of them here.
?
Note! If this is your first 
asset map you may want 
to treat this exercise 
as an opportunity to 
identify areas where 
your neighbourhood can 
build capacity.
 10
#
#
#
#
#
length of time
length of time
length of time
length of time
length of time
3.   Solve the shock 
challenges
You will need to rely on your neighbourhood’s social and physical assets in 
the event of a shock. There will be a number of challenges that you will have 
to consider to find shelter, food and water, medical care, transportation, 
skilled people, waste disposal and up-to-date communications. Use your 
assets to create a neighbourhood response to the shock challenges. 
F
F
Work as a team and use the prompts to solve these shock challenges
F
F
Fill in the blank spaces with a numbers that are manageable for your group
F
F
Record your conversation on the Neighbourhood Response sheet and 
annotate your Neighbourhood Map with any insights
Stay on track! Don’t get distracted by details that aren’t related to the 
scenario. Use the information you have to the best of your ability.
SHELTER
Provide shelter for ___ people 
for ___________.
Example: Provide shelter for 100 
people for 72 hours.
#
length of time
PEOPLE
Identify people with skills and/or 
knowledge that you would rely 
upon in a shock. Everyone has 
skills and knowledge to offer.
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 28
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS PROGRAM ASSET MAPPING GUIDE
 11
SHELTER
FOOD
WASTE 
DISPOSAL
SKILLED 
PEOPLE
What do you need?
What do you need?
What do you need?
What do you need?
What do you need?
What do you need?
What do you need?
What do you need?
What do you need?
Where will you get it?
Where will you get it?
Where will you get it?
Where will you get it?
Where will you get it?
Where will you get it?
Where will you get it?
Where will you get it?
Where will you get it?
Who do you need to 
talk to?
Who do you need to 
talk to?
Who do you need to 
talk to?
Who do you need to 
talk to?
Who do you need to 
talk to?
Who do you need to 
talk to?
Who do you need to 
talk to?
Who do you need to 
talk to?
Who do you need to 
talk to?
WATER
TRANSPORT
HEALTH & 
WELLNESS
COMMUNICATION
Neighbourhood Response Sheet
OTHER
?
 11
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 29
Reflect
Where is your community well resourced? 
What assets are your greatest strength?
How could you build greater neighbourhood resilience? 
Are there any assets that you want to add or build upon?
Post-Shock Debrief
What might you need or want to know more about?
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | MAPPING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE
 30
Your Digital Map
Digitizing your map on-line makes it easier to 
share, update and view. Identify a steward to be 
responsible for inputting the assets to your map 
and incorporating future updates.
F
F Choose your mapping platform.  We suggest 
Google MyMaps as a free, accessible and 
shareable mapping tool. Other mapping 
platforms include UMap and ArcGIS Online. 
We recommend that you consider cost, 
user-friendliness and the ability to share and 
download your maps when you choose your 
mapping tool.
F
F Import your assets. Google MyMaps gives two 
options for inputting your map markers. You 
can either import an excel file where you have 
listed, categorized and specified  the location 
of your assets, or you can manually input 
each marker on the map. If you are able, we 
recommend using an excel file to keep track of 
your assets. Doing so will make  it significantly 
easier to update your map in the future.
F
F Download, share and print your map. Share 
your map with your neighbours and encourage 
everyone to have a printed copy. It is important 
to have a printed copy of your map in the state 
of an emergency. 
MAINTAINING YOUR ASSET MAP
Follow-up events can be hosted in formal workshop settings where participants are invited and 
RSVP, or at community events (such as Car-Free-Day).  A workshop requires a coordinator who 
is dedicated to delivering the workshop and ensuring that changes to the digital asset map are 
documented following the workshop. The instructions below provide guidance for maintaining 
physical and digital copies of your map.
AFTER THE 
WORKSHOP
Your Physical Map
Following the workshop you will have a 
physical copy of an asset map. Identify 
a steward to be responsible for sending 
scans or images of the map to workshop 
participants and for future updates. 
F
F Scan or take photos of your map 
and legend. Try to ensure that your 
images are a high resolution for easy 
interpretation after the workshop.
F
F Share your map. Send images of the 
map to workshop participants.
F
F Display in prominent location. If 
you represent a neighbourhood 
organization, ensure that your map is 
displayed in a location that is highly 
visible to your community. We suggest 
having hard-copies readily available for 
folks who may want to have a copy on 
hand. Ensure that the date is included 
on the map.
F
F Update regularly. Consider 
incorporating a mapping workshop 
with an annual event to make sure 
that your assets are up to date with 
present-day conditions.
ASSET ICONS
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES  
FOR MODULE 3
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | PLANNING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE ACTION
 31
Now that you have conducted your Neighbourhood Resilience Assessment, 
and had rich community discussions through your Neighbourhood 
Mapping activities, you should have a good idea of the biggest challenges 
and opportunities within your community.
The next step is to create a Neighbourhood Resilience Action Plan to 
address challenges and build on opportunities.
A Neighbourhood Resilience Action Plan is a proposed course of action 
to address shocks and stresses, and foster conditions of resilience 
within your community―such as social connection and caring, health 
and basic needs and local leadership. Your Neighbourhood Resilience 
Action Plan should elevate and align work already happening within your 
neighbourhood while also seeking to address gaps. Action Plans do not 
need to be long or complex―and in most cases a short, simple plan that 
is updated frequently is preferable to a long one.
This is your road map to resilience.
Building resilience is both time and relationship intensive. In addition 
to your working team, you will need to involve community members, 
and should try to leverage partnerships with other organizations and 
neighbourhoods to strengthen the fabric of your neighbourhood as you 
implement this plan.
While there is no one template or model for a Neighbourhood Resilience 
Action Plan, many neighbourhood action plans share these components:
•	 Neighbourhood Maps
•	 Neighbourhood Resilience Report Card
•	 Vision and Goals (Why we are doing this?)
•	 Actions and Deliverables (What will we do?)
•	 Process (How will we do this?)
PLANNING 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
RESILIENCE ACTION
04
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES 
FOR MODULE 4
1. Neighbourhood 
Resilience Report Card 
(completed in Module 2)
2. Neighbourhood Map 
(completed in Module 3)
3. Neighbourhood 
Resilience Action Plan
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | PLANNING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE ACTION
 32
•	 Timeline (When will we do this?)
•	 Evaluation (How we will know we are making a difference?)
•	 Partners (Who will we work with?)
The process to create your Action Plan has several steps:
1.	 Scope the Action Plan
2.	 Review your Neighbourhood Resilience Report Card
3.	 Inventory your Current Programs and Actions
4.	 Create your Resilient Neighbourhood Vision
5.	 Develop High-Level Goals
6.	 Identify your Actions
7.	 Refine your Plan
8.	 Implement your Plan
STEP 1: SCOPE YOUR PLAN
Just like your Neighbourhood Resilience Assessment, your first step is to 
determine the scope of your Action Plan.
•	 Internal focus: Will your plan target only staff and service users of 
your organization?
•	 Internal and immediate community focus: Will your plan target all 
or just part of the neighbourhood or community?
•	 Whole neighbourhood focus: Will your plan target residents and 
workers in the neighbourhood as defined by municipal boundaries? 
Or will you select a smaller area more directly around your 
organization (e.g. a five block radius)?
While the overarching goal of the Resilient Neighbourhoods Program is 
to build resilience at the neighbourhood scale, many organizations may 
first choose to build internal, organizational resilience. Choose the scale 
that works best for your organization and working team. This is entirely 
up to you. Building resilience in any capacity is extremely valuable on a 
day-to-day basis―and when shocks and stresses occur.
You will also need to determine who will create the Action Plan, and who 
will be charged with implementing actions. Some organizations choose to 
have community members participate directly in Action Planning; others 
choose to use their initial resilience planning team (developed in Module 
1 of this toolkit) to start and validate the actions with community once 
they are drafted.
When you have determined the scope of the plan, organize a 
Neighbourhood Resilience Action Planning Workshop. Decide on a 
group size that is manageable for you and your organization―this may 
mean you choose to only work with your initial team.
 32
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | PLANNING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE ACTION
 33
STEP 2: REVIEW THE NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE REPORT CARD
At the end of conducting your Neighbourhood Resilience Assessment, 
you created a Report Card for your neighbourhood. This summarizes the 
primary shocks and stresses that your community is concerned about, 
and the overall strengths and weaknesses of your neighbourhood.
Review these as a group and post the summary where everyone can 
see it and refer to it. Write the top 3 shocks and top 3 stresses on the 
Neighbourhood Resilience Action Planning Template in the appendix.
STEP 3: CREATE A VISION
A vision statement is the long-term, ideal state of resilience that you want 
your neighbourhood to achieve. Your Neighbourhood Resilience Vision 
is a shared idea of success if you achieve all of your resilience goals and 
objectives. It is a “blue sky” statement, future-facing, clear, concise and 
inspiring.
EXAMPLES OF VISION STATEMENTS:
•	 A neighbourhood where all people feel secure, able to transform to 
support the community during a disaster.
•	 A caring, sharing and accessible neighbourhood where everyone 
can feel valued.
•	 A neighbourhood that exemplifies a culture of resilience, which is 
supported by diverse, inclusive and collaborative partnerships.
There is no exact science to creating a vision, but these guiding questions 
can help:
•	 What are the assets of your neighbourhood/community?
•	 What about your neighbourhood/community makes you feel 
proud?
•	 Describe a time that you felt happy, healthy, supported and 
included in your neighbourhood―what were the conditions that 
enabled that to happen?
•	 In the event of a disaster, what would you most want to preserve or 
reconstruct in your neighbourhood/community?
•	 The word emergency comes from the Latin, “emergere” which means 
to “arise out or up”. If a disaster struck your neighbourhood/community 
tomorrow, what would you like to emerge from it?
*TIP: Have participants write out their answers to these questions from three 
separate perspectives: 1) for themselves as an individual, 2) for the organization, 
and 3) for the neighbourhood/community as a whole. Encourage participants to 
capture these on three separate post-it notes and compare.
*TIP: Imagining the distant future is challenging, but being able to anticipate and 
plan for what may happen is an important part of resilience. We suggest playing 
the free, open-source game, The Thing from the Future to think about what the 
future may hold. Play a few rounds of this game using positive cards such as 
“Grow” or “Transform”.
 33
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | PLANNING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE ACTION
 34
Gather everyone’s ideas and pick out key words and themes. Next, work 
together to turn these words and themes into a statement―a collective 
vision for your resilient neighbourhood. Do not spend too much time 
wordsmithing. Your vision statement does not need to be perfect, and 
can be revisited. The most important part is capturing what is unique 
about your neighbourhood―and what you want to achieve through this 
process. Write your vision statement on the Neighbourhood Resilience 
Action Planning Template in the appendix.
STEP 5: DEVELOPING HIGH-LEVEL GOALS
Once you have created a shared vision, decide on a number of broad but 
realistic outcomes you are trying to achieve through your overall plan. 
These are your goals, and should draw directly from your Neighbourhood 
Resilience Assessment Report Card and reflect the need to continue building 
on strengths, address weaknesses and consider top shocks and stresses.
You may use the following Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and 
Threats Table to help determine your goals.
STRENGTHS
Unique skills, knowledge,  
assets, resources and capacities 
that you can draw on from 
within your organization to 
implement your Action Plan.
1.	
What are the greatest strengths 
identified in your Report Card?
2.	
What do you do well?
3.	
What experience, knowledge 
and skills do you have?
4.	
What unique resources can you 
draw on?
5.	
What do others see as our 
strengths?
WEAKNESSES
Areas for improvement that 
you may choose to address or 
change within our organization.
1.	
What was the greatest 
weakness identified in your 
Report Card?
2.	
What can you improve?
3.	
Where do you have few 
resources?
4.	
What do others see as your 
weaknesses?
OPPORTUNITIES
Partnerships, capacities,  
assets, skills and resources that 
you can leverage to implement 
your actions.
1.	
What resilience goals could 
align with our organization’s 
overall vision, mission and 
goals? 
2.	
What positive factors are 
currently driving your 
community’s resilience?
3.	
What good opportunities are 
open to us?
4.	
What trends could you take 
advantage of?
THREATS
Negative events, forces  
or gaps in resources that may 
inhibit your ability to implement 
your actions.
1.	
What negative factors are 
currently impacting our 
community’s resilience?
2.	
What trends could stand in the 
way of your success?
3.	
What lessons can be drawn 
from other neighbourhoods?
4.	
How do your weaknesses 
expose you to threats?
 34
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | PLANNING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE ACTION
 35
Some examples of broad goals are:
•	 Educate and motivate community members on how to lower their 
carbon footprints.
•	 Improve organizational emergency preparedness.
•	 Expand after school programs for youth.
•	 Increase local food security.
STEP 4: ORGANIZATION INVENTORY
Brainstorm all of the initiatives, programs and projects your organization 
is already working on, or supports on an ongoing basis. It is highly likely 
that all or many of these projects, programs and initiatives are already 
building resilience. List these initiatives in the Neighbourhood Resilience 
Action Planning Template.
STEP 5: IDENTIFYING RESILIENCE ACTIONS
While goals are “what” you want to achieve, actions are “how” you will 
achieve them. Consider both actions that are already underway through 
current initiatives, and actions that could fill gaps. Make sure to include 1–2 
actions that can be achieved quickly to receive buy-in from the community 
and keep engagement high.
Brainstorm different actions on post-it notes, then categorize into the 
following groups:
•	 Actions you are already taking to reach your goals;
•	 Actions you are already taking but need to tweak in order to reach 
your goals;
•	 Actions you need to add entirely, or need to make significant 
changes to in order to reach your goals.
While you are doing this, the following questions may help with the 
categorization:
•	 Referring back to the organizational inventory you created earlier, 
which programs, projects or work is your organization already 
doing to reach your goals?
•	 Which of these programs or projects are the most successful, and 
how could you elevate these?
•	 Which of these programs or projects are moderately successful 
and how could you build and support them to do more?
•	 Where are the gaps in your programs and projects that could be 
addressed over the short, medium and long-term to meet your 
goals?
•	 Which of these actions will have the most significant impact?
•	 Which of these actions have benefits across more than one shock/
stress?
•	 Do we have the community leaders (staff, volunteers, residents or 
other) needed to complete actions?
 35
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | PLANNING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE ACTION
 36
•	 Are there any timing considerations for these actions?
•	 Do we have actions that address both our top shocks and top 
stresses?
•	 Do we have actions that amplify our greatest strengths and 
support our weaknesses?
Some examples of actions are:
•	 Hosting a personal and family emergency preparedness workshop 
for staff.
•	 Conducting a Disaster Support Hub exercise.
•	 Developing a business continuity plan for your organization.
•	 Creating a food garden in front of your facility.
•	 Planting trees in unused spaces on your property.
•	 Installing solar panels or a rain barrel at your facility.
•	 Hosting a skill-share event for community members.
Then, determine the overall timeframe for implementing your Action 
Plan. Write your final actions and accompanying logistical information 
under the appropriate categories in the Neighbourhood Resilience Action 
Planning Template in the appendix. You may add additional rows as needed.
If you find you have too many actions and need to refine them, consider 
using these guiding questions:
•	 Which of these actions are already resourced?
•	 Which of these actions can we start now?
•	 What can we realistically accomplish?
•	 Do we have priority and secondary actions, and if so, what are they?
•	 What criteria should guide our decision making?
•	 Who benefits from this work?
•	 Who is impacted by this work?
•	 How will we ensure equity and inclusion are built through our 
actions?
•	 What actions clearly align with what we are already doing or 
planning?
•	 How could you leverage existing resources or initiatives already 
under way?
•	 What are the essential first steps?
•	 How should these be communicated to stakeholders and the 
community?
•	 Who do you need to consult with to get permission, resources, etc.?
STEP 6: VALIDATE THE PLAN
Now that you have created your Neighbourhood Resilience Action Plan 
with a small group of people, it is important to validate that plan with 
community members to ensure that you are on the right track.
This helps to build buy-in with the community and to develop relationships 
with community champions. You may choose to engage your organization or 
 36
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | PLANNING NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE ACTION
 37
community in specific ways to validate the plan. Some suggestions include:
1.	 Interviews: Have conversations or conduct semi-structured 
interviews with specific people (front-line workers and leaders at 
your organization or community leaders who represent a particular 
group’s perspective).
2.	 Community conversations: Solicit feedback during community 
events. Draft a set of questions that can be answered in an informal 
setting that extract the goals and perspectives of community 
members’ aspirations for improved resilience.
3.	 Workshop discussions: If resources permit, bringing staff or the 
community together for a workshop allows for more structured 
visioning, goal-setting, and action-planning activities.
Once you have received this feedback, refine your Action Plan as necessary.
STEP 7: IMPLEMENT ACTION PLAN
Implementing actions is the critical part of this process: it is the time 
at which analysis, visioning and planning takes shape in the real world. 
Implementation can also be the point in the process which differentiates 
the communities that are successful from those that are not. Resilient 
communities work together to solve problems. Ensure that appropriate 
resources have been allotted to carry out priority actions. Schedule 
regular (monthly or quarterly) progress reports on actions.
STEP 8: MONITOR AND RE-ASSESS
Monitor your progress as actions are being implemented or completed. 
Collect notes on what is working and what is not―resilient communities 
are ones that learn from their mistakes and adapt. You may also choose to:
•	 Revise or remove any actions that are found to be unachievable;
•	 Postpone actions that may improve when conditions are more 
favourable;
•	 Identify new actions that better address objectives.
At a pre-determined point in time (e.g., 1 year) when resilience-building 
actions have been implemented, return to your Neighbourhood Resilience 
Assessment and conduct it again. The assessment will show you what 
progress has been made and where, and kick-start the creation of your 
next Action Plan.
This continued assessment, updating and analysis is essential for effective 
resilience.
 37
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE ACTION PLAN
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES  
FOR MODULE 4
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 38
DISASTER SUPPORT HUBS
The Resilient Neighbourhoods Program team (City of Vancouver, Britannia 
Community Services Centre, Collingwood Neighbourhood House, Dunbar 
Community Centre Association, and 312 Main Community Coop), wish to 
acknowledge and extend our deepest gratitude to the Wellington Regional 
Emergency Management Office (WREMO) and the Seattle Emergency 
Hubs for sharing years’ worth of research and work around their respective 
Community Emergency Hubs. These two organizations generously allowed 
Vancouver to adapt their research, concepts and templates. Their work has 
been instrumental in the creation of this toolkit. Vancouver’s own Disaster 
Support Hub concept was based on learnings from New Zealand after the 
Christchurch earthquake in 2011, and WREMO’s Community Emergency 
Hubs were our template from the beginning. Seattle’s Hub team has 
generously and graciously shared their expertise with Dunbar over the 
past 18 months, and has been critical in the development of the Dunbar 
Earthquake and Emergency Preparedness Hub. 
•	 Wellington Regional Emergency Management Organization: 
Special thanks to Dan Neely and the entire WREMO Community 
Resilience team for sharing their wisdom and allowing us to adapt 
their guide.  
•	 Seattle’s Emergency Communication Hubs: Special thanks to Cindi 
Barker for sharing her expertise with Dunbar Earthquake and 
Emergency Preparedness.
Disclaimer: This toolkit is intended to serve as a starting point for 
neighbourhood organizations to plan and prepare for, respond to and 
recover from disasters. This guide is not a plan in and of itself, but may 
be used as a planning tool for and by neighbourhoods and communities. 
READYING 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 
DISASTER RESPONSE
05
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES 
FOR MODULE 5
1. Role Lanyards
2. Needs and Offers Cards
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 39
 39
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 40
PART 1: ABOUT DISASTER SUPPORT HUBS
Disaster Support Hubs are a City of Vancouver initiative launched in April 
of 2016 in recognition that a major earthquake in Vancouver will impact 
everyone in our community.  
They were created acknowledging that the City of Vancouver’s formal 
response will need to be augmented by grassroots community-response 
during a disaster. Disaster Support Hubs leverage existing, trusted 
community spaces as a focal point for communities to plan for, respond 
to and recover from disasters.  
Individuals, families, neighbours, local businesses and community 
organizations will need to support each other while emergency service 
personnel are responding to high-priority incidents.
Disaster Support Hubs are designated locations where you can gather 
to coordinate efforts and offer assistance to other members of your 
neighbourhood. They are also post-disaster locations in which City staff 
and trained volunteers will prioritize sharing information and providing 
services to the public once available. They are also a place where 
neighbours can convene to recover from emergencies and disasters.
While the City of Vancouver works hard year-round to ensure that staff 
and departments are ready to respond to disasters and emergencies, 
such shocks can still have significant, unforeseen impacts that require 
community-based response and recovery. The City of Vancouver 
acknowledges that when a major disaster strikes, City staff will be 
assigned to addressing high-priority incidents involving hospitals, schools, 
bridges or other critical government services and infrastructure. As such, 
neighbourhood and community-based organizations, businesses and 
residents and community members will need to come together to support 
each other in the interim, until City support is possible. As government 
services return to normal, Hub functions may change. 
Day-to-day, neighbourhood and community-based organizations host a 
range of programs and services in their communities, and often support 
the most vulnerable members of the community. During a disaster, the 
maintenance of these services are as critical as ever, and organizations 
may play additional roles in facilitating neighbourhood-level response and 
recovery alongside volunteer community members.  
Organizations and neighbours have critical, unique and often flexible 
skills that can support emergency response and recovery. In disasters 
all over the world, neighbours and communities are the first to respond 
to immediate needs of those around them. They come up with creative, 
grassroots solutions to pressing challenges. In Vancouver, we know 
that neighbourhoods across Vancouver are diverse, and residents and 
neighbours will be the first to respond to help each other during a disaster. 
Neighbourhood and community-based organizations play a crucial role 
in maintaining vital services to vulnerable community members, and in 
facilitating response and recovery at the community level. 
 40
 40
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 41
Disaster support hubs are a tool that should be incorporated into 
emergency plans for families, neighbours, and community organizations. 
Hubs can also be used depending on the specific needs of neighbourhoods 
and local groups. They are locations where community can meet, plan, 
share, and help.
ABOUT THIS GUIDE
This guide provides instructions and templates to use your local Disaster 
Support Hub location to plan and prepare for, respond to, and recover 
from disasters in your neighbourhood. 
Please note: There are no caches of emergency supplies at Disaster 
Support Hubs. There may be some basic supplies (such as pens, white 
boards, signage and a tent) located at Hubs, but ultimately the resources 
of the Disaster Support Hub are the skills, knowledge, and supplies that 
your organization and neighbours bring to it.  
A Disaster Support Hub is not a container of things, it’s 
a group of people in the neighbourhood and the skills 
they have that can be helpful when a disaster strikes. In 
addition to asking “What is in our emergency kit?”, you 
should also be asking, “Who is in our emergency kit?”
DISASTER SUPPORT HUB PURPOSE
Disaster Support Hubs are designated, community-led locations 
established during an emergency, crisis or disaster for community 
members to share information and connect people who have needs 
to available support. They act as a focal point for individuals, families, 
organizations and businesses in a neighbourhood to come together to 
plan out how they will work together to help each other after a disaster. 
Neighbourhoods around Vancouver are unique, so the actions people 
take in operationalizing a Hub may be different. However, there are some 
key features of Disaster Support Hubs: 
•	 Safe gathering places: Hubs are a safe gathering place for people 
to connect after a disaster and to coordinate response and 
recovery efforts within their neighbourhood. 
•	 Information exchange: Hubs are meant to facilitate the collection 
and dissemination of important information after a disaster, so that 
your neighbourhood knows how to connect with each other and 
stay safe.
•	 Community engagement: Hubs are a tool to engage neighbours 
and community members in emergency preparedness and 
planning. In order to build community capacity to respond to and 
recover from disasters, we first need to engage community and 
provide a forum for discussions and activities. 
 41
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 42
•	 Community leadership: While most emergency response centres 
around professional first responders, it is critical that Hubs are 
led by community, for community. They are meant to be self-
organized, grassroots initiatives that utilize the leadership of local 
organizations and community members during an emergency. 
•	 Matching needs and offers: Hubs are about sharing information 
and connecting people to available support and resources. Hubs 
may play an active role in receiving, sorting and coordinating 
the distribution of these resources. This may be on an individual 
level (one person helping another with a small task), or on an 
organizational level (a non-profit or business providing hot meals 
to neighbours who don’t have electricity). It is important to avoid 
over-promising services unless you are prepared to provide them. 
•	 Disaster preparedness: While Hubs are activated after a disaster, 
planning activities should take place before-hand. Hubs are able to 
be used faster and more effectively when people know each other 
and understand neighbourhood skills and resources ahead of time. 
•	 Supporting vulnerable individuals: Hub planning can allow 
neighbours to consider who might need help and how after a 
disaster. Thinking of potentially vulnerable individuals in advance 
can save lives.
•	 Local problem-solving: Resilient communities actively solve 
emerging problems together. Group problem-solving is a skill that 
is honed and improved through practice.
•	 Network of hubs: After a disaster, people will go to the places they 
feel safe. While there are pre-determined Hub locations, people will 
create ad hoc Hubs during an emergency. When planning a Hub, it 
is important to consider what other nearby locations people might 
congregate in and consider coordinating with these. 
•	 Low-tech, flexible, and adaptable: Hubs are meant to be low-
tech, simple and adaptable. Each neighbourhood is unique, and 
each emergency is unique. Hubs may be adapted to the specific 
needs of the neighbourhood, and should always aim to use simple 
processes and language that can be understood by everyone in the 
community. 
•	 Facilitating recovery: In addition to supporting community in the 
immediate aftermath of a disaster, Hubs also serve as an important 
platform for community-led recovery. Resilient neighbourhoods 
recover stronger after disasters because the whole community 
comes together to help one-another, and builds back better. 
DISASTER SUPPORT HUB OBJECTIVES INCLUDE: 
•	 Provide up-to-date information to the public so the community 
knows how to help each other and stay safe;
•	 Solve problems using the people, skills and resources available in 
the neighbourhood; 
•	 Act as a safe gathering place for community members to help each 
other;
 42
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 43
•	 Continue essential day-to-day organizational programs and 
services and transform to meet acute needs of community in a 
disaster. 
One of the primary roles of Disaster Support Hubs is to facilitate the flow 
of information throughout disaster response and recovery. By providing 
information to community, you are supporting people to make informed 
decisions that can keep them safe and help them recovery as quickly as 
possible. While disasters bring about many unforeseen situations, some 
of the information that might flow through a Disaster Support Hub could 
include: 
•	 People asking for / offering assistance including: shelter, food, 
water, medical
•	 Lost pets / people
•	 Updates about neighbourhood / city / region
•	 Localized problems (down powerlines)
•	 Skills & materials (translation, shovel, radio)
•	 Volunteer inquiries
•	 Donations (at Hub and in community)
•	 Info about how to manage situations (purify water, fix appliances, 
etc.)
•	 Inquiries about and support through any services and programs 
your organization normally provides. 
Remember: while first responders will be overwhelmed during a disaster 
and may not be able to respond immediately, you should still call 9-1-1 to 
seek help for life-threatening situations. Disaster Support Hubs are not 
field hospitals or medical facilities.  
DISASTER SUPPORT HUB CODE OF CONDUCT
Disaster Support Hubs are intended to be accessible and inclusive for all 
community members. All individuals working at the Hub should endeavor 
to abide by the following code of conduct: 
1.	 Ensure health and safety: People working at Hubs are expected to 
prioritize the health and safety of all staff and volunteers operating 
the Hub. To foster and contribute to a positive, safe and healthy 
environment for all users of the Hub and the broader neighbourhood. 
2.	 Act lawfully: People working at Hubs must act lawfully according 
to the laws of Canada, British Columbia, and City of Vancouver 
bylaws. Understand that all laws still apply during emergencies and 
disasters, and that people working at the Hub have no special legal 
powers.  
3.	 Act with integrity: People working at Hubs are expected to make 
decisions that benefit the community and prioritize the needs of the 
most vulnerable community members. 
 43
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 44
4.	 Treat everyone with respect: People working at Hubs are expected 
to provide assistance regardless of race, national or ethnic origin, 
citizenship status, language, age, gender, sexual identity, disability, 
physical characteristics, religion, political opinions or other grounds 
of discrimination. Treat volunteers, other Hub workers, community 
members and staff with respect at all times. 
5.	 Uphold confidentiality: People working at Hubs are expected to 
maintain confidentiality of personal and privileged information and 
not give out any personal or confidential information to the media 
or other external parties. 
6.	 Strive for collaboration: People working at Hubs are expected to 
work collaboratively with community members, volunteers and City 
of Vancouver staff. This includes being as open as possible about 
decisions and actions, and communicating appropriate information 
to community members to the best of your ability.
PART 2: PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS  
(BEFORE DISASTER STRIKES) 
STEP 1: PERSONAL AND BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS
Your neighbourhood or community-based organization provides valuable 
and even vital services and programs to support the community day-
to-day. In the event of a disaster, it is critical that your organization try, 
wherever possible, to continue or maintain the programs and services that 
community members depend on. This is why it is important that your staff 
and volunteers become personally prepared, and that your organization 
plans for continuity.  
Planning for business interruptions, emergencies and disasters is a crucial 
aspect of running a business. A plan can help you and your employees:
•	 Respond and stay safe during an emergency
•	 Avoid or minimize downtime in the event of a disaster or 
emergency
•	 Recover full operations quickly
If your staff and volunteers are not prepared, they will take longer to 
be able to personally respond and recover from disasters―which will 
impact your services and programs. Likewise, if your organization has not 
invested in continuity planning, this may mean that there are significant 
disruptions in the services that community members depend upon. 
The ability to respond quickly to disruptive incidents is important. Having 
a business continuity plan could make the difference in the long-term to 
the survival of your organization and service users. 
Below are some resources for your organization and staff to prepare at 
home and in the office. 
 44
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 45
PERSONAL AND FAMILY PREPAREDNESS RESOURCES
PLAN FOR AN EMERGENCY WITH YOUR FAMILY
Create a family plan so you and your family can stay together and stay safe 
during an earthquake or other emergency.
EMERGENCY PLANNING FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES AND SPECIAL NEEDS
Emergencies can present additional challenges for seniors and people 
with special needs. By planning ahead, you can be more confident about 
protecting yourself in any emergency.
PET EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Prepare your pets for an earthquake or other natural disaster in Vancouver.
VEHICLE EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
How to drive safely in a disaster and what to include in your vehicle 
emergency kit.
IDENTIFY POSSIBLE HAZARDS IN YOUR HOME
Identify and remove potential hazards in your home so you stay safe during 
an earthquake or other disaster.
PREPARE YOUR HOME FOR AN EARTHQUAKE
Keep yourself, your belongings, and your home safe during an earthquake.
MAKE AN EMERGENCY KIT
Make evacuation and emergency supply kits, and be self-sufficient for up to 
10 days during an emergency.
EMERGENCY FOOD, WATER, AND SANITATION
Store the food and water you and your family will need if key resources are 
not readily available after an emergency.
BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS RESOURCES 
Prepare your business for disasters and emergencies: vancouver.ca/home-
property-development/business-emergency-safety.aspx 
Business and Employer Emergency Preparedness Guide: vancouver.ca/files/
cov/business-employer-emergency-preparedness-beep-guide.pdf 
Business and Employer Emergency Preparedness Plan: vancouver.ca/files/
cov/business-employer-emergency-preparedness-beep-plan.pdf 
Mini Business and Employer Emergency Preparedness Plan: vancouver.ca/
files/cov/business-employer-emergency-preparedness-beep-mini-plan.pdf
STEP 2: CHOOSE A LOCATION
Decide on a location for the Hub―this will likely be where your organization 
is located. 
There are 25 designated Disaster Support Hubs already located 
throughout the city. While there are buildings and facilities on these sites, 
these Disaster Support Hub locations were selected because they have 
ample outdoor space, acknowledging that we need a low-tech method 
of community response and recovery that can be set up outside in the 
 45
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 46
event that a building is not safe to enter. Again, a Hub is not a container 
or things, or a building: it is a group of people to contribute their time, 
skills, knowledge and resources to help their communities respond to and 
recover from disasters and emergencies.
While there are pre-designated Disaster Support Hubs at Park Board and 
Vancouver Public Library facilities, people will ultimately go to locations 
that are familiar to them, and where they feel safe, including organizations 
and places that they use and access on a regular basis. This is why it 
is important for neighbourhood and community-based organizations to 
plan and prepare to support their communities―no matter what happens. 
Your Hub should be located in a central, accessible location that can 
be reached by community members. Remember, you will be running 
exercises here, so choose a location that can be accessed both before 
and after a disaster. If possible, choose a location at a newer building that 
is more likely to be accessible after an earthquake―this will increase the 
likelihood you are able to access necessary supplies. 
Below is a map of current designated Disaster Support Hub locations in Vancouver.
 46
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 47
STEP 3: GATHER SUPPLIES
Now that you have selected your location, gather supplies required to 
support the smooth-running of the Hub in a time of need. Remember, 
Hubs are designed to be low-tech with minimal cost, and limited storage 
space requirements. Some organizations may choose to invest in shipping 
containers and have robust supplies for response operations, but this 
is not necessary: you can operate your Hub with basic stationary and 
signage. 
Basic materials (that will mostly fit in a large Rubbermaid bin) may include: 
BASIC HUB KIT CONTENTS
•	 Copies of the Disaster Support Hub Guide
•	 Lanyards
•	 Clipboards
•	 Note books 
•	 Blank paper
•	 Ball Point Pens
•	 Permanent Markers
•	 Dry-Erase Markers
•	 Tape 
•	 Thumb tacks 
•	 White Boards
•	 Cork Boards
•	 Push Pins (lots!)
•	 Flip Chart Paper
•	 Index Cards
•	 Duct Tape
•	 Masking Tape
•	 Radios
•	 Batteries (lots!)
•	 Flashlights 
•	 First Aid Kit
•	 Sidewalk Chalk 
More extensive but not mandatory materials could include: 
ADDITIONAL HUB KIT CONTENTS
•	 Tarps
•	 Canopy Tents (2)
•	 Tables (2)
•	 Chairs (4)
•	 Easels (2)
•	 Laminated Maps and Signage
•	 Basic tools: hammer, screw driver, pliers, multi-tool,  
leather gloves, staple gun, rope
•	 Garbage Bags
 47
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 48
•	 Glo Sticks
•	 Zip Ties
•	 Marker/traffic cones (8)
•	 Portable Toilet (19 Litre Plastic Bucket and sawdust  
can do the trick!)
Of course, you can also include any other materials that you think you might need, 
but remember, you may not be able to access these during a disaster. Luckily, 
people are resourceful―you don’t need to have all of the gear or gadgets―just a 
solid team willing to solve problems.
STEP 4: UNDERSTANDING ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Disaster Support Hubs were created on the premise that everyone has 
unique skills, knowledge and abilities that they can use to help their 
community respond to and recover from a disaster. Hub roles are designed 
to facilitate the flow of information and connection between needs and 
offers in the community. These roles may be adapted as needed by each 
individual Hub, and roles may be added as necessary. A complete list of 
roles and responsibilities is contained at the end of this module.    
STEP 5: HOSTING AN EXERCISE 
In communities all over the world, in every disaster, neighbours and 
community members come together to provide critical support to one-
another. This happens naturally and informally. The Disaster Support Hub 
concept is an effort to try to put some structure around these natural 
occurrences, so they can be considered and practiced in advance. By 
considering our roles during a disaster we can prepare, respond and 
recover―faster and more effectively.  
Exercises are one way that communities can practice this in advance. 
They provide opportunities for communities to connect socially, build 
trust and collectively solve problems: foundational features of resilient 
communities. Scenarios and role playing help us step into “what might 
happen”, while knowing that every single disaster is different and brings 
unanticipated challenges that we cannot predict. 
Exercises are hands-on training opportunities and while role-playing can 
sometimes feel awkward, it helps us build “muscle memory” for stepping 
into the roles needed to operate a Disaster Support Hub, and solving 
problems at the neighbourhood level. 
There are two main types of exercises: 
1.	 Table top: These are done as a meeting or in a classroom-based 
setting. Participants talk through the step-by-step actions they would 
take in a real-life situations. Table Tops are low-stress ways to discuss 
and clarify roles and responsibilities, and to highlight gaps in existing 
plans. These types of exercises can be very short and are a great way 
to start familiarizing yourselves with the functions of a Hub. Table top 
exercises can be very short―and can be done in 30 minutes to two 
hours, depending on the level of detail you want to get into.     
 48
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 49
2.	 Functional: These are on the ground exercises at an actual 
Hub location. Rather than talking through step-by-step actions, 
participants practice the actions of setting up, getting organized 
and playing roles of the Hub team and of community members, 
as if the real-life situation has taken place. These exercises are 
more time and resource intensive, and can require more planning 
to execute. Functional exercises do not have to be very long, 
but usually run at least 1 to 2 hours so that participants can get 
comfortable in their roles.    
We recommend starting with a table-top exercise first as they are easier 
to plan and organize, and are in a tightly controlled environment. Once 
you have done this, plan a larger functional exercise. 
In both cases, you will use a description of a particular emergency and its 
potential impacts to help you work through different roles, responsibilities 
and functions of the Hub. There are 3 emergency scenarios provided 
to use for your exercises included in the appendix. These are the same 
scenarios you used in your Neighbourhood Mapping activities in Module 
3. You may even choose to use your asset map as part of the exercise to 
connect possible needs and offers spatially within the neighbourhood.   
OPENING THE EXERCISE: 
Open your exercise by providing participants with an overview of what to 
expect. You may choose to set your exercise at different points throughout 
response and recovery. For example, you may choose to set the exercise 
at the start of response, immediately following the disaster. Or you may 
choose to set it several weeks in. This will determine whether participants 
work through setting the hub up or starting with it already underway. 
In addition to providing an overview of the exercise, have a brief “ice 
breaker” discussion to help frame the exercise. Below are questions 
around response and recovery that can be used as icebreakers for the 
group. 
Response: Response is a short, focused phase that begins immediately 
after disaster strikes, and is completed when the situation is stabilized. 
While Hubs are a location that community can gather to support each 
other, they are also a location you can use as part of your family emergency 
plan. It is important to have a plan for yourself and your loved ones so 
that you can respond to help others in your neighbourhood as quickly as 
possible when disaster strikes.   
1.	 In the event of a disaster, I might need help with: 
2.	 In the event of a disaster, I can help with: 
3.	 In the event of a disaster, how will you find/connect with your loved 
ones? 
 49
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 50
Recovery: Recovery happens alongside response in a disaster, and 
continues on afterwards for weeks, if not months or years. Recovery 
is the process of people coming together to help their neighbours and 
community whole again―socially, physically and economically. Hubs 
support community put their neighbourhood back together, and hopefully 
make it better over the long-term. 
We often do not plan for recovery in advance, but recovery is our 
opportunity to build a stronger, healthier, happier, more resilient 
community. In order to frame recovery for your community, we recommend 
starting all exercises with one of these preambles: 
1.	 What do you most value/love about this neighbourhood /
community? 
2.	 If you could design this neighbourhood from scratch, what would 
you do differently? What would you keep the same?
3.	 Disasters are damaging and disruptive, but they can also be 
generative over the long term. The word emergency comes from 
the Latin, “emergere” which means to “arise out or up”. If a disaster 
or major emergency occurred tomorrow in this neighbourhood /
community, what would you like to emerge from it?
SCENARIOS: 
While every disaster is different, there are some core needs that typically 
need to be addressed in each, likely to fall under these broad categories: 
•	 Shelter
•	 Food
•	 Water
•	 Energy
•	 Medical 
•	 Waste and Sanitation 
•	 Communication and Coordination 
•	 Emotional and Psychological
These are the same categories from your Neighbourhood Mapping 
Activities in Module 3 of this toolkit. 
While we are often tempted to plan for the absolute worst case scenario, 
this can sometimes overwhelm people to the point where it is difficult to 
take positive action. 
We don’t want to scare people away from planning and preparing! So, 
we suggest running exercises using scenarios that encourage problem 
solving and solutions to moderate impacts (at least to start). You can do 
this either by controlling the type of emergency your exercise is based on 
(blizzard, heat wave or moderate earthquake), or by explicitly suggesting 
response needs. For example, your scenarios may require that you work 
on these needs: 
 50
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 51
•	 Shelter 100 people for 72 hours;
•	 Feed 250 people for 72 hours; 
•	 Obtain clean drinking water for 50 people for 72 hours; 
•	 Manage waste and sanitation for a 10-block radius;
•	 Check on 100 people who are sheltering-in-place (or staying 
indoors) and require external support; and 
•	 Coordinate and Communicate the above.
You can use the scenarios on the following pages for your Hub exercises. 
 51
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 52
POWER OUTAGE & BLIZZARD
SCENARIO: 
Vancouver is experiencing record-breaking winter snowfall and a prolonged 
power outage. Cold temperatures and icy conditions have limited walking and 
driving. Homeless people are especially at risk of freezing. Many seniors and 
people with disabilities are unable to leave their homes due to icy sidewalk 
conditions. Many homes in your neighbourhood are now without heat. While 
the city is working to clear snow and repair electricity, your neighbourhood is 
expected to be without power for an indeterminate amount of time. Natural 
gas is severely disrupted. 
Further information about this scenario: 
•	 95% of all restaurants use natural gas. 
•	 45% of homes are without electricity including electric heat. 
•	 55% of homes are heated by natural gas but are without electricity. 
•	 Most schools are heated by natural gas. 
•	 Only 5% of people are prepared with physical cash in an emergency fund. 
•	 Walking distance is limited to 10 blocks by visibility and icy conditions. 
•	 Cell phones and internet are working but spotty.
NEEDS AND OFFERS: 
Use specific examples of needs and offers of community members to guide 
and prioritize Hub activities. Choose from: 
NEEDS
1.	
Akiko’s young children are stuck at school and she is on the other side of 
the City, and she doesn’t own a car. She is desperate to get in touch with 
them, but power is out so the school phone isn’t working and busses are 
stuck. 
2.	 Hussein lives alone at home. He has mobility challenges and requires a 
walker to leave his home. He needs help getting food and water due to 
the icy road conditions.  
3.	 Li Xiu Ying just moved to Vancouver to take an English course for 3 months. 
English is not her first language, and she is having trouble understanding 
what is happening in the neighbourhood, and what services might be 
available. 
4.	 Fatima has been without power in her home for days and needs a place to 
warm up. 
5.	 Jennifer is a single mother with 2 children. Her childcare has been disrupted 
and she needs help with childcare while she goes to work. 
6.	 Mariana has a 2 month old baby. Her partner is away for work. She wants 
company and emotional support but is worried about leaving her home 
with her baby because of the icy road conditions. 
7.	 The Singh family’s home has suffered some damage―there is a leak in 
the roof and their basement is flooding. They need someone to help them 
repair it. 
8.	 Micah is concerned about his neighbour. She is an elderly woman who 
lives alone but has seemed intimidated by Micah in the past, so he wants 
someone else to come with him to check on her.
 52
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 53
9.	 Jerry has run out of food for his dog, Fluffy. The local pet store is closed 
due to the blizzard, and Jerry is wondering if anyone else can share their 
dog food. 
10.	 Preeti is pregnant and needs to go to the doctor but is worried about 
leaving her home given the icy conditions.
11.	 Luisa has a chronic medical condition and needs power to charge medical 
support devices, but her home has lost power. 
12.	 Nancy’s toilet is not working. Sewage pipes leading to her home are 
broken. She needs help setting up a portable toilet. 
13.	 Ali is a senior who has trouble walking. He is afraid to leave his home in 
case he falls. 
14.	 Henry is homeless and needs to know where he can go for shelter. 
15.	 Ana is trying to get in touch with her family but her cell phone is out of 
batteries. She needs a power source to charge it. 
 OFFERS
1.	
Zhang Wei has his amateur radio license and radio equipment, and wants 
to know how he can help. 
2.	 Jorge works for a local construction company and wants to know how he 
can help. 
3.	 Arjun and Aniel are teenagers from the neighbourhood. They want to 
know how they can help. 
4.	 Katie is a skilled trades person offering to help.
5.	 Melissa is a retired nurse who can help with first aid and medical support. 
She is keen to help. 
6.	 Emily is a local parent who organizes school activities every year. She 
wants to know how she can help. 
7.	 Rosie is a therapist who wants to provide emotional support to people 
who need it. 
8.	 Yoshi is a local chef who has access to an industrial-sized kitchen, BBQ 
and propane and wants to help. 
9.	 Alejandra has an extra bedroom in her home and wants to know if anyone 
needs it.
10.	 Luisa is a local community organizer and wants to help at the Hub. 
11.	 Lucy is a local artist who wants to know how she can help. 
12.	 Ian runs a local community garden and is offering two boxes of fresh 
produce to community members.
13.	 Aaliyah is an avid outdoors person with camping supplies and wants to 
know if anyone needs a tent or sleeping bag. 
14.	 Robyn owns a local brewery and wants to know if there is any way she 
can help. 
15.	 Amanda speaks three languages and is offering to translate information 
for community members. 
 53
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 54
 54
HEATWAVE, DROUGHT & AIR QUALITY ADVISORY
SCENARIO: 
Vancouver is experiencing a record-breaking heat wave and severely 
compromised air quality from forest fires. Afternoon temperatures are 
reaching 30 degrees Celsius and evening temperatures are remaining as 
high as 25 degrees Celsius. People have been warned to stay indoors in air-
conditioned spaces and avoid being outside, particularly during the warmest 
afternoon hours. However, many people do not have air conditioning and 
individuals vulnerable to heat-related illness (children, seniors, and people 
with chronic health conditions) need to access air-conditioned shelter 
outside of their home. Homeless people are at increased risk of heat-illness 
and breathing problems from lack of indoor relief from polluted air. Outdoor 
workers face similar risks.
Further information about this scenario: 
•	 Extreme heat and poor air quality are limiting active modes of transportation. 
•	 Environment Canada and Vancouver Coastal Health are suggesting people 
“shelter-in-place” or stay indoors as much as possible. 
•	 Maximum walking distance is 10 blocks due to air particulate exposure. 
•	 Public buildings like libraries and community centres have air conditioned space 
with air filtration for smoke.
NEEDS AND OFFERS: 
Use specific examples of needs and offers of community members to guide 
and prioritize Hub activities. Choose from: 
NEEDS
1.	
Akiko has a young child with asthma. Her apartment doesn’t have air 
conditioning or good air filters. She wants to know where she can take 
her child to cool down and breathe more easily.  
2.	 Hussein lives alone. He has a respiratory illness. He needs help getting 
food and water.  
3.	 Li Xiu Ying just moved to Vancouver to take an English course for 3 months. 
English is not her first language, and she is having trouble understanding 
what is happening in the neighbourhood, and what services might be 
available. 
4.	 Fatima is feeling faint and nauseous from the heat but isn’t sure she can 
make it to her doctor by herself. 
5.	 Danielle is a single mother with 2 children. Her childcare has been disrupted 
and she needs help with childcare while she heads to work. 
6.	 Aaliyah has a 2 month old baby. Her partner is away for work. She wants 
company and emotional support but can’t risk leaving her home and 
exposing her baby to the smoke. 
7.	 The Singh family’s home was under renovations and the interior of the 
house is exposed to the smoky air. They are not sure if it is safe for them 
to stay there or where they should go. 
8.	 Micah is concerned about his neighbour, an elderly woman who lives alone 
but has seemed intimidated by Micah in the past, so he wants someone 
else to come with him to check on her.
9.	 Jerry is homeless and needs to find somewhere to stay out of the smoke. 
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 55
10.	 Preeti is pregnant and needs to see her doctor but is afraid of leaving her 
home. 
11.	 Luisa has been told her apartment doesn’t have sufficient air filtration and 
isn’t safe to stay in. She needs to find somewhere else to stay. 
12.	 Nancy’s power is out. She needs to find somewhere to stay with air 
conditioning. 
13.	 Ali is an outdoor worker who is feeling dizzy and having trouble breathing. 
14.	 Li Wei has run out of food in his home and needs help accessing food 
supplies through the Hub. 
15.	 Alejandra is trying to get in touch with her family but her cell phone is out 
of batteries. She needs a power source to charge it. 
 OFFERS
1.	
Zhang Wei has his amateur radio license and radio equipment, and wants 
to know how he can help. 
2.	 Jorge works for a local construction company and wants to know how he 
can help. 
3.	 Arjun and Aniel are teenagers from the neighbourhood. They want to 
know how they can help. 
4.	 Katie is a skilled trades person offering to help.
5.	 Melissa is a retired nurse who can help with first aid and medical support. 
She is keen to help. 
6.	 Leigh is a local parent who organizes school activities every year. She 
wants to know how she can help. 
7.	 Emily is a therapist who wants to provide emotional support to people 
who need it. 
8.	 Yosh is a local chef who has access to an industrial-sized kitchen, BBQ and 
propane and wants to help. 
9.	 Annabel has an extra bedroom in her home and wants to know if anyone 
needs it.
10.	 Isabel is a local community organizer and wants to help at the Hub. 
11.	 Rachel is a local artist who wants to know how she can help. 
12.	 Ian runs a local community garden and is offering two boxes of fresh 
produce to community members.
13.	 Lucy has two extra fans and wants to know if anyone else needs them. 
14.	 Robyn owns a local brewery and wants to know if there is any way she 
can help. 
15.	 Amanda speaks Cantonese and Mandarin and is offering to translate 
information to community members. 
 55
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 56
EARTHQUAKE
SCENARIO: 
A magnitude 7.3 Georgia Strait earthquake has struck Vancouver. Bridges, 
roads and telecommunications systems are impacted. Fires have broken 
out across the city and some buildings have collapsed. Downed power lines 
and broken gas lines have left hazards in streets. Access in and out of the 
neighbourhood as well as movement within the neighbourhood is limited by 
debris. Families are trying to reunite but cellular communication is unreliable. 
People are unable to access city water and have limited food supplies. 
Further information about this scenario: 
•	 Shaking & fires have damaged many commercial buildings along arterial roads.
•	 Many streets are blocked by debris or downed power lines, limiting travel. 
•	 15% of residential units are no longer safe to occupy. 
•	 Some high-rises damaged beyond repair.
•	 Some liquefaction along shorelines and spread throughout the city.
•	 Moderate damage to infrastructure―water mains broken, sewer lines damaged, 
power and natural gas disruptions.
•	 Periodic communications outages―loss of cellular networks, landlines.
•	 Aftershocks are expected, likely causing additional damage to buildings.
NEEDS AND OFFERS: 
Use specific examples of needs and offers of community members to guide 
and prioritize Hub activities. Choose from: 
NEEDS
1.	
Akiko’s young children are stuck at school and she is on the other side of the 
City. She doesn’t own a car. She is desperate to get in touch with her kids, 
but no one is answering the school phone. She needs help reaching them. 
2.	 Hussein lives alone at home. He has mobility challenges and requires a 
walker to leave his home. He needs help getting food and water.  
3.	 Li Xiu Ying just moved to Vancouver to take an English course for 3 months. 
English is not her first language, and she is having trouble understanding 
what is happening in the neighbourhood and what services might be 
available. 
4.	 Fatima is walking with a friend on the other side of the City. She wants to 
find out whether it is safe to get home and what the best route might be. 
5.	 Danielle is a single mother with 2 children. Her childcare has been 
disrupted and needs help with childcare while she finds food and water 
for her family, and performs basic repairs on her home. 
6.	 Aaliyah has a 2 month old baby. Her partner is away for work. She wants 
company and emotional support. 
7.	 The Singh family’s home has suffered some damage―mainly broken 
windows and small cracks in the walls. They are not sure if it is safe for 
them to stay there. 
8.	 Micah is concerned about his neighbour, she is an elderly woman who 
lives alone but has seemed intimidated by Micah in the past, so he wants 
someone else to come with him to check on her.
9.	 Jerry has run out of food for his dog, Fluffy. The local pet store is closed 
due to the emergency event, and Jerry is wondering if anyone else can 
share their dog food. 
 56
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 57
10.	 Lucy and Norah have arrived alone. They are 8 & 10 years old. They aren’t 
sure where their parents are and are scared.
11.	 Luisa has been told her apartment isn’t safe to enter. She needs to find a 
place to stay. 
12.	 Nancy’s toilet is not working. Sewage pipes leading to her home are 
broken. She needs help setting up a portable toilet, or creating a backyard 
latrine. 
13.	 Ali is a senior who has trouble walking. He is afraid to leave his home in 
case he falls. 
14.	 Li Wei has run out of food in his home and needs help accessing food 
supplies through the Hub. 
15.	 Preeti is trying to get in touch with her family but her cell phone is out of 
batteries. She needs a power source to charge it. 
OFFERS 
1.	
Zhang Wei has his amateur radio license and radio equipment, and wants 
to know how he can help. 
2.	 Jorge works for a local construction company and wants to know how he 
can help. 
3.	 Arjun and Aniel are teenagers from the neighbourhood. They want to 
know how they can help. 
4.	 Katie is a skilled trades-person offering to help.
5.	 Melissa is a retired nurse who can help with first aid and medical support. 
She is keen to help. 
6.	 Alejandra is a local parent who organizes school activities every year. She 
wants to know how she can help. 
7.	 Rosie is a therapist who wants to provide emotional support to people 
who need it. 
8.	 Yoshi is a local chef who has access to an industrial-sized kitchen, BBQ 
and propane and wants to help. 
9.	 Isabel has an extra bedroom in her home and wants to know if anyone 
needs it.
10.	 Jing is a local community organizer and wants to help at the Hub. 
11.	 Rachel is a local artist who wants to know how she can help. 
12.	 Ian runs a local community garden and is offering two boxes of fresh 
produce to community members.
13.	 Leigh is an avid outdoors person with camping supplies and wants to 
know if anyone needs a tent or sleeping bag. 
14.	 Robyn owns a local brewery and wants to know if there is any way he can 
help. 
15.	 Amanda speaks Cantonese and Mandarin and is offering to translate 
information to community members. 
 57
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 58
EXERCISE INJECTS
In addition to the Needs and Offers characters above, select several of the 
prompts below to guide the activation and running of your Hub. 
GENERAL HUB ACTIVATION AND OPERATIONS:   
•	 You have just arrived at the Hub, what are your first steps?
•	 Who will take on which role?
•	 What information do you need at this point? Where would you get it?
•	 What are your first priorities at the Hub?
•	 How will you track tasks and priorities?
•	 What equipment or materials will you need to reach your 
objectives, in addition to the materials you previously sourced in 
your Hub pack? How might you access / get them?
•	 Who will need to be informed of Hub activities? How will you keep 
them informed?
•	 Who might need information from you? What type of information 
would they need and how would you provide it?
•	 How are you going to coordinate ongoing staffing?
COMMUNITY PROBLEM-SOLVING AND PRIORITIZATION: 
VULNERABLE INDIVIDUALS
•	 Where are vulnerable individuals who are stuck indoors located? 
How will you reach them? How will you support them? Consider 
door-to-door check-ins.
SHELTERS 
•	 Where can people find shelter in your neighbourhood? 
•	 How many people could each shelter accommodate? Do they have 
power? 
•	 Are there areas in your neighbourhood that are outside of the 
travel range of shelters? 
•	 Who do you rely upon to use the identified shelters? 
FOOD AND WATER
•	 Are there disruptions to food and water? Where might those be? 
Where can you source alternatives for food and water?
•	 Who do you rely upon to access the identified food and water?
TRANSPORTATION
•	 What is your transportation strategy given conditions of roads and 
sidewalks? 
•	 What is needed to help people be self-sufficient? Consider clearing 
sidewalks and gathering mobility supplies. Ride sharing where 
possible and necessary.  
 58
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 59
•	 Take note of transportation assets (ex. motor vehicles, walking 
paths, bicycles etc.) for transporting people and goods (food, 
water, first aid supplies) to shelters. 
COMMUNICATION
•	 How are people informed and coordinated? Are there people 
without access to phones or internet? Who might need to receive 
information in person? 
•	 How will you inform people about available services; help people 
communicate with their family; or, coordinate and connect 
people to shelter and heat, food and water, medical needs and 
transportation? 
•	 Could your access to communication change either by getting 
disrupted by a new hazard or restored?
•	 How might you communicate with the City’s Emergency 
Operations Centre? What kind of information might they want?
OTHER 
•	 What else might be needed to help your community respond? 
Think back to your Neighbourhood Mapping Activities. Consider 
unique social, cultural and physical characteristics of your 
neighbourhood.
•	 Remember: the main purpose of a Hub is to connect the 
community with information that can help them make informed 
decisions, and to match community needs with resources and 
support from within the community itself. 
FINISHING AN EXERCISE: 
In addition to keeping recovery at the core of your Hub planning and 
preparedness, we suggest considering how you can build stronger social 
connection amongst neighbours. Research on disasters across the globe 
shows that communities with strong social cohesion demonstrate the 
strongest resilience. Your organization already has extensive networks 
in the neighbourhood, so contemplate how you can expand and draw 
upon these. 
Consider ending each Disaster Support Hub exercise with a BBQ or potluck, and take time 
to celebrate your increased preparedness and connect with participants as neighbours 
and hopefully new friends! Plus, the smell of a good food can bring all sorts of people to 
the Hub who hadn’t already heard of your exercise! 
 59
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 60
PART 3: RESPONSE AND RECOVERY  
(QUICK START FOR WHEN DISASTER STRIKES) 
RESPONSE 
Now that you have practiced the roles, responsibilities and functions of 
a Hub, here is a quick start guide on what to do when a disaster strikes. 
STEP 1: WHEN DISASTER STRIKES 
a.	 Immediately after: Immediately following a shock it’s essential to 
first look after yourself, your family and those immediately around 
you such as coworkers or neighbours. For those already at home, 
they will take care of their families and neighbours first before 
coming to the Hub. Others may already be at work and need to 
check in at home. Everyone should solve problems immediately 
around them―start with the building, then move on to check on 
neighbours. It is important that all staff arrive at the Hub knowing 
that loved ones and neighbours are safe and secure so that they can 
concentrate on the broader community. 
b.	 Heading to the Hub: Assess the situation. Once the immediate block 
is safe, try to find updates from the City of Vancouver and local 
news sources on the general state of the area. If you are making 
your way to the Hub from somewhere else like home, are there any 
serious hazards being reported that will impact your ability to safely 
get to the Hub? What might the safest route to the Hub be? Once 
you have assessed this, head to your local Hub and be careful on 
your route―you may encounter hazards along the way.  
c.	 Accessing the Hub: Once you arrive at your Hub, survey the area 
to ensure that there are no hazards that could harm you or other 
community members. For example, if there is a gas leak or fire, it is 
not safe to use the area. If the area is not safe, find another location to 
operate your Hub. For example, is there another organization with a 
facility nearby that you can partner with? Leave a note stating where 
you are going and why. If the area is safe, identify exactly where you 
will set up. Tidy the area and gather together the materials you have 
access to and set them up. Start a list of what else would be helpful 
once more resources become available. These items can even be 
posted on your Needs and Offers board―see below. 
d.	 Working together: As staff and team members arrive, put together 
the initial team. At this point, community members may also be 
arriving at the Hub. You may choose to solicit their help right away, 
or you may ask them to wait while you get organized. Hubs are an 
opportunity to incorporate community members and neighbours into 
response and recovery as convergent volunteers―especially while 
staff members are busy looking after their families and neighbours. 
Two to four people is enough to get started with setting up your Hub. Introduce yourself 
to newcomers if you don’t already know them. Learning people’s names is an important 
part of building the team, and helps foster trust and cohesion of the group. 
 60
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 61
Remember, you do not have to “open” the Hub  
until you are ready to do so.
As a group, your first tasks should be to: 
•	 Collectively agree upon and appoint a Hub Supervisor to facilitate 
set up;* 
•	 Review the purpose of the Hub;
•	 Review the general situation in your neighbourhood, and the city 
as a whole;  
•	 Decide what needs to be done to set the Hub up and how it should 
be done;  
•	 Determine who is going to do what during set up.
*It is important to have one person who is providing high-level oversight of Hub activities 
to ensure that objectives are being met, and that the entire team is being cared for. 
e.	 Setting Up: 
Look around the area: where are community members likely to 
enter through? Is there any safe, natural shelter you can use? Are 
there natural access points or places to put signage?
Set up the Public Information Board: This is a large board that 
should be easy to see when people enter (see page 70). It will 
contain up-to-date information about the city and neighbourhood 
that will be useful to community members as they enter. 
Set up a Task Board: This is the record of what actions are being 
taken at the Hub, and who is responsible for what. This board is 
not for the public, and should be set up in an area that is more 
private for the Hub team. 
Set up a Needs and Offers Table: This table is for Hub team 
members to transcribe needs and offers from community 
members onto the Needs and Offers forms. It should be located 
close to, but not directly next to the Needs and Offers Board. 
Needs and Offers Board: This is a large board where all 
outstanding needs and offers are posted. Ideally, you will have 
one board for Needs and one for Offers. Each will have columns 
or rows for types of needs such as “Food, Water, Medical, Shelter, 
Tools, People, Other”. See template in appendix. These boards 
should be visible and accessible to community members, but are 
administered by Hub staff.
Community Space: This is an area for community members 
to rest, wait for assistance or wait while they are assigned to a 
volunteer role.
 61
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 62
Hygiene Station: This is a quiet, separate area to set up portable 
washrooms. If you are able to set your Hub up inside a building 
you may not need to set this up.
NOTE: Disaster Support Hubs need to be accessible for everyone. Make sure that you 
consider accessibility of the physical space and signage. Are there ramps that wheelchairs 
can access? Is lettering of signage large and in clear font? If you have extra volunteers, 
can any of them provide wayfinding?
SUGGESTED HUB FLOOR PLAN:
Given that you may be setting up a Hub outside, consider how you can 
use your surroundings to set up a perimeter. Sidewalks, trees, fences 
and other outdoor features can be used to construct work spaces and 
facilitate movement through the space.
 62
HUB ENTRANCE (PUBLIC)
COMMUNITY 
MEMBERS
RECEPTION  
TEAM
PUBLIC 
INFORMATION 
BOARD
NEEDS AND 
OFFERS BOARD
COMMUNITY 
SPACE
NEEDS AND 
OFFERS MESSAGE 
TAKERS
VOLUNTEER 
COORDINATION
INFORMATION 
COORDINATION
SITUATION 
BOARD
PRIVATE AREA
PUBLIC AREA
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 63
HUB WORK FLOW:
ASSIGNING ROLES:
Once you have finished setting up and decide to “open” the Hub, your 
team will take on specific roles and responsibilities. Below is a list of the 
common roles and responsibilities for operating a Hub.
There are 9 core roles that operate the Hub. The first four are priority roles 
to fill, starting with the Hub Supervisor:
1.	
Hub Supervisor
2.	 Information Coordination
3.	 Public Information
4.	 Reception
5.	 Needs and Offers Message Takers
6.	 Needs and Offers Message Matchers
 63
HUB ENTRANCE (PUBLIC)
PUBLIC 
INFORMATION 
BOARD
NEEDS AND 
OFFERS BOARD
COMMUNITY 
SPACE
VOLUNTEER 
COORDINATION
INFORMATION 
COORDINATION
SITUATION
BOARD
PRIVATE AREA
PUBLIC AREA
#
#
#
#
INFORMATION
NEED
OFFER
q
NEEDS 
AND 
OFFERS 
MESSAGE 
TAKERS
VOLUNTEER
OTHER
RECEPTION 
TEAM
HUB 
SUPERVISOR
FACILITY 
MAINTENANCE
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 64
7.	 Facility Maintenance
8.	 Community Space
9.	 Volunteer Coordination
10.	 Runners
If you have fewer people than the roles listed, you may have people 
perform multiple roles for a short time until more help arrives. If the 
volume of work becomes unmanageable you can increase the number of 
people performing particular roles such as the Needs and Offers Message 
Takers. If you have too many people, send some of them home and let 
them know you will be asking them to come back for the next shift, or 
when it is busier.
When assigning volunteers to roles, try to leverage their existing skills and 
knowledge wherever possible. This does not need to be done within the 
official roles listed below. Ask them about their hobbies, their work and 
what they like to do. Give them a description of the available roles, and 
try to match them with one they feel comfortable doing. If someone has a 
particular skill and wants to help using that, try to find a way for them to 
do so. For example, if someone is a counsellor, they may want to provide 
emotional support in the Community Space. Another person who speaks 
multiple languages may be useful as a translator. This is a valuable way of 
supporting the community, even though it is not one of the roles listed in 
this guide. Hubs use the skills and resources within the neighbourhood, 
and must be flexible and adaptable to the needs of the community.
ROLE LANYARDS
Lanyards are a simple, space-saving way to identify Hub team members 
and their roles. The lanyards have the position titles on the front to identify 
the role to other people in the Hub. The lanyards also include a list of tasks 
on the back to remind the person of what tasks they need to do in that 
role for quick reference. The Hub team should wear their lanyards at all 
times while on shift as identification. These can be made, and kept in the 
Hub kit, in advance.
 64
ROLE LANYARDS
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 65
HUB SUPERVISOR – THE OVERSEER
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Hub Supervisor is to oversee all Hub personnel and Hub 
activities. They maintain a high-level view of the emergency situation, and 
ensure that objectives of the Hub are being met while the Hub is operated 
as safely and smoothly as possible. A Hub Supervisor ensures that the 
entire Hub team is looked after, and provides leadership, troubleshoots 
emerging problems and helps determine priorities.*
*The Hub Supervisor is NOT the sole decision-maker at the Hub. Decisions should be 
discussed and made as a team.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 Supervisory/team management experience
•	 People-person
•	 Clear communicator
•	 Comfortable prioritizing
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Maintain high-level oversight of the entire Hub and emergency situation;
•	 Oversee all Hub personnel and all Hub activities;
•	 Ensure Hub objectives are met;
•	 Prioritize health and safety of Hub team and community;
•	 Open and close the Hub;
•	 Ensure that all roles are filled;
•	 Work with the media, as necessary; and
•	 Ensure everyone has what they need to do their jobs.
TASKS
•	 Oversee set up and ensure that area is safe;
»»
Recheck safety of area after any new hazard occurs (like an aftershock);
»»
Open the Hub when the team and the space are ready.
•	 Maintain high-level oversight of emergency situation.
»»
Work with Information Coordination and Public Information to understand 
the situation and identify current or potential challenges;
»»
Help prioritize objectives and activities of the Hub.
•	 Oversee all Hub personnel―make sure roles are filled, keep the team working 
together as a group and ensure that decisions are made as a team.
»»
Keep a running log of tasks, activities and who is assigned to them.
»»
Organize and facilitate regular team meetings and regularly check in with 
entire team.
»»
Troubleshoot emerging problems and find answers to questions from other 
team members.
»»
Work with Facility Maintenance to ensure that everyone has what they need 
to do their job―everything from tables and chairs to information.
»»
Coordinate turning over hub operations to relief volunteers, or closing hub 
overnight.
»»
Model a calm, positive attitude for other Hub workers and community 
members.
»»
Make sure everyone is prioritizing health and safety. Use frequent rotations 
or breaks to avoid fatigue, stress. Ensure everyone is eating and staying 
hydrated. Monitor for signs of stress and if needed, facilitate someone 
 65
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 66
changing roles, taking a break, or going home. Model this behaviour for 
everyone through your own actions.
»»
Work with Volunteer Coordinator to identify Hub needs and assign roles 
based on skills, knowledge, and resources.
•	 Oversee all Hub operations―make sure that objectives are met and prioritize 
work.
»»
Monitor flow of work and adapt operations as needed to ensure objectives 
are met.
»»
Maintain a log and summary of current situation and all significant decisions, 
and be prepared to communicate these to the incoming Hub Supervisor 
during a shift change, and to City staff or First Responders.
»»
Work with Media and external organizations, as needed. Foster collaborative 
relations and share resources with other communities if needed.
»»
Close the hub overnight or whenever is appropriate: make sure all 
equipment is locked up securely. Use signage to say that the hub is closed 
and when it will open.
•	 Close the Hub when the community no longer needs it.
»»
Use signage to tell the community that the Hub will no longer open, and 
provide information on where they can go to find assistance.
»»
Clean up all areas. Return any moved furniture and equipment.
»»
Collect together all of the records for the event and leave them in the Hub 
container for collection.
»»
Communicate this closure to City staff and hand off any documentation or 
records they may need.
 66
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 67
INFORMATION COORDINATION – THE PLANNERS
PURPOSE
The purpose of Information Coordination is to collect and maintain useful 
information for members of the Hub Team to guide decision-making and 
prioritization. They also maintain and update the Situation Board and 
maintain a display of Hub tasks and priorities which should be situated 
in a more private area. They verify or dispel rumours and ensure that 
information is accurate.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 Strong attention to detail;
•	 Clear communicator;
•	 Skilled at consuming large amounts of information and presenting in a clear, 
concise way;
•	 Excellent and in-depth knowledge of neighbourhood and City;
•	 Clear, legible writing;
•	 HAM radio certification and skills, if available.
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Collect, confirm and share appropriate information about emergency situation to 
the Hub team;
•	 Ensure accuracy of information by verifying or dispelling rumours;
•	 Display and update the Situation Board;
•	 Maintain a running list of Hub Team tasks and priorities;
•	 Update Hub Team with important information.
TASKS
•	 Identify sources and actively seek out information (radio, social media, runners, 
community members, etc.)
•	 Collect and validate information on an ongoing basis;
•	 Monitor radio, social media, and other appropriate channels for incoming and 
relevant information;
•	 Work with Public Information (see below) to gather information sourced directly 
from community members;
•	 Update and display information on the Situation Board in a private location only 
accessible to Hub team members. Components may include:
»»
Information should contain time and date-stamps, notices, and maps where 
relevant and available
»»
Write clearly to make sure it is easy to read. Use large print and a dark 
marker
»»
Overall picture of what is happening in neighbourhood/city
»»
Current hazards (downed power lines, fires, etc.)
»»
Status of Utilities (if known)
»»
Weather reports
»»
Maps
»»
Hub Team Task List
»»
Hub Team Priorities
•	 Create and share regular Situation Updates to the Hub Team – generate short, 
concise written Situation Reports as documentation. These may be requested by 
formal emergency management agencies;
•	 Update the Hub Team as pertinent information comes in, and provide a summary 
of information at team briefings.
 67
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 68
SUGGESTED SITUATION BOARD LAYOUT
SITUATION BOARD
LAST UPDATED
Date: DD/MM/YY
Time: 00:00
DATE/TIME
LOCATION
(Address/Maps/
Images)
EVENT/ISSUE
(Description)
RESPONSE
(Who/What)
STATUS
(Urgent/In Progress/
Completed/On Hold)
WEATHER 
FORECAST
RESOURCES 
NEEDED
HUB PRIORITIES
HUB TASKS
HUB STAFF
•	 Date and Time
•	 Location of Issue/Incident
•	 Description of Issue/Incident
•	 Description of Response and Who is Responsible
•	 Status (haven’t started, in progress, completed)
 68
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 69
PUBLIC INFORMATION BOARD – THE PLANNERS
PURPOSE
The purpose of Public Information is to collect and maintain a display 
board of useful information for community members to inform their 
decision-making and safety. Some people may only be coming to the 
Hub in search of information, so the Public Information Board should be 
located in plain sight, near the entrance of the Hub. Public Information 
personnel verify or dispel rumours and ensure that information is accurate.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 Strong attention to detail;
•	 Clear communicator;
•	 Skilled at consuming large amounts of information and presenting in a clear, 
concise way;
•	 Excellent and in-depth knowledge of neighbourhood and City;
•	 Clear, legible writing.
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Collect, confirm and share appropriate information about the neighbourhood, 
and the broader situation;
•	 Ensure accuracy of information by verifying or dispelling rumours;
•	 Display and update the Public Information Board;
•	 Support community members in understanding situation and support them in 
thinking of actions they may take.
TASKS
•	 Work with Information Coordination and Needs and Offers Matching to collect, 
confirm and share appropriate information about the neighbourhood, and the 
broader situation;
•	 Display and update the Public Information Board in a visible location, near the 
entrance;
»»
The Public Information Board is information about the neighbourhood and 
broader situation to help community members make informed decisions. It 
should also contain advice, where relevant.
»»
Information should contain time and date-stamps, notices, and maps where 
relevant and available.
»»
Write clearly to make sure it is easy to read. Use large print and a dark 
marker.
»»
Content should include current hazards, the status of utilities, and an 
overview of what is happening in the neighbourhood and in the city/region 
as a whole.
•	 Examples of important information include:
»»
Hazards (e.g. floods, fires, gas leaks, contaminated water).
»»
Weather reports as available.
»»
Status of Infrastructure like water, sewage, power, gas, telecommunications, 
transportation, etc.
»»
Location of resources or support. Monitor the news through radio and City 
social media.
•	 Support community members in understanding situation and support them in 
thinking of actions they may take.
•	 Work with the Hub Supervisor to liaise with other Hubs, First Responders, and 
different organizations;
 69
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 70
•	 Work with the Hub Supervisor to liaise with Media;
»»
Work with the Hub Supervisor to assess whether incoming Media members 
have useful information to contribute.
•	 Work with Reception and Needs and Offers teams to identify information coming 
in from community members;
»»
Work with Reception to gather information coming in from community 
members as they arrive. Some questions may be, “What street did you 
come from? What was going on there? Does anyone there need help?” etc.
•	 Work with Runners to gather information from the neighbourhood, as needed;
•	 Validate all incoming information to ensure accuracy and clearly mark if 
information isn’t confirmed;
•	 Write down questions that need to be answered and try to gather that 
information.
Do NOT display Personal information (people’s names, addresses, etc.), private or 
confidential information you have received, details of any deaths or injuries or addresses 
of evacuated homes.
SUGGESTED PUBLIC INFORMATION BOARD LAYOUT
LAST UPDATED
Date: DD/MM/YY
Time: 00:00
PUBLIC INFORMATION BOARD
Situation Overview
—
— earthquake (magnitude 6.5)
—
— power outages throughout the city
—
— water and sewer pip damage
—
— some collapsed buildings
—
— shelters beginning to open at community 
centres
—
— some small fires due to gas leaks 
throughout city
Weather Forecast
—
— rain
—
— 10°C
—
— light wind
Health and Safety Advisories
—
— aftershocks expected
—
— boil water advisory in effect
—
— do not flush toilets
—
— stay away from downed power lines (at 
least 10 meters)
—
— do not enter collapsed/severely damaged 
buildings
—
— call 9-1-1 in event of life-threatening 
emergency
—
— visit Blue Jay Medical Centre at 700 E. 
Vancouver Avenue for medical assistance
Hub News
—
— nightly potluck at 5:00pm
—
— accepting donations of food, shovels and 
water bottles
—
— accepting volunteers to help with 
neighbourhood clean-up activities
•	 Date and Time
•	 Situation Overview
•	 Health and Safety Notices
•	 Weather Forecast 
•	 Hub News
 70
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 71
 71
RECEPTION – THE DOERS
PURPOSE
The purpose of Reception is to be the first point of contact when community 
members arrive. Welcome people as they arrive, ask what brought them 
to the Hub to find out what services they may need, and direct them to 
the appropriate Hub service. Depending on volume of people entering the 
Hub, this role may need to be filled by multiple people.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 People-person;
•	 Familiar with the neighbourhood and community;
•	 Calm and confident under pressure;
•	 Experience working with people under stress;
•	 Clear communicator;
•	 Additional languages are always an asset.
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Greet every person who enters the hub;
•	 Create a calm, welcoming reception area at the entrance to the Hub;
•	 Explain what the Hub is for and what kinds of services are offered. Be able to 
explain what services or functions the Hub cannot provide;
•	 Provide clear instructions to direct people to where they should go next at the 
Hub based on their specific need or offer;
•	 Alert the Hub Supervisor if additional volunteers are required for this role to 
avoid long line ups.
TASKS
•	 Stay stationed and visible at entrance to the hub and be clearly identifiable;
•	 Be the first point of contact for every person entering the Hub;
•	 Using empathy and compassion in all interactions with community members;
•	 Stay calm at all times, even if people are visibly upset or frustrated;
•	 Listen carefully to what each person’s needs are and direct them to the 
appropriate person/Hub service;
•	 Be honest when you don’t know the answer, and try to direct the person to 
someone who might;
•	 Explain and set expectations about what kind of services the Hub may or may 
not be able to supply;
•	 Maintain continual understanding of what is happening at the Hub to best direct 
people. Set the tone for interactions at the Hub by being calm, friendly and 
curious.
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 72
NEEDS AND OFFERS MESSAGE  
RECORDERS – THE DOERS
PURPOSE
The purpose of Needs and Offers Takers is to collect and record needs 
and offers from community members so that these can be matched up 
through the Needs and Offers Board. Depending on volume of people 
entering the Hub, this role may need to be filled by multiple people.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 Strong listening skills;
•	 Clear, legible writing;
•	 Familiar with the neighbourhood and community;
•	 Calm and confident under pressure;
•	 Additional languages are always an asset.
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Interview community members using the Needs and Offers forms as prompts/
questions;
•	 Capture messages (Needs and Offers) from community members on Needs and 
Offers Forms;
•	 Direct community members to the Needs and Offers Board;
•	 For life-threatening needs, call 9-1-1 and solicit help from the Hub Supervisor.
TASKS
•	 Interview and record Needs and Offers of community members using the Needs 
and Offers forms. Use clear, legible printing with black or blue pen.
•	 Pass completed Needs and Offers forms on to Needs and Offers Matchers.
•	 Provide clarifications on message information where necessary.
 72
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 73
NEEDS AND OFFERS BOARD  
MATCHERS – THE DOERS
PURPOSE
The purpose of Needs and Offers Matchers is to collect Needs and Offers 
forms from message takers, and post them on the Needs and Offers 
Display Board under the correct categories, and to match Needs and 
Offers notes and connect needs and offers where possible. Depending 
on volume of people entering the Hub, this role may need to be filled by 
multiple people.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 Strong reading comprehension;
•	 Good problem-solving skills;
•	 Clear, legible writing;
•	 Familiar with the neighbourhood and community;
•	 Calm and confident under pressure;
•	 Additional languages are always an asset.
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Collect Needs and Offers forms from Needs and Offers takers;
•	 Review messages for accuracy and seek clarification where required;
•	 Triage messages and help connect needs and offers;
•	 Post Needs and Offers on Needs and Offers Display Board and organize by 
category and priority.
•	 When solutions have been found, or offers have been used up or are no longer 
available, remove them from the board and store them safely.
TASKS
•	 Set up Needs and Offers Display Board(s) between the Needs and Offers 
Message Takers and the entrance of the Hub, next to the Public Information 
Board.
»»
Use two columns or rows―one for needs and one for offers.
»»
Put thematic headings to categorize messages, including: shelter, food, 
water, medical (non-life-threatening), sanitation, equipment, etc.
»»
Gather new Needs and Offers forms from message takers and confirm any 
unclear information.
»»
Try to match Needs and Offers immediately with what is already on the 
board. If you cannot match them, post them on the board under the correct 
heading.
•	 Remove requests when the need has been matched with an offer and record the 
solution directly on the forms. Do not throw them away: store them in a bin in 
case you need to refer to them later.
•	 Remove offers when they have been used up or are no longer available. Record 
that they have expired. Do not throw them away, either: store them in a bin in 
case you need to refer to them later.
•	 If you come across any information that could affect the community, the running 
of the Hub, or the wider response to the emergency, pass it on to the Hub 
Supervisor.
 73
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 74
One of the core objectives of the Hub is to solve problems using the skills and resources 
available to the neighbourhood/community. There are some fundamental basic needs 
common to every disaster that will need to be addressed. The first priority is always 
the preservation of life, health, and safety. This includes rescue and medical attention 
to those who are injured, and checking on people to make sure they are safe. The other 
basic needs are shelter, water, food, waste/sanitation, communications, tools, people/
skills and lost or missing people or pets. Messages will often fall under these categories.
SUGGESTED NEEDS AND OFFERS BOARD LAYOUT
NEEDS AND OFFERS BOARD
CATEGORY
NEEDS
OFFERS
Shelter
Food
Water
Medical 
(non-life 
threatening)
Sanitation/
Waste
Equipment
People/Skills/
Help
•	 Needs
•	 Offers
•	 Thematic Headings
 74
NEEDS AND OFFERS CARDS
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 75
COMMUNITY SPACE – THE DOERS
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Community Space is to provide social and emotional 
support to community members through hospitality distractions, and 
social activities for people of all abilities. Disasters are stressful, often 
traumatic experiences. Making time and space for people to sit quietly or 
participate in normal, fun activities can be an enormous help.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 People person;
•	 Kind, caring, calm demeanor;
•	 Familiar with the neighbourhood and community;
•	 Calm and confident under pressure;
•	 Experience in hospitality, recreation, community development, or counselling/
therapy/social support services is an asset;
•	 Additional languages are always an asset.
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Set up and maintain a clean, positive environment for people to relax;
•	 Organize a space where people can be around others for general support or 
company;
•	 Support people in their experience by listening;
•	 Create healthy distractions such as drawing or games;
•	 Cultivate a space for people to connect, spend time together, and engage in an 
informal information exchange;
•	 Maintain hospitality services such as coffee, tea, and snacks.
TASKS
•	 Set up and maintain a community space at the Hub, ensuring it is accessible to all 
community members;
•	 Ensure that the space is relatively quiet and peaceful;
•	 Ensure that there is comfortable, clean seating and that the space is accessible to 
all people;
•	 Respectfully listen to people as a calm, caring ear;
»»
Comfort people who are distressed or struggling (but do not attempt to 
counsel them unless you are accredited or qualified to do so);
»»
Help people feel in control of themselves by letting them make their own 
decisions;
»»
Don’t get sentimental or emotional―hold space for them;
»»
Help them recover their composure in their own way and in their own time;
»»
Do not tell distressed individuals not to worry, that it could have been 
worse, that others are worse off, or that everything will be alright. Do not try 
to “fix” their emotions.
»»
Do try to connect them with support services if their needs are greater than 
the Hub can provide.
•	 Set out refreshments if available.
Some people may come to the Hub to seek company or reassurance from other 
community members. The Community Space is intended to be a place for people to 
gather for comfort, and to have a clean, safe location to wait for resources or services.
 75
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 76
FACILITY MAINTENANCE – THE GETTERS
PURPOSE
The purpose of Facility Maintenance is to keep the physical space of 
the Hub running smoothly, efficiently and cleanly. Facility maintenance 
ensures that physical resources needed to operate the Hub are obtained, 
and that the space is functional, safe and welcoming.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 Background in facility maintenance/management;
•	 Handy with tools and resourceful;
•	 Experience with occupational health and safety or first aid training.
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Ensure the space is safe, functional and clean. Indicate physical deficiencies 
clearly with signage and cordon off where necessary;
•	 Find and obtain needed resources and equipment;
•	 Set up sanitation stations, sun and rain shelters, garbage and recycling bins, and 
other needed infrastructure;
•	 Safeguard supplies and equipment;
•	 Work to provide accessible spaces that accommodate people with all needs;
•	 Use personal protective equipment (PPE) as required, such as aprons, gloves or 
hardhats, and do not do anything unsafe.
TASKS
•	 Ensure the space is safe, functional and clean. Indicate physical deficiencies 
clearly with signage and cordon off where necessary;
»»
Clean up any hazards (like broken glass) immediately;
»»
Work to provide accessible spaces that accommodate people with all 
needs, such as organize sweeping pathways for safe and swift movement of 
wheelchairs, bikes and others;
»»
Set up sanitation stations, sun and rain shelters, garbage and recycling bins, 
and other needed infrastructure;
»»
Safeguard supplies and equipment;
»»
Collect rubbish and ensure bins are readily available;
»»
Maintain signage;
»»
Keep pathways clear of debris;
•	 Work with Hub Supervisor to ensure that all Hub team members have resources 
and equipment necessary to do their jobs;
»»
Fix deficiencies and source additional materials as needed.
•	 Plan for and support facility and operations, as needed;
•	 Ensure set up of Hub is optimized to the flow of people in and out of the space;
•	 Weatherproof the Hub wherever possible.
 76
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 77
RUNNERS – THE GETTERS
PURPOSE
The purpose of runners is to take information or small resources to and 
from the Hub, and to conduct outreach to home-bound individuals in the 
neighbourhood. Runners may also use vehicles or bicycles, if available.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 Good physical fitness and mobility;
•	 Strong knowledge of the neighbourhood and city;
•	 Excellent navigational skills;
•	 Thorough and detail-oriented;
•	 Comfortable carrying supplies and equipment.
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Bring information and resources to and from the Hub as needed;
•	 Connect with local organizations to collect information and take stock of 
neighbourhood hazards or issues on route;
•	 Maintain safety at all times and be mindful of hazards on route (downed power 
lines, fires, etc.);
•	 Use other modes of transportation as available and necessary;
•	 Conduct door-to-door notification and checks for home-bound individuals who 
may need help.
TASKS
•	 Stay with a buddy/in a pair ensure the health and safety of partner runner at all 
times;
•	 Work with Hub Supervisor and Public Information to determine where you will be 
dispatched and for what purpose;
»»
Carry information and resources between the Hub and other organizations;
•	 Seek clarity on needs of information and resources:
»»
For example, if you are asked to pick up “30 power bars”, ask whether you 
need to pick up electrical power bars or nutrient bars! (This example is 
taken from a real-life emergency response.)
•	 Collect and record important information on routes and at each end location;
•	 Report back to Hub regularly with information on situation around 
neighbourhood;
•	 Collect information to inform support services offered at the Hub and connect 
home-bound individuals with support wherever possible.
 77
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 78
VOLUNTEER COORDINATION – THE GETTERS
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Volunteer Coordinator is to work with the Hub 
Supervisor to determine personnel needs for the Hub, and interview, 
onboard, train and schedule all volunteers.
HELPFUL SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE
•	 People-person;
•	 Friendly, calm demeanor;
•	 Organized and experience with scheduling an asset;
•	 Strong, clear communicator;
•	 Experience as a trainer or coach.
RESPONSIBILITIES
•	 Ensure critical Hub roles are filled;
•	 Work to understand individual volunteer skills, knowledge and interests;
•	 Assign volunteers to roles;
•	 Provide orientation and training for all new volunteers;
•	 Create, maintain, and communicate volunteer schedule to all volunteers.
TASKS
•	 Keep an up-to-date running list of roles that need to be filled and work with the 
Hub Supervisor to prioritize these;
•	 Welcome, interview, orient and train new volunteers;
»»
Work with volunteers to match their own skillsets and knowledge with roles 
they are suited to perform;
•	 Manage a volunteer schedule―do your best to think long-term and rotate people 
frequently so they don’t burn out;
»»
Consider the daily opening hours, the length of time it will be open and 
make a roster. Remember, your Hub may be operating for days if not weeks 
or months. Schedule for a marathon so you don’t burn out volunteers early 
on.
•	 Look after the physical and emotional health of volunteers;
»»
Check on volunteers to ensure they are taking breaks, eating, and staying 
hydrated;
•	 Communicate current situation to all new volunteers.
»»
Ensure all volunteers have a strong understanding of Hub roles, 
responsibilities, functions, activities and objectives.
These are suggested roles for running a Disaster Support Hub. Depending 
on the functions your organization performs day-to-day, you may 
choose to incorporate other roles relevant to the ongoing services your 
organization provides. Some possible other roles could include:
•	 Emotional support
•	 Child care
•	 Radio Communications Operator
•	 Translator
•	 Donations Intake and Distribution
Note: Where possible, get your organization’s regular services and programs back up and 
running as soon as possible to provide continuity for the community, and give people 
some sense of normalcy.
 78
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 79
STEP 2: ACTIVATING THE HUB
Now that you have set up, and the team has been assigned to 
their roles, it is a good time for a final review before opening. 
Some important information to review may include:
•	 The overall situation and any information about the 
neighbourhood and broader City that you have access to 
(through radio, word-of-mouth, City staff and affiliated 
organizations, etc.)
•	 The purpose and objectives of the Hub. What are you there 
to do as a group? What are you trying to achieve?
•	 Responsibilities and tasks immediately following opening. 
What are the next steps that each person must take?
•	 Other skills, knowledge, and resources needed to perform 
our duties or to reach our objectives in the near term. Who 
else might be able to help us? When will we need to take 
breaks or go home? What do we need in order to operate?
Remember, you do not have to “open” the Hub  
until you are ready to do so.
STEP 3: ONGOING RESPONSE
The first few days of the response may feel chaotic as people learn 
their roles and responsibilities, but everyone will gain confidence 
in their ability to work together as they solve-problems.
•	 Continue gathering and updating information about the 
neighbourhood and overall situation. Remove but store 
outdated information nearby in case you need to refer to it 
later.
•	 Continually check in with all team members to ensure that 
they feel supported.
•	 Solicit help from newly arrived volunteers, or send runners 
to look for extra help. Response and recovery may go on 
for a long time, and you don’t want your team to burn out.
•	 As the response slows down, relieve volunteers more 
frequently or reduce the hours of operation of the Hub to 
ensure people get ample break time.
Other community support groups may also organize in your area, 
and formal City response may come in, if needed. Work with them 
to make sure everyone in need is reached, the workload is shared 
and the overall response is efficient and coordinated.
STEP 5: INFORMATION AND WORKING WITH MEDIA:
The media can be a useful resource for sharing information with 
the wider community.
 79
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 80
Information you can provide:
•	 Anything they can see (such as we are open, weather 
conditions)
•	 General information (such as we are really busy, we are 
quiet, we have had lots of community offers and help.)
•	 Public information you have received via public radio.
Information you cannot provide:
•	 Personal information (people’s names, addresses, etc.)
•	 Any private or confidential information you have received.
•	 Details of any deaths or injuries.
•	 Addresses of evacuated homes.
STEP 6: RECOVERY
Ongoing: Recovery to major disasters can last for weeks if not months 
or years. Hub activities will look markedly different a few days in, a few 
weeks in, and so on. Community needs will evolve and change over time. 
Response is focused on life-safety and stabilizing the situation. Recovery 
is about clean-up, rebuilding, healing and recuperating.
For example, in the aftermath of the Christchurch Earthquake in New 
Zealand in 2011, one of the most significant tasks was shoveling and 
cleaning up soil from liquefaction. The community also led different mural 
projects so people could have an outlet for collective grief. After the 
Calgary Floods in 2013, one of the most significant activities was cleaning 
out water-damaged homes.
Remember the questions posed during your exercises around what you 
want to preserve in your neighbourhood, and what you may want to 
emerge out of a disaster.
•	 What do you most value/love about this neighbourhood/
community?
•	 If you could design this neighbourhood from scratch, what would 
you do differently? What would you keep the same?
•	 Disasters are damaging and disruptive, but they can also be 
generative over the long term. The word emergency comes from 
the Latin, “emergere” which means to “arise out or up”. If a disaster 
or major emergency occurred tomorrow in this neighbourhood/
community, what would you like to emerge from it?
Recovery needs may fall under some of the following themes/subjects:
•	 Social/emotional
•	 Economic/financial
•	 Physical/structural
•	 Environmental/ecological
 80
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 81
The services provided at the Hub may transition to support these needs. 
Some examples of ways Hubs can support recovery may include:
•	 Connecting with and checking in with community members, 
especially those who have been displaced or isolated by the event.
•	 Working together to solve problems―big or small.
•	 Collectively advocating for outside support or resources.
•	 Finding volunteers to provide community members with 
bereavement support or grief counselling.
•	 Supporting community art projects such as painting murals for 
healing and connecting.
•	 Assisting children and families with transitions back to daycare or 
schooling, and returning a sense of normalcy.
•	 Finding volunteers to help community members navigate insurance 
claim applications.
•	 Helping local businesses clean up and restore operations.
•	 Connecting community members with skilled tradespeople to 
repair damaged homes and physical structures.
•	 Cleaning up garbage, waste and contaminated natural spaces like 
parks, lakes and the shoreline. *Note: in the case of hazardous 
material spills clean up should only be performed by people who 
are trained and using approved safety equipment. Always follow 
the direction of authorities.
As the immediate response slows down, it is important to wind down the 
Hub and give people ample rest. Make sure team members are taking days 
off and getting time for their own personal recovery needs. If possible, 
find opportunities to socialize through shared meals or recreation.
Determine which roles can be reduced or removed from the daily roster. 
Reduce hours as necessary. Switch to shorter opening hours. Communicate 
these changes clearly to community members. Return your organization 
to normal operations and reinstate any programs and services that are 
not already back up and running. If asked, supply government agencies 
with documentation of major Hub activities and decisions.
CLOSING THE HUB
Eventually, you will need to de-activate your Hub. When this time comes, 
make sure you communicate this clearly to community members, City 
staff, and other affiliated organizations in writing, and leave signage 
indicating where people can go should they require additional assistance. 
Debrief with staff and volunteers on what worked and what did not―
and incorporate these learnings into your future Hub planning and 
preparedness. Consider having a potluck or gathering before closing and 
invite the whole community to foster connections between neighbours, 
and thank volunteers.
 81
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | READYING NEIGHBOURHOOD DISASTER RESPONSE
 82
 82
ROLE LANYARDS
NEEDS AND OFFERS CARDS
TOOLS AND TEMPLATES  
FOR MODULE 5
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | APPENDIX
 83
Resilience Vancouver 
Tools and Templates
FORMING A TEAM
NEIGHBOURHOOD SHOCKS AND STRESSES ASSESSMENT
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE REPORT CARD
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE ACTION PLAN
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE BASELINE ASSESSMENT (INDIVIDUAL)
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE BASELINE ASSESSMENT (COLLECTIVE)
ASSET ICONS
NEEDS AND OFFERS CARDS
ROLE LANYARDS
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | APPENDIX
 84
Other Helpful Links
Links to free and/or low-cost events, activities, workshops and training to build 
resilience in your community:  
SOCIAL CONNECTION AND CELEBRATION 
•	 Neighbourhood Walking Tours - janeswalk.org and neighbourlab.com 
workshops 
•	 Block Parties - vancouver.ca/doing-business/block-parties.aspx
•	 On the Table - onthetablebc.com
•	 Community Gardens - vancouver.ca/people-programs/start-a-new-
community-garden.aspx
•	 Street Gardens - vancouver.ca/home-property-development/
beautifying-your-boulevard-and-street.aspx
•	 Neighbourhood Book Exchanges - littlefreelibrary.org
•	 Parklets - vancouver.ca/streets-transportation/parklets.aspx
•	 Outdoor Murals - vancouver.ca/parks-recreation-culture/make-an-
outdoor-mural.aspx#mural-support 
HEALTH, SAFETY, AND EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 
•	 Britannia Community Services Centre – Halloween-Themed Map Your 
Zombieville worksheets - britanniacentre.org/community/resilience
•	 Britannia Community Service Centre and Vancouver Public Library – 
Hunger Games Themed Event Guide - britanniacentre.org/community/
resilience
•	 First Aid Training - vanffcpr.org and sja.ca/English/Pages/default.aspx 
•	 Naloxone Training - vch.ca/public-health/harm-reduction/overdose-
prevention-response
•	 Psychological First Aid - phsa.ca/our-services/programs-services/health-
emergency-management-bc/disaster-psychosocial-program#Training--
&--education and coursera.org/learn/psychological-first-aid 
•	 De-escalation and Conflict Resolution - crisiscentre.bc.ca/training 
•	 Sustainability and Climate Action - spec.bc.ca and evergreen.ca/our-
projects/green-bloc-neighbourhoods
RECONCILIATION, ANTI-RACISM, AND CULTURAL COMPETENCY 
•	 Reconciliation and Decolonization - vpl.ca/truth-reconciliation and vpl.
bibliocommons.com/list/share/69130658/1142145167 and pdce.educ.ubc.
ca/reconciliation 
•	 Accessibility - sparc.bc.ca/research-consulting/accessibility-audits and 
disabilityalliancebc.org/programs and calp.forestry.ubc.ca/home/urban-
forestry-toolkit
LINKS TO GRANTS AND FINANCIAL SUPPORT: 
•	 Resilient Neighbourhoods Grants – forthcoming 
•	 Vancouver Foundation - Vancouver Foundation Community Grants 
support thousands of projects every year to help build healthy, vibrant 
and livable communities across BC. vancouverfoundation.ca/grants
•	 Neighbourhood Small Grants – grants from $50 to $500 to support 
projects that bring people together, share skills and knowledge, build 
a sense of belonging and responsibility, and respect and celebrate 
diversity. neighbourhoodsmallgrants.ca 
•	 BC Hydro Community Grants - Broad Impact Grants: Grants of up 
to $10,000 are available for organizations that wish to expand an 
existing program’s reach or to develop a new program across multiple 
communities in B.C.
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | APPENDIX
 85
•	 Grassroots Grants: Grants of up to $2,000 are available for local 
community-based programs. bchydro.com/community/community-
giving/grants.html
•	 Port of Vancouver - Through our dynamic and broad-ranging community 
investment program, we dedicate up to one per cent of our net income 
to initiatives that matter to local communities. Our investments support 
three key pillars: Community Enrichment, Education and Training and 
Environmental Leadership. portvancouver.com/community/community-
investment  
•	 Evergreen – Grants for creating and sustaining healthy and dynamic 
urban environments in our schools, public spaces, housing and transit 
systems and communities at large. evergreen.ca/our-projects 
•	 VanCity Foundation - We offer investments, loans, grants and direct 
strategic support to changemakers who share our vision for a just and 
vibrant society. vancitycommunityfoundation.ca
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
 86
Acknowledgements 
The following organizations and individuals have contributed to the development 
of the Resilient Neighbourhoods Toolkit: 
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS PROGRAM PILOT PARTNERS
•	 312 Main: Vanessa Richards, Vive Wong and Iris Yong
•	 Britannia Community Services Centre: Lindsay Grant, Cynthia Low, Ariel 
Caldwell (VPL), Judy McGuire, Ian Marcuse and the entire Britannia 
Resilience Steering Committee. 
•	 Collingwood Neighbourhood House: Lisa Gibson, Crecien Bencio, January 
Wolodarsky and Jennifer Gray-Grant
•	 Dunbar Community Centre Association: Ann Pacey, Andrea Sara, John 
Halldorson, Gerry Massing and the entire Dunbar Earthquake and 
Emergency Preparedness group
COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE PARTNERS 
•	 Building Resilient Streets – Stacy Barter 
•	 Evergreen’s Project Greenbloc – Robyn Chan and Angela Han 
•	 Hey Neighbour Collective – Francis Heng, Michelle Hoar and Stacy Barter
•	 San Francisco’s Empowered Communities Program – Daniel Homsey and 
GL Hodge 
•	 Seattle Emergency Hubs – Cindi Barker 
•	 Toronto’s Community Resilience to Extreme Weather – Sheila Murray 
•	 Toronto and Regional Conservation Authority’s Sustainable 
Neighbourhood Action Plan – Sonya Meek 
•	 Wellington Regional Emergency Management Office – Dan Neely and the 
entire Community Resilience team
ACADEMIC PARTNERS 
•	 Emily Carr – Amanda Huynh 
•	 Langara’s Social Planning and Community Development Class – Kathryn 
Nairne
•	 Simon Fraser University’s Resource and Environmental Planning Program – 
Kate Menzies (internship)
•	 University of British Columbia’s Global Network for Advanced Management 
program - Dr. Murali Chandrashekaran and Catalina Acevedo Calle 
OTHER ADVISORS AND PARTNERS
•	 Association of Neighbourhood Houses – Deb Bryant 
•	 DIALOG 
•	 Drive Youth Employment Services – Rosie Forth 
•	 Future City Builders - Stephanie Koenig and Kelly Davies
•	 Natural Resources Canada – Murray Journeay, Nicky Hastings and Marit 
Heideman
•	 Neighbour Lab – Adele Therias, Stephanie Koenig, Emi Webb, Leah 
Karlberg 
•	 Our Place 
•	 Ray-Cam Cooperative Centre  
•	 Susanna Haas Lyons
•	 The Thingery – Chris Diplock 
•	 Vancouver Coastal Health – Claire Gram 
•	 Vancouver Foundation – Lidia Kemeny
RESILIENT NEIGHBOURHOODS TOOLKIT | PROGRAM BACKGROUND
 87
Resilient Neighbourhoods 
Program Background
In July 2017, Vancouver City Council approved an Innovation Fund to enable the 
development, piloting the Resilient Neighbourhoods Program that responded 
to recommendations from local citizens. Over an 18 month period, the City 
has partnered with “anchor organizations” in 4 diverse neighbourhoods to 
refine a framework that is adaptable and scalable. Each of these groups and 
neighbourhoods has identified different resilience challenges, and has expressed 
an interest in taking on a role in mobilizing Disaster Support Hubs in their 
communities. These four neighbourhoods and Organizations are: 
•	 Downtown Eastside (312 Main)
•	 Dunbar (Dunbar Community Centre Association) 
•	 Grandview-Woodland (Britannia Community Services Centre)
•	 Renfrew-Collingwood (Collingwood Neighbourhood House)
The pilot phase of the Resilient Neighbourhoods Program aimed to:
•	 Provide a framework to integrate neighbourhood-level efforts related to 
climate adaptation, community connection, and emergency preparedness.
•	 Share experiences and knowledge across neighbourhoods, and to learn 
from and align with grassroots efforts that enhance community wellbeing.
•	 Embed resources with neighbourhood organizations to support the co-
creation of tools and processes that empower neighbourhoods (residents, 
businesses and community organizations).
•	 Build awareness of risks and hazards by connecting neighbourhoods with 
accessible, locally-relevant information.
•	 Expand the Disaster Support Hub model beyond Community Centres to 
include other neighbourhood organizations that provide critical social 
services, infrastructure and resources to their communities.
Through the pilot phase, partners worked together to co-create 5 deliverables, 
including:  
•	 Neighbourhood Resilience Action Plans
•	 Social and physical asset maps
•	 Instructions and resources for facilities to serve as Disaster Support Hubs
•	 Training and exercises to build community capacity and connections
•	 An information sharing platform
