SOWING THE SEEDS FOR 
LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP: 
A LEARNING GUIDE FOR RESIDENT ENGAGEMENT 
USING A CONNECTED COMMUNITIES APPROACH
Toronto Environmental Alliance 
Centre for Connected Communities 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1
6
11
2
3
5
21
23
26
29
6
7
9
9
10
11
13
14
17
18
20
22
24
25
27
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
INTRODUCTION TO THE LEARNING GUIDE 
Where Our Learning Came From: 
Working to Advance Equitable Climate 
Action With Community Hubs
The Connected Community Approach: 
10 Keys Framework 
Key: Learn Together
DEVELOP A THEORY OF CHANGE & 
ESTABLISH GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Why is Meaningful Resident 
Engagement Important for Climate 
Action?
Starting With the Why: Building a Theory 
of Change
Key: Let Values Lead
Guiding Principles
Key: Create Connected Communities 
from the Inside Out
BUILD DEEP COLLABORATIONS AND 
CO-CREATE PROGRAMMING
TEA’s Resident-led Climate Engagement 
Model
Key: Build on Everyone’s Strengths
Example of a Co-Designed Program: 
Bathurst-Finch Climate Ambassadors
Key: Facilitate Collaborative Processes
Example Of Centring Local Priorities:
Parkdale Climate Justice Circle
Key: Prioritize Equity and Power Sharing
EVALUATE TO CAPTURE LEARNING & 
MEASURE RESULTS. A PROJECT 
EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
Key: Embrace the Messiness
SHARE KNOWLEDGE & STORIES TO 
DEEPEN IMPACT
Key: Make Community Building Visual 
and Accessible
Key: Work at Multiple Scales
CONCLUSION: PLAY A MEANINGFUL AND 
SUPPORTIVE ROLE
Key: Build Creative Infrastructure
APPENDIX: REFERENCES & RESOURCES
THIS REPORT WAS CO-PRODUCED 
BY THE TORONTO ENVIRONMENTAL 
ALLIANCE AND CENTRE FOR 
CONNECTED COMMUNITIES. 
Principal authors: Diana Yoon, Emmay 
Mah, Umema Sharafali, and Anne Gloger. 
Support from: Jolene Cushman, Maria 
Chernova, Sarah Buchanan, and 
Elizabeth Teo.
The community hubs and residents that 
play a vital role in our neighbourhoods are 
the inspiration for this work. We would 
like to thank the staff and residents from 
the following hubs and organizations for 
taking time to share their insights and 
collaborate with us over the past several 
years: Unison Bathurst-Finch Hub, Bathurst-
Finch Community Action Network, East 
Scarborough Storefront, Parkdale-Activity 
Recreation Centre (PARC), and Parkdale 
People’s Economy.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
​We would like to give special thanks to the 
many other people who contributed to this 
work and this guide, including: Mandana 
Attarzadeh, Ajeev Bhatia, Simon Cheng, 
Karla Danan, Tamara Grossutti, Chemi 
Lhamo, Maddy Macnab, Heather Marshall, 
Ryan O’Connor, Mary Pickering, Michael 
Polanyi, Ana Teresa Portillo, Jennifer Reilly, 
Fairoz Retha and Mercedes Sharpe Zayas.
Thank you to The Atmospheric Fund for 
their support in producing this guide. Thank 
you to The Atmospheric Fund and Ontario 
Trillium Foundation for their support of 
the Accelerating Neighbourhood Climate 
Solutions Through Community 
Hubs project.
Published October 2021.
WHO IS THIS GUIDE FOR
This guide is for organizations and 
individuals undertaking work to engage 
residents on climate change issues and/
or support resident-led climate action, 
specifically:
	
Environmental non-profits 
	
and charities
   	
Grassroots climate / green groups 	
	
or community groups 
	
with environmental goals
	
Policymakers with environmental, 	
	
planning or related portfolios
	
Environmental funders
This guide aims to help the reader to reflect 
on how their organization and/or work 
can apply these resources and insights to 
deepen their climate engagement practice 
and support authentic community building 
processes.
1. INTRODUCTION TO THE 
LEARNING GUIDE
WELCOME TO OUR RESIDENT CLIMATE ENGAGEMENT LEARNING GUIDE!
Our goal is to highlight the importance of meaningful resident climate engagement, share 
lessons that we’ve learned from our partners and community members, and encourage other 
organizations and individuals to adopt resident-led approaches to their climate work. 
Please consider this learning guide as a starting point. This document summarizes some good 
practices from the field of community development, explores the application of these practices 
to local climate work, and presents a model for resident-led climate action. We hope that this 
offers a helpful framework and useful tools that can be adapted and customized to work in 
different local settings and contexts.
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
1
This learning guide showcases some of the 
behind-the-scenes processes and learning 
from the Toronto Environmental Alliance’s 
Accelerating Neighbourhood Climate 
Solutions Through Community Action 
project. Through this capacity-building 
project, TEA partnered with community 
hubs and local residents to catalyze 
neighbourhood-level climate action. This 
project was launched in July 2019 and 
implemented over two years in two Toronto 
neighbourhoods: Bathurst-Finch and 
Parkdale. 
Our project was designed to build on 
and integrate good practices from the 
community development and climate 
engagement fields, with the belief that 
residents are key actors in shaping 
their communities, and environmental 
initiatives and policies are made better 
with their contributions.  In planning 
this project, TEA identified a disconnect 
between the work of environmental 
movements and community building 
efforts taking place in Toronto’s 
diverse communities. In order to bridge 
environmental work with community 
WHERE OUR LEARNING CAME FROM: WORKING TO ADVANCE 
EQUITABLE CLIMATE ACTION WITH COMMUNITY HUBS
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
work, we sought to learn how, as an 
environmental organization, we could work 
in a truly community-centred way. 
Over the course of the project, we 
collaborated with the Centre for Connected 
Communities (C3) to explore how to apply 
their Connected Community Approach 
and 10 Keys Framework to shape our 
work with residents and local partners. 
We believe that this framework can help 
other environmental organizations with 
developing meaningful local partnerships, 
centring residents’ voices and priorities, 
and understanding how to effectively bring 
their own unique assets and perspectives to 
community building work.
“Community hubs are inclusive and 
trusted place-based or virtual spaces 
which leverage local networks, respond 
to neighbourhood priorities, support 
the actions of residents, and grow 
grassroots leadership in order to 
build strong, resilient, and connected 
communities.” 
– Definition of a “community hub”, developed 
by the Advisory Group on Climate Change and 
Community Hubs
2
The Connected Community Approach 
(CCA) is a set of principles and practices 
that support the authentic and meaningful 
connection of people who want to make 
a positive impact in their community. The 
Connected Community Approach identifies 
10 keys that when implemented together, 
with authenticity and intentionality, can 
foster the paradigm shift required to unlock 
the potential of connected communities. 
The 10 keys builds on the 20 years of 
community development experience of the 
East Scarborough Storefront and draws 
on foundational literature to propose a 
community-centred way of identifying local 
solutions to complex social issues. 
THE CONNECTED COMMUNITY APPROACH:
10 KEYS FRAMEWORK
BUILD ON EVERYONE’S STRENGTHS
FACILITATE COLLABORATIVE PROCESSES 
CREATE CONNECTED COMMUNITIES FROM THE INSIDE OUT
LEARN TOGETHER
EMBRACE THE MESSINESS
PRIORITIZE EQUITY AND POWER SHARING
LET VALUES LEAD
WORK AT MULTIPLE SCALES
MAKE COMMUNITY BUILDING VISUAL
BUILD CREATIVE INFRASTRUCTURE
THE TEN KEYS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Working in neighbourhoods is complex; it 
becomes more complex for organizations 
that do not have a history of working in 
those neighbourhoods primarily because 
they lack the local context, relationships, 
and trust which are critical to advancing 
local priorities authentically. This is not 
an uncommon scenario, since many 
organizations that are not place-based seek 
to work in neighbourhoods to achieve their 
goals. In this scenario, sound community 
development approaches are critical to 
success. 
Through this learning guide, there are 
boxes with brief explanations of the 10 
keys, how they relate to local climate action 
work, and how the keys can be applied to 
better engage with communities.
The Accelerating Neighbourhood Climate 
Solutions Through Community Hubs project 
centred on building genuine relationships 
and a foundation for ongoing community-
based climate projects and collaboration. 
A core project element was the co-design 
of local climate learning programs with 
residents and community hub staff, which 
was a highly rewarding and valued process, 
but also time and resource-intensive. We 
learned that residents and hub staff needed 
dedicated, context-specific support in 
order to devote sufficient time and energy 
to climate action, while advancing other 
critical community priorities. We found that 
an ongoing commitment to shared decision-
making and mutual learning from all 
partners was necessary to ensure equitable, 
inclusive, and meaningful participation in 
project initiatives. 
It is important to note that just as this 
project was gaining momentum, the 
COVID-19 pandemic suddenly placed 
incredible pressures on community 
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
5
hubs, whose staff took on a central 
role in supporting local residents from 
marginalized and equity-deserving 
groups. Hubs, and many of their resident 
collaborators, found themselves at the 
center of community responses to the 
pandemic. As a result, some activities 
planned for this program were put on hold 
or cancelled as hubs sought to support 
residents to meet immediate survival needs 
such as accessing food and income. 
Public health restrictions also led TEA and 
our hub partners to pivot from planned 
in-person resident engagement activities 
to online delivery. Adapting to online 
delivery created challenges, but also 
unexpected opportunities for resident 
engagement. Our ability to successfully 
adapt project elements, such as resident 
training programs, can largely be attributed 
to the investment that all the project 
partners made in developing authentic and 
meaningful relationships and shared goals.
Photo Courtesy of PARC
Work with local organizations (e.g. hubs, 
centres, agencies, residents groups) to 
find out:
     	
How communications and 	 	
	
	
information is shared across
 	
the community
	
Who in the community is 
	
focused on climate action work
	
What the impact of this climate 	
	
	
action work has been so far
Facilitate knowledge exchange events 
on climate and community priorities 
that allow various local players to come 
together and understand one another’s 
context and perspective, and build a 
foundation of mutual understanding 
from which to design locally relevant and 
impactful projects
Offer to support, and explore how to 
bring a climate lens to initiatives already 
taking place in community 
Share resources and learnings with 
with residents engaged or interested in 
climate action initiatives
Intentionally learn what knowledge, 
projects and initiatives already exist in 
the community 
Too often, environmental organizations 
enter into a community space seeking 
to impart new information to community 
members and compel them to take action. 
While developing new knowledge and 
building capacity is important, if climate 
action is to be truly adopted by community 
members, it is critical to build on the 
knowledge, wisdom, and momentum that 
already exist within the community.
Learning feedback loops are what 
strengthens a community over time; 
intentional learning can help everyone 
- e.g. grassroots groups, institutions, 
organizations, funders - to learn how the 
community works, how communication 
flows, and what people care about, so that 
synergies can be found and decisions can 
be grounded in community context. In this 
way, initiatives build on each other over time.
KEY: LEARN TOGETHER
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO 
LEARN TOGETHER?
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
5
WHY IS MEANINGFUL RESIDENT 
ENGAGEMENT IMPORTANT FOR 
CLIMATE ACTION? 
We believe that residents are key actors 
in shaping their communities, and 
environmental initiatives and policies 
are made better with their contributions. 
Community action to reduce emissions 
and build resilience is an important 
element of addressing the profound threat 
posed by climate change. 
TEA embarked on the Accelerating 
Neighbourhood Climate Solutions Through 
Community Hubs project with a strong 
conviction that residents are integral to, 
and interested in, advancing local climate 
solutions. In addition, we felt there was a 
gap in supporting residents to catalyze 
climate action in their own neighbourhoods, 
especially residents from communities that 
are most impacted by climate change. 
Climate change does not affect all people 
equally, nor are all contributing equally to 
climate change. In fact, those who have 
contributed the least - which include 
Indigenous people, children and youth, 
people with low incomes, people with 
Disabilities/Disabled people, migrants and 
immigrants, and people living in the Global 
South - often experience the greatest harm. 
The most impacted communities should 
have meaningful influence over decisions 
that determine how climate change 
will affect their lives. However, these 
communities have been continuously 
excluded from processes to develop climate 
programs and policies. Furthermore, 
environmental decision-makers have failed 
to recognize their broader and distinct 
responsibility to honour and uphold 
Indigenous sovereignty, treaty rights, and 
knowledge in these processes. As such, this 
responsibility often goes unacknowledged 
in the design and implementation of climate 
initiatives.
At the onset of the project, we recognized 
that TEA had a lot to learn as an 
organization about how to take up our 
responsibilities and use our assets to 
centre the voices of the people most deeply 
impacted by climate change (and we still 
do). In a sense, this project was designed 
to test our belief that when residents from 
impacted and excluded communities are 
positioned to make decisions and access 
resources, they can play a meaningful role 
in building healthy, equitable, and resilient 
low-carbon communities. This belief was 
the starting point for developing a theory 
of change, which helped to ground these 
convictions in the specific parameters 
and context of our neighbourhood-based 
project.
2. DEVELOP A THEORY OF 
CHANGE AND ESTABLISH 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
6
STARTING WITH THE ‘WHY’: BUILDING 
A THEORY OF CHANGE
It is important for organizations to clearly 
understand their own strategic and 
values-related motivations for launching 
community-centred work. Sometimes 
organizations with a specific scope of work 
and expertise lack a foundational analysis 
of why and how they want to work with 
communities. In order for TEA, as a local 
environmental organization, to act in a 
truly community-centred way, we first did 
some introspective work to reflect on why 
we wanted to focus on local climate action. 
What was our purpose and how did this 
relate to achieving our mission? How did our 
goals and intentions interact and intersect 
with those of community members and local 
partners? What principles and values were 
informing our work?
In addition to understanding our ‘why’, we 
had trouble defining TEA’s role in relation to 
our partners when we first started this work. 
We asked ourselves: what kind of knowledge 
and experiences do we bring to community-
centred climate work? We wanted to ensure 
that we were adding genuine value to local 
solutions and expertise. 
TEA and hub partners worked with Openly, 
an external consultant, to develop a theory 
of change for our project. This process was 
extremely valuable in helping us to reflect 
on and articulate our purpose, goals and 
roles, and our pathway to achieving change. 
For us and our partners, it was especially 
important to have a shared framework 
that integrated climate goals with other 
important social justice and community 
development goals.
OUR PROJECT’S THEORY OF CHANGE:
Underlying our theory of change are the 
shared values and principles held by 
TEA and our partners. By building on this 
common ground, we were able to develop a 
collective understanding of how we would 
approach this novel work in a challenging 
and evolving context.
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
7
Many collaborations lack a clear purpose 
and shared understanding of why they are 
doing this work, what they hope to achieve, 
and the principles that will guide the 
collaboration. As a result, time and energy 
is spent seeking clarity as opposed to 
advancing solutions. 
When organizations or groups are trying to 
engage in activities that foster a connected 
community, their work needs to be built 
on a foundation of values and shared 
purpose. This can be articulated through an 
overarching theory of change. In essence, 
a theory of change asks the following 
questions:
     Why are you creating this project?
     What is this project designed to change?
     How are your activities designed to
     achieve that change?
     What principles will guide your 
     collective action? 
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO 
“LET VALUES LEAD”?
KEY: LET VALUES LEAD
SOWING THE SEES FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
9
A theory of change is a good start to 
authentically engaging in community. 
To keep us grounded in our theory of change, our work was built upon guiding principles that 
we developed with our partners to shape our work: 
     Meeting community partners and residents where they’re at
     Amplifying existing initiatives and approaches
     Pursuing co-benefits of local climate action and social justice
     Co-creating learning and capacity building opportunities with community partners
We found that it was important to ‘check-in’ on our principles throughout the project.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Begin all collaborations by spending 
time collectively drafting a shared 
understanding of the purpose of the 
partnership 
Identify what the necessary conditions 
of a successful partnership are from the 
different perspectives (e.g. local hubs / 
organizations / grassroots groups and 
environmental organizations - which may 
be located outside the community) 
Reflect on various players’ purposes and 
guiding principles to make sure that the 
approach resonates with all players
Healthy, nurturing organizations and groups are fundamental for a connected community.  
Investing in the wellbeing of the people doing the work will ultimately mean greater impact. 
Both a theory of change and guiding principles can help organizations stay grounded in 
what is important in the face of political, financial and logistical pressures. When staff are 
grounded in the purpose and principles of the project, it helps to build a supportive and 
effective team, which in turn, positively impacts how they work with grassroots groups and 
residents. This will ultimately result in greater impact. 
KEY: CREATE CONNECTED 
COMMUNITIES FROM THE INSIDE OUT
Take the time at the beginning 
of a project to ensure that all the 
organizational partners involved (e.g. 
staff from both the environmental 
organization and community hub) have 
an understanding and commitment to the 
project purpose, principles and values
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO CREATE 
CONNECTED COMMUNITIES 
FROM THE INSIDE OUT?  
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
10
Co-design as much of the project as 
possible with local collaborators
Brainstorm ways to provide support 
and recognition for the people on the 
frontlines (staff and residents) doing 
community work
Schedule frequent touch points to listen 
to challenges as they emerge and adapt 
the project based on new learnings from 
the community 
3. BUILD DEEP COLLABORATIONS 
AND CO-CREATE PROGRAMMING 
TEA’S RESIDENT-LED CLIMATE 
ENGAGEMENT MODEL 
Residents and grassroots groups have many 
assets - such as knowledge, skills, and 
relationships - that they can bring to local 
climate initiatives. This is why undertaking 
a meaningful co-design process for 
community engagement with local people 
is critical for catalyzing climate action 
in our neighbourhoods and across our 
municipalities. TEA’s model was developed 
with support from the Centre for Connected 
Communities and the 10 Keys framework. 
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
11
OUR MODEL: RESIDENT-LED 
COMMUNITY CLIMATE ENGAGEMENT
STEP 1: FERTILIZE THE GROUND 
(PARTNERSHIP AND MAPPING)
Meet with local partners to set project 
goals, a work plan, evaluation metrics, 
and guiding principles.
Identify assets that can advance climate 
action at the community level (e.g. 
community hub, grassroots groups, local 
initiatives, neighbourhood resources, 
skills)
STEP TWO: PLANT THE FIRST SEEDS 
TOGETHER (CO-DESIGN) 
Work with partners (e.g. hub staff and 
resident leaders) to design a facilitative 
process to introduce climate action to 
the community
These processes can take on 	
	
a variety of creative approaches 	 	
such as designing a neighbourhood 
climate action/conversation toolkit 
or knowledge exchange events
Such facilitative processes 
are important for starting the 
conversation including identifying 
local priorities that are connected 
to climate action, communicating 
the relationship between climate 
action and community building,
STEP THREE: THE FIRST SPROUT! 
(COMMUNITY DIALOGUE AND 
CONVERSATION) 
STEP FOUR: WATER THE SEEDLINGS 
(BUILD ON LOCAL MOMENTUM AND 
ASSETS)
 
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
Leverage the local assets identified in 
step one (such as grassroots groups, 
interested residents, local initiatives) 
and other local relationships held by 
partners to facilitate conversations 
about climate action
Co-deliver the conversations with 
partners playing different lead and 
support roles (e.g. promoting, hosting, 
facilitating, pre-post communications) 
Based on the learnings and reflections 
from the community conversations, 
identify the local initiatives that 
environmental and community 
partners can support and strengthen 
with a climate action lens (e.g. with 
supplementary knowledge, resources, 
and support) or climate-related 
initiatives that residents want to start 
helping to surface where a climate 
lens can strengthen ongoing work 
in the community, and translating 
technical language and policy 
jargon into accessible language
STEP FIVE: BEAR FRUIT (FORM 
COLLABORATIONS)
STEP SIX: HARVEST (LEARN TOGETHER) 
If it’s the right fit, co-create a plan with 
the community collaborators to develop 
and resource the initiative(s)
Support community collaborators to 
launch or add new elements to their 
initiatives; work together to document 
experiences and results 
Once local initiatives are launched or 
implemented, regroup with partners and 
collaborators to reflect on achievements, 
challenges, and learning; assess 
progress together against original plans 
and goals
Share learning with other interested 
stakeholders who can benefit from these 
experiences 
If there is the desire to continue to 
collaborate, discuss how to integrate 
learning into the next phase of work
Discuss what resources will be 
necessary to continue ongoing work 
from the foundation that you’ve built 
together (e.g. funding, staff, volunteers, 
timelines, etc.)
Meet with the people leading 
local initiatives to explore working 
together
Learn about one another’s work. 
Describe organizational or project 
goals to folks working on local 
initiatives. Listen to their goals! 
Alignment with local initiatives 
could include: local, healthy food; 
housing; health; waste reduction; 
sustainable infrastructure; and 
civic engagement
KEY: BUILD ON EVERYONE’S STRENGTHS
Asset-based community development 
starts with the belief that everyone 
has skills, resources, knowledge, and 
expertise that can be leveraged to advance 
community priorities. It acknowledges 
that in all communities there are existing 
strengths that should be built upon as 
opposed to starting from scratch. 
Engaging a community in climate action 
work means first taking time to learn about 
a community’s strengths and priorities, 
and reflecting on what assets you have to 
contribute to the community. It is important 
to find alignment in where an organization’s 
strengths can be complementary to those 
of community partners, with the goal of 
deepening existing climate action work 
in the community or supporting new 
initiatives that address local priorities.
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO BUILD ON 
EVERYONE’S STRENGTHS?
	
What positive changes are 		
	
	
already happening within 	 	
	
	
the community that can be 	
	
	
built on?
	
Who is doing great work that
	
could be strengthened and 	
	
	
connected for greater impact?
Work with local players to identify 
strong initiatives that could benefit from 
a climate lens
Identify your own organization’s assets 
and how they can contribute to the 
community. Some examples of an 
environmental organization’s assets 
that could advance resident-led climate 
action work can include: 
	
Providing technical expertise in 	 	
	
climate action models and 		
	
	
frameworks
	
Decoding and translating climate 		
	
action language
	
Sharing municipal policy and 	
	
	
strategy analysis and linkages
	
Helping to make connections 	
	
	
between community priorities and 	
	
climate issues
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
13
Instead of only looking at community 
challenges, ask the questions:
When provided with the opportunity and 
resources, local communities can apply 
their knowledge, skills, and relationships 
together and to play a meaningful role in 
animating and leading the transition to an 
equitable, humane and sustainable city.
OBJECTIVES OF THE PROGRAM: 
Increase resident leadership capacity to 
take on climate-related activities in their 
hubs and local communities by:
THE BLUEPRINT: 
Context
Bathurst-Finch is a mixed-income 
neighbourhood in North York with a 
diverse population that includes multiple 
newcomer and racialized communities. 
The Bathurst-Finch Unison Hub houses 
co-located health and community services, 
and has been home to a long-running 
resident engagement program (Action for 
Neighbourhood Change), currently known 
as the Our Strong Neighbourhoods (OSN) 
program. 
Partnerships
A strong partnership was essential to the 
success of the program. The co-designed 
Climate Ambassador Training program 
was built on TEA’s relationship with the 
Bathurst-Finch Unison Hub, which began 
with a research project in 2018 and grew 
from our mutual interest in exploring 
how to integrate climate objectives into 
the Hub’s operations and programs. To 
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
14
Taking stock of existing groups, 
knowledge, skills, capacities, interests, 
and initiatives related to climate change. 
Support resident leaders in identifying 
ways to best support and amplify 
existing initiatives and seed new ideas
Support resident learning and action 
opportunities to strengthen climate 
action.
EXAMPLE OF A CO-DESIGNED PROGRAM: 
BATHURST-FINCH CLIMATE AMBASSADORS 
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
15
OUTCOMES: 
An updated online learning framework 
and implementation plan was created and 
delivered during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The flexibility of the project and team was 
vital to allowing the training to continue. 
A diverse group of residents from the 
Bathurst-Finch and the broader North 
York area were recruited to the program. 
Program participants demonstrated a very 
high level of engagement and commitment 
to the online training with twenty-one 
Climate Ambassadors attending six virtual 
training sessions and graduating from 
the program. Following the conclusion of 
the program, BFCAN led their own online 
program series on waste reduction based 
on the experience they had gained. Hub 
staff indicated that they would like to 
deliver other online programs based on the 
learning from this experience - even if this 
was not driven by necessity. 
All of these co-design elements 
(detailed below) contributed to a strong 
sense among participants of feeling 
connected to a community of people with 
shared environmental and community 
development interests. All the partners 
were pleased with the unexpectedly high 
levels of attendance and meaningful 
contributions by participants throughout 
the training program, despite a very 
challenging external context.   
Spotlight on good practices & lesson 
learned: an in-depth co-creation process
Undertaking an authentic co-creation 
begin developing the climate leadership 
program, TEA met with the Hub’s project-
leads to review draft purposes, principles, 
and deliverables as well as conduct a 
collaborative local scan and mapping 
exercise to identify priority contacts. 
With the support of Hub staff, TEA also 
developed a partnership with the Bathurst 
Finch Climate Action Network (BFCAN), 
a local resident-led group supported by 
the Hub’s OSN program, to co-design and 
facilitate the training program. BFCAN 
had previously developed and delivered 
climate-focused civic engagement 
activities at Hub events. 
Co-creation and Training 
Over several months, TEA held working 
sessions with Hub staff and BFCAN 
members to develop the Climate 
Ambassadors Training Program, which 
included both co-created and co-curated 
curriculum content, and a supported 
community outreach and recruitment 
process. BFCAN members facilitated 
sessions and participated as learners 
in the program. Early in the training co-
creation process, government direction 
and measures on COVID-19 remote work 
took effect, which compelled the partners 
to pivot to developing an online program. 
THE ESSENTIALS OF CO-DESIGN
1. Facilitating knowledge exchange to 
share unique strengths, tools, ideas, and 
connections.
2. Incorporating local priorities and 
interests.
3. Promoting supportive communications 
to problem-solve, reduce conflict, and 
facilitate collective decision-making. 
Government direction and measures 
on COVID-19 remote work and social 
distancing took effect early in the training 
co-creation process, which compelled the 
partners to pivot to developing an online 
program.
Dedicated time for working sessions 
to develop each module in the 
curriculum: This required extensive 
group discussions and work to set 
learning objectives, research and refine 
content, identify additional learning 
aids such as videos and links to online 
resources, and develop an agenda and 
shared facilitation plan. BFCAN played 
a leadership role in this process with 
support from TEA and Hub staff.
Local outreach and recruitment: 
Significant time was dedicated to 
developing and implementing an 
outreach plan to recruit residents to 
the training program that used the 
Hub’s communications channels and 
other local channels, and facilitating 
the registration and participation by 
residents in the online program. These 
processes were heavily supported by 
Hub staff.  
Interactive, not just information-
oriented sessions: Sessions included 
breakout group discussions that 
linked different topics of local interest 
with climate: transit and active 
transportation, waste reduction, 
food security, and seniors & social 
connections. Participants developed 
ideas and outlined preliminary plans for 
initiatives. Adjusting to an online format 
required learning new practices to make 
sessions run smoothly.
Adapt curriculum to reflect the current 
context: The Climate Ambassador 
Training Program launched with an 
initial session drawing connections 
between the COVID-19 pandemic and 
climate change, and creating space 
for personal thoughts and reflections. 
In later sessions, trainers facilitated 
discussions about civic engagement for 
a green and just recovery.y.
process to deliver a first-time online 
learning program was very labour-intensive 
for all the partners involved. The following 
elements were fundamental to the success 
of the program:
KEY: FACILITATE COLLABORATIVE PROCESSES
Successful collaborations don’t just happen, they often require expert facilitation to ensure a 
collective understanding of the project, a shared purpose and mutually reinforcing processes. 
For example, an environmental organization is likely to be a content expert (bringing 
knowledge about climate mitigation and adaptation), and local community organizations 
and grassroots groups are likely to be context experts (knowledge about the lived reality of 
local people, local priorities and community building history). The role of facilitator is to bring 
process expertise: making sure that when the environmental organization and community 
groups come together they are able to leverage each other’s strengths in positive and 
productive ways.   
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO FACILITATE COLLABORATIVE PROCESSES?
Identify who is facilitating the process. 
It can be someone from the community 
or from the environmental organization 
or an external facilitator: someone 
with facilitation skills and perspective. 
Different people can play this role at 
different stages of the collaboration.
Provide context: reflect together 
regularly as a collaborative on where 
you started and where you’re going 
throughout the project.
Be intentional about integrating new 
players into the collaborative: slow down 
activities to make sure you are bringing 
everyone along.
Check in regularly with your partners 
not just on what they are doing, but how 
they are feeling about working on the 
project.
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
17
TEA, PARC, and PPE collaborated to 
develop a new climate-focused resident 
capacity building program in the Parkdale 
neighbourhood. As the project progressed, 
these sessions were named by the 
participants as the “Parkdale Climate 
Justice Circles”. 
OBJECTIVES: 
Parkdale is a vibrant, diverse, mixed income 
community west of downtown Toronto, 
with a long history of being home to many 
newcomer and racialized communities 
and working people. Parkdale Activity-
Recreation Centre (PARC) acts as a 
community hub in the neighbourhood, 
and is home to a variety of social service 
agencies and groups such as Edmond 
Place, West Neighbourhood House, 
Parkdale People’s Economy and the 
Parkdale Community Food Bank. 
Parkdale residents had organized around 
various community issues, but wanted 
to start up new climate justice focused 
initiatives. TEA’s key partners in this 
neighbourhood are the Parkdale Activity-
Recreation Centre (PARC), a community 
hub, and the Parkdale People’s Economy 
(PPE), a network of over 30 community-
based organizations and hundreds of 
community members collaborating to build 
decent work, shared wealth, and equitable 
development in Parkdale.
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
18
Support residents to build networks, 
access resources and support 
their efforts to identify community 
engagement entry points to local 
climate action.
Explore learning opportunities at, and 
physical upgrades to, the Centre and 
other local project sites which can 
contribute to low-carbon solutions at the 
neighbourhood level. Advance initiatives 
in the Parkdale community, and support 
deep, meaningful resident engagement 
in local priorities related to climate 
change and sustainability. 
EXAMPLE OF CENTRING LOCAL PRIORITIES: 
PARKDALE CLIMATE JUSTICE CIRCLE 
THE BLUEPRINT: 
Relationship Building
PARC encouraged TEA to participate in 
the Parkdale Neighbourhood Planning 
Table’s community meetings as a good 
starting point for connecting with 
residents. Attending meetings with 
additional community groups facilitated 
by the Parkdale People’s Economy over 
the next two months aided in gauging 
interest in climate learning and training, 
hearing opinions on local climate action 
opportunities, challenges, and priorities, 
and networking for relevant local group 
contacts. This was important as it fed 
into the creation of an advisory group of 
residents that formed to co-design the 
learning sessions.  
OUTCOMES: 
Centring Climate Justice Perspectives
When facilitating climate justice learning, 
organizers should create space for this 
learning to be led by Indigenous and 
equity-deserving people with authentic 
knowledge, experience and perspectives. 
Participants in the co-design process 
identified the priority of working in 
solidarity with Indigenous peoples on 
climate action early on, so PARC engaged a 
local Indigenous educator to aid in building 
participants’ understanding of why the 
acknowledgement and incorporation of 
traditional and Indigenous knowledge 
is important to climate justice work. In 
addition, Climate Justice Circle sessions 
sought to connect climate action to system 
change discussions and immediate and 
pressing local concerns such as housing, 
food, transit and extreme weather.
Re-prioritization and Flexible Partnerships 
After launching with a successful in-
person community learning session, 
resident engagement and development of 
training sessions had to be put on hold for 
a significant period due to the COVID-19 
pandemic, as the neighbourhood turned 
its focus to survival and mutual aid. During 
this time, PARC and PPE led a co-design 
of a resident consultation, engagement 
and capacity building process to support 
a community submission to the Toronto 
Office of Recovery and Rebuild’s public 
consultation process, with support from 
TEA to integrate climate considerations. 
While plans had to shift, the climate 
justice circles resumed in an online format 
and kept up the momentum for climate 
action in the Parkdale community. Flexible 
partnership can also mean prioritizing what 
neighbourhood partners need at that time 
over original plans. 
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
19
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
20
KEY: PRIORITIZE EQUITY AND POWER SHARING
Power is a complex dynamic in all 
communities. If an organization has 
not been in the community on a long-
term basis, it is especially critical that 
the decision-making power rests in the 
community. The kinds of power structures 
and dynamics that people are used to often 
have to be disrupted to achieve this. 
At present, in most climate action 
work with communities, the power and 
decision making rests with established 
environmental organizations, policy 
makers, funders, and/or researchers. This 
power imbalance can be addressed by all 
the collaborators in an initiative coming 
together to design more equitable planning 
and implementation processes, where 
decision-making is shared, and recognizes 
the expertise and experience that local 
organizations, grassroots groups and 
residents bring to the collaboration.  
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO PRIORITIZE 
EQUITY AND POWER 
Use an environmental justice approach 
when working in the community
Work with systems players to help them 
understand the role grassroots groups 
play in local climate action
Acknowledge the power that your 
organization might hold as the driver 
of a project and holder of funds; be 
transparent about where you want 
to maintain power and where you 
will intentionally step aside for the 
community make decisions
Enter each space with humility, knowing 
that everyone has a piece of knowledge 
not held by anyone else, and local people 
have the deepest knowledge of their 
communities
Enabling Resident Participation
PARC’s and PPE’s approach to enable 
resident participation in the Climate 
Justice Circle sessions - both in-person 
and virtual - provided valuable learning. 
Organizers of these sessions actively 
worked to offer residents different supports 
that would remove potential barriers and 
make it possible for them to participate. For 
example, the project engaged newcomer 
members of the Tibetan community and 
a community translator was brought 
in to provide translation services for 
in-person and online sessions. Other 
forms of support offered to participants 
included transit tokens and honorariums. 
It is important to value and recognize the 
contributions that community members 
make to planning and engagement 
processes, and compensate them for 
their time. 
4. EVALUATE TO CAPTURE 
LEARNING & MEASURE RESULTS  
A PROJECT EVALUATION FRAMEWORK:
A project evaluation process was integral 
to measuring the impact of our community 
hubs project, but also to shifting strategies 
and improvements as needed along the way.
Rather than bringing in an external 
consultant at the end of the project, 
we engaged a consultant early in the 
project to assist with developing an 
evaluation framework and collecting 
baseline information. This was the same 
organization that helped us to develop our 
theory of change. The evaluation examined 
the extent to which we had realized our 
theory of change and guiding principles 
in implementing the project and assessed 
our progress on our detailed monitoring 
and evaluation framework that included 
indicators and deliverables.
The evaluation was specifically designed to:
Characterize the role and contribution of 
the project
Identify the strengths and assets in 
our organizations’ approach as well 
as the “sticking points” and areas for 
improvement
Identify the opportunities for 
strengthening strategies and social and 
environmental impacts and for sharing 
lessons learned
Key evaluation questions included: 
The evaluation process included three core 
methods for collecting data:
What will it take to live into our theory of 
change?
How do our stakeholders experience our 
relationship? Are we bringing value and 
benefit to our partners? Where could we 
improve?
What are we noticing about trends 
related to local climate action? Are 
these indicating movement towards our 
intended impact? 
Are we achieving our outcomes? Where 
are we shining? Where are we falling 
short? What facilitates success? 
Where are there persistent barriers and 
challenges?
Participant surveys - both online and 
in-person formats were used and were 
customized to the unique contexts 
of the Bathurst-Finch and Parkdale 
neighbourhood co-design and capacity-
building processes
Focus groups - with resident leaders, 
hub staff, and TEA to understand the 
successes and outcomes, challenges 
and barriers, and key learnings emerging 
from local resident engagement 
activities
Project tracking - tracking relationships, 
activities and interactions, including: 
invitations to speak and contribute a 
climate perspective; support provided 
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
21
to new and existing climate action 
projects; number of new partnerships, 
collaborations, and network connections; 
and spinoff activities and initiatives.
The latter was important because it 
documented the extent to which residents 
and hub staff were integrating climate into 
their community activities as a practice and 
the extent to which TEA was contributing 
its expertise in a supportive and 
complimentary manner to local partners.
Key project outcome areas included:
Hubs have greater capacity to catalyze 
neighbourhood-level climate action
Local residents have enhanced 
knowledge, capacity and confidence to 
engage in low-carbon projects
Communities whose voices have been 
underrepresented or missing from the 
KEY: EMBRACE THE MESSINESS
Ideas, priorities, aspirations and enthusiasm 
in a community emerge in different places 
at different times which are impossible 
to predict. As you begin to work in a 
community, it is likely that synergies with 
other actors in the community may emerge 
as the project progresses. 
Being able to build on these synergies and 
integrate aligned goals and visions where 
appropriate is vital. Facilitating processes 
in this kind of complexity requires you to 
see emergence as a strength that creates 
the nimbleness required to identify and 
build on local momentum. Equally, changes 
in communities may require the intended 
project to change course to respond to 
these changes.
 
Commit to maintaining a process 
of working which recognizes that 
communities are complex and ever-
changing and invites changes to be 
integrated into the work moving forward
 
Keep focused on the purpose and 
the principles as the fundamental 
underpinning of the project to help the 
project to be relevant to the community 
over time. Tasks and outcomes can then 
be emergent and nimble as the change 
occurs
Use evaluation as a learning tool; work 
with partners on collective sense-making 
in order to adjust course as necessary
Many of the key learnings from the 
evaluation process have been integrated 
into this guide. We took an iterative 
approach to the project with our partners, 
which was important to be truly responsive 
to emerging community priorities and 
needs. This proved to be especially true in 
the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. As 
such, it was important to have an evaluation 
framework and process that was designed 
to effectively and meaningfully document 
and assess progress in a complex and 
dynamic project environment.
environmental movement are more 
engaged in building climate justice and 
effecting community change
TEA has stronger networks and greater 
capacity to support local climate action
More neighbourhood-level climate 
initiatives are beginning to take root
 
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO EMBRACE 
THE MESSINESS?
5. SHARE KNOWLEDGE & STORIES 
TO DEEPEN IMPACT  
It is imperative that we celebrate successes, 
share insights and lessons learned from 
community-led climate action initiatives 
to inspire and create opportunities for 
future projects. Ultimately, our project was 
designed to demonstrate the essential 
social and physical infrastructure that 
community hubs and resident-led 
groups contribute to building low-carbon 
neighbourhoods. In order to share the 
knowledge generated by the project, we 
developed an extensive communication plan 
that included creative ways to capture and 
showcase project learning.
Creating digital or print materials that 
share project stories and successes can 
help residents and local organizations who 
participated to reflect and look back, as 
well as engage new residents who may not 
have been able to participate throughout 
the course of the project. They also serve the 
purposes of sharing project learning with 
other stakeholders such as environmental 
organizations, policymakers and funders as 
well as interested members of the public.
To highlight our hub partners’ climate-
related initiatives - in their buildings and on 
their grounds - TEA created virtual tours of 
the Bathurst-Finch Unison Hub and the East 
Scarborough Storefront. We also created 
digital social-media pieces to go along with 
more extensive case studies on the key 
project components of resident and hub-led 
work for other community groups who may 
be interested in replicating a similar process 
or taking inspiration from what hubs and 
residents accomplished.
CLIMATE-FRIENDLY HUB VIRTUAL TOURS
The East Scarborough Storefront
The Unison Bathurst-Finch Hub
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
23
Communication is foundational to building 
engagement in communities. Climate 
action language is often inaccessible and 
lacks relevance to many people’s daily 
lives, and the link between climate and 
community priorities can be unclear. In 
addition, communicating across different 
languages, literacy levels, cultural reference 
points, values and priorities can create 
barriers for resident engagement if not done 
meaningfully and effectively.
Different approaches, such as using various 
visuals (graphic design, photographs, 
etc.) to illustrate ideas, concepts and 
intentions, can aid in accelerating shared 
understanding and momentum among 
diverse audiences and collaborators. Telling 
stories of local people and initiatives 
through a range of tools and techniques to 
illustrate how climate action can benefit 
communities can help residents to see 
themselves as part of solutions. 
   
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO MAKE 
COMMUNITY BUILDING VISUAL 
AND ACCESSIBLE?
KEY: MAKE COMMUNITY BUILDING VISUAL AND ACCESSIBLE 
Create friendly, accessible, graphically-
designed and locally-relevant materials 
to demonstrate the connection between 
climate action and community building
Document the partnership process 
visually and creatively so that the people 
involved can literally see progress along 
the way and can provide feedback
Highlight stories of local residents and 
organizations leading climate-related 
initiatives
Use infographics to share data and 
complex concepts
Our project was designed to generate 
replicable, adaptable and scalable learning 
on the largely untapped climate leadership 
potential of resident-led groups and 
community hubs, which play important 
roles in many neighbourhoods. Another 
important element of the project was to 
apply this learning to inform government 
policies, strategies and investments 
focused on local climate action.
TEA convened an Advisory Group in 
collaboration with the City of Toronto to 
explore the role of community hubs in 
local engagement strategies and achieving 
community climate goals from a policy 
perspective. The Climate Change and 
Community Hubs Advisory Group was made 
up of a range of stakeholders including 
multi-agency community hubs, faith-based 
hubs, community centres, civil society 
organizations, and City of Toronto Divisions. 
During four meetings held between June 
and October 2019, the Advisory Group 
shared knowledge, built relationships 
across sectors, and made recommendations 
for the next phase (2021-2023) of Toronto’s 
TransformTO Climate Action Plan. 
SOWING THE SEEDS FOR LOCAL CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
24
Climate Action and Resilience 
Community Spaces 
Partnerships for Climate Action
Inclusion and Equity
Local Climate Leadership
Community Benefits and Economic 
Development
Funding Models
Climate Communications
Assessment of Progress
When the COVID-19 pandemic hit Toronto, 
TEA launched a new phase of work with 
the Climate Change and Community Hubs 
Advisory Group and City. Many of the local 
organizations participating in the Advisory 
Group were at the forefront of responding 
to the urgent needs of vulnerable residents 
KEY: WORK AT MULTIPLE SCALES
Facilitating a connected community 
means not only working to build a strong 
local social fabric, but also connecting 
community-led initiatives to larger systems, 
and movements to larger change efforts. 
Connecting community building to city 
building, to global change efforts, supports 
scale that is truly grounded in community. 
Climate action in communities is impacted 
by a variety of players in many different 
spaces and there are often intersecting 
interests across these players. 
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO WORK AT 
MULTIPLE SCALES? 
Identify where there is local momentum 
around climate action work 
Leverage your networks and connections 
in the environment and climate space to 
advance local priorities
Bring learnings from the community 
back to systems players and people in 
broader environmental movements
Build the capacity of community hubs/
organizations to understand the political 
and policy structures that affect climate 
mitigation/adaptation at the community 
level 
Connect hubs/community players to 
people involved in broader movements/
actions that might have relevance to the 
community agenda
The recommendations covered nine 
key areas: 
in their neighbourhoods. While frontline 
work was the top priority, TEA was able 
to collaborate with these organizations 
to document their emergency response 
and community support work to collect 
key lessons learned that can be applied 
to future health and climate shocks. 
Hubs, and their resident collaborators, 
provided integral social infrastructure 
for neighbourhood-based pandemic 
responses, which is described in our 
report Community Hubs and Community-
Based Responses to the COVID-19 Crisis: 
Lessons for building a more equitable, 
resilient and climate-safe Toronto. It is our 
hope that this body of work will inform 
government plans and investments at 
a scale that will help municipalities, 
and specifically neighbourhoods at the 
greatest risk, prepare for future climate 
shocks.
6. CONCLUSION: PLAY 
A MEANINGFUL AND 
SUPPORTIVE ROLE  
Residents, grassroots groups and local 
organizations can lead community climate 
initiatives, and contribute significant 
knowledge and learning to broader 
municipal climate strategies and plans. 
These local actors are positioned to play a 
central role in building healthy, equitable, 
and resilient low-carbon communities, but 
they must be equipped with the necessary 
resources and support to undertake this 
work together with other civil society 
partners and government.
Environmental organizations can play a 
key role in collaborating with local actors 
to catalyze community climate action. 
However, this requires a willingness to 
replace conventional strategies, which 
aim to get community members to adopt 
climate goals, with approaches that 
centre and integrate community priorities 
into climate initiatives. The Connected 
Communities Approach and 10 Keys 
provide helpful guidance for environmental 
actors who wish to engage in authentic 
community-building processes.
The starting point for launching or 
strengthening local climate initiatives is 
often working with partners to facilitate 
meaningful resident engagement processes. 
In order for environmental organizations 
to be effective collaborators in this work, 
they must recognize the valuable assets 
that residents, grassroots groups and 
local organizations bring to the table. 
Environmental organizations must be 
prepared to invest significant time in joint 
planning and co-design processes, and use 
their resources to support local priorities. 
Local actors should not be expected to 
apply a ‘climate lens’ to their work or launch 
climate initiatives without a significant level 
of (additional) resources and support.
Each neighbourhood and community is 
unique. When residents and grassroots 
groups are supported to play lead planning 
and implementation roles, they will design 
engagement processes that use locally 
effective methods and develop climate 
initiatives that speak to community 
priorities. There is no “one-size-fits-all” 
solution for building a groundswell of 
community climate action, which is why we 
must continuously listen, learn, support, 
adapt, and iterate.    
KEY: BUILD CREATIVE INFRASTRUCTURE 
While community-based action can be 
core to climate mitigation and adaptation 
strategies, many communities are not 
presently resourced to develop sustainable 
and effective community-led climate 
work. One of the most effective things 
environmental organizations and funders 
can do in a community is to invest in 
creating and strengthening the kinds 
of infrastructure that supports climate-
related work over the long term. Creative 
infrastructure includes the way in which 
communications flow, the places in which 
people gather and plan together, the 
information that is readily accessible to 
the community, shared documentation, as 
well as buildings, parks and other physical 
infrastructure that can enable local 
initiatives.  
Identify what role local organizations and 
grassroots groups would like to play in 
facilitating community-led climate action 
work and how can you help to strengthen 
that role
Hold discussions with residents and 
local organizations’ staff on what 
infrastructure (communications, 
channels, documentation, places 
and spaces, etc) are needed for the 
community to lead and contribute to 
climate action work
Support local organizations and 
grassroots groups in accessing the 
resources and expertise they need to 
launch their climate action work and 
make it sustainable
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO BUILD CREATIVE 
INFRASTRUCTURE?
Thank you for taking the time to read our 
guide. This process has been an incredible 
learning experience for TEA and our 
partners. We are committed to continuing 
to grow our own knowledge and skills 
to undertake authentic co-design and 
collaboration processes with residents and 
community groups. We hope this learning 
guide has been a helpful starting point for 
you and/or your organization. 
THANK YOU FOR READING
APPENDIX: REFERENCES & 
RESOURCES
Centre for Connected Communities, The 
Connected Communities Approach - How 
to unlock the potential of a community 
to find local solutions to complex social 
issues. Published August 2020.
Centre for Connected Communities, 
10 Keys to Unlock the Potential of a 
Connected Community. Published 
August 2020.
Centre for Connected Communities.
Resource Library, Published 2019.
Advisory Group on Climate Change and 
Community Hubs, Advisory Group on 
Climate Change and Community Hubs: 
Recommendations for the TransformTO 
2021-2023 Implementation Plan. 
Published November 2019.
Toronto Environmental Alliance, Community 
Hubs and Community-Based Responses to 
the COVID-19 Crisis: Lessons for building a 
more equitable, resilient and climate-safe 
Toronto. Published Februrary 2021.
Toronto Environmental Alliance, Community 
Hubs and Climate Change Report. Published 
December 2018.
Toronto Environmental Alliance, Climate-
Friendly Hubs Virtual Tours. Published 2021.
Toronto Environmental Alliance, Climate 
Design Principles for public engagement. 
Published March 2016.
International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, A Connected 
Community Approach: Citizens and Formal 
Institutions Working Together to Build 
Community - Centred Resilience, Published 
September 2021
