THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
1
JUNE 2021
THE HEALTH 
COSTS OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE
HOW CANADA CAN 
ADAPT, PREPARE, AND 
SAVE LIVES
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
II
Foreword.............................................................................................................................................. III
Timeline................................................................................................................................................IV
Executive Summary...................................................................................................................... V
1. Introduction......................................................................................................................................1
2. Climate Change, Health, and Adaptation................................................................ 4
3. Analysis: Climate Change Impacts and Costs.......................................................14
4. Estimating Health Costs of Climate Change for Canada ...........................22
5. A Wide-Angle View of Climate-Related Health Costs....................................38
6. Conclusions and Recommendations....................................................................... 48
Glossary................................................................................................................................................ 52
References.........................................................................................................................................54
CONTENTS
The Canadian Institute for Climate Choices is an unparalleled collaboration of experts from a diverse range of 
disciplines and organizations across the country. 
As an independent, non-partisan and publicly funded organization, we undertake rigorous research, conduct 
in-depth analysis, and engage a diverse range of stakeholders and rightsholders to bring clarity to the climate 
challenges and transformative policy choices ahead for Canada. Learn more at climatechoices.ca.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
III
FOREWORD 
The health effects of climate change are a reality to many people living in Canada. The climate 
is changing, and the effects that this is having on human health will intensify over the coming 
decades. Some of these effects will be dramatic enough to become news stories: 
wildfires and floods will destroy homes and workplaces. Fierce storms will leave 
people in the dark for days. But others will be harder to illustrate, such as the 
thousands of deaths per year from fine particulate air pollution or the changing 
patterns of infectious disease outbreaks. 
This report begins to identify and quantify some of the health-related costs of 
climate change. It also acknowledges that many costs cannot (yet) be quantified—it 
only describes the “known knowns.” There are many “known unknowns” related to 
climate change on which we are not yet able to put a dollar value. These unknown costs 
could be even greater than the known ones. 
To protect everyone in Canada, a whole-of-government approach is needed. Responses 
cannot be relegated to one level or segment of government or society. The problem is 
complex, and the solutions will have to be, too. The climate crisis is not just an environmental 
issue: it’s a public health issue. It’s also a housing issue. It’s an education issue. It’s an economic 
issue. It touches every aspect of our lives.
The health effects of climate change will affect us all in some way. It’s clear from the data in 
this report that acting to mitigate emissions quickly will save lives and curb costs over the next 
decades. We will also need to adapt, changing our cities and communities and our systems 
too so that people are better equipped to survive a quickly shifting climate.
Climate change is an escalating public health emergency, and we need to start treating it 
that way. 
Ian Culbert
Executive Director
CANADIAN PUBLIC HEALTH ASSOCIATION
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
IV
HEALTH 
SPRING 2021
TIP OF THE 
ICEBERG 
FALL 2020
A closer look at health costs and adaptation 
opportunities, built around our analysis of the 
costs of heat-linked health burdens, Lyme 
disease, and air quality changes. The report 
includes a discussion of mental health impacts 
and other difficult-to-quantify health costs.
MACROECONOMIC
SPRING 2022
Using national macroeconomic modelling of 
potential climate change impacts to vulnera­
ble sectors and assets, this report will outline 
the implications of a changing climate on 
economic productivity and well-being.
If we think of the costs of climate change as an 
iceberg ahead, this introductory paper zooms 
in on the tip of the iceberg—the known and 
measurable hazards—as well as the contours 
of what lies below the water.
A focused analysis on infrastructure costs 
and adaptation opportunities, built around 
our modelling of climate-induced impacts 
to flooding, transportation infrastructure, 
and electricity systems. We also take a 
deeper dive into how climate change is 
affecting Northern infrastructure, including 
exploring the impacts on individuals and 
communities that economic studies often 
underemphasize or leave out.
INFRASTRUCTURE 
FALL 2021 - WINTER 2022
2020
2022
Our ongoing research 
into the costs of climate 
change includes the 
following reports:
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
V
INTRODUCTION 
Climate change is not just an environmental and 
economic threat, it is also a threat to public health. 
Climate change will make existing health inequities 
worse and increase costs to Canada’s health system 
and economy—unless governments work together 
to invest in preparation and prevention. 
The impacts of climate change are already causing 
illness, death, and economic damage in Canada. 
Wildfires and floods destroy homes and disrupt 
lives and livelihoods. Heat waves can be deadly, 
especially to the elderly, and to people working 
outdoors. These are the most dramatic and 
visible examples. But the changing climate is also 
altering the places and landscapes that people call 
home—sometimes slowly and sometimes rapidly, 
introducing new risks, such as new diseases or 
different ice or snow conditions. 
Humans are adaptable. But climate change 
is shifting the nature of these threats at an 
unprecedented pace. 
As with the COVID-19 pandemic, no one in Canada 
will be immune to the health effects of climate 
change. And as with the pandemic, the impacts 
of climate change will be worse for those who are 
already at risk of poor health and face barriers to 
affordable housing, food security, and healthcare. 
Our report shows that climate change will make 
existing health inequities worse and concludes 
that addressing climate change requires 
recognizing the systemic issues that place some 
people at greater risk. Failing to do so will lead to 
higher costs, more illness, and additional deaths 
from climate change impacts.
The risks to people across Canada are twofold. 
First, the impacts of climate change on health 
are increasing rapidly. Second, health and social 
systems—which are necessary to weather illnesses 
and loss—are often unable to meet the needs 
of those most vulnerable to climate-related 
health hazards. Yet despite these growing risks, 
preparation for the health impacts of climate 
change remains inadequate.
In this report, we outline future threats by 
projecting climate impacts to health in the 
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
VI
METHODS 
This report combines new analysis and evidence from the existing literature to highlight key 
health risks and costs across Canada from a changing climate. 
Projections of health costs 
We estimated how climate-related health costs could change between now and the year 2100 
for three key health impacts:  
A.	 The impact of declining air quality associated with increasing ground-level ozone 
concentrations  
B.	 Increasing incidence of Lyme disease  
C.	 The health effects of hotter temperatures 
For each of these climate-related health risks, we analyzed the impacts under both low and high 
global greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. 
To illustrate the benefits of proactive health adaptation, we also examined the potential cost 
savings from two potential adaptations to heat waves. 
Losses and damages that cannot be quantified 
Air quality, Lyme disease, and heat are only a few of the many possible threats that climate 
change poses to health. Many other impacts require attention even if it is not currently possible 
or appropriate to quantify them. 
To paint a broader picture of the effects of climate change on health in Canada, we summarize 
current understanding of climate-related mental health effects, impacts on Indigenous People’s 
cultures and food security, and risks to Canada’s healthcare facilities. 
coming decades and discuss opportunities to 
protect the health of people in Canada. 
Our research finds that protecting the health of 
people in Canada in the face of climate change is 
not just about preparing for specific risks like heat 
waves or Lyme disease. It is also about addressing 
factors like poverty and racism that make people 
more vulnerable and ensuring access to housing, 
healthcare, employment, and education. Health 
and climate change policy objectives can’t be 
viewed in isolation—they are fundamentally 
interconnected with the broader social and 
economic policy landscape. Addressing the root 
causes of climate-related health impacts as well as 
their symptoms, therefore, requires coordination 
and collaboration across and within governments.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
VII
FINDINGS 
 	Ground-level ozone and other impacts to air quality are a clear threat to health. 
As temperatures rise, concentrations of ground-level ozone (a major component of smog) will 
increase across Canada. Our modelling shows that, with the temperatures projected for the end 
of the century, average summer ozone concentrations could increase by 22 per cent. 
As ground-level ozone increases, so do deaths and healthcare costs. Unless action is taken, future 
healthcare costs of ozone exposure could increase to one quarter of current healthcare costs linked 
to cancer. The costs of death and lost quality of life are even greater—we estimate these costs will 
be $87 billion per year by mid-century and $246 billion per year by the end of the century.
Over a ten-year period at the end of the century, ozone-linked respiratory illnesses could be 
associated with 270,000 hospitalizations and premature deaths—more than the population of 
Gatineau, Quebec. 
 	Lyme disease impacts are uncertain, but they are likely smaller than many 	
	
	
other 	climate change impacts on health. 
Warming temperatures from climate change are creating ideal conditions for the spread of the 
ticks that carry Lyme disease into many parts of Canada where they have never been seen. We 
project that, under a low-emissions future, additional cases of Lyme disease due to demographic 
change and climate change will rise to about 8,500 annually by mid-century and 9,900 by the 
end of the century, up from an average of about 600 cases per year.
Our analysis projects Lyme disease to be the least costly of the health impacts we modelled. 
Our modelling estimates that healthcare costs of Lyme disease will be on the order of $3 million 
annually by mid-century.
Lyme disease is challenging to model and future risk is uncertain, but our results provide an 
important starting point for discussion of potential future impacts and costs.
 	Heat waves will continue to become more frequent and severe. 
The number of days with heat-related deaths is increasing. 
Between 1971 and 2000, Ontario and Manitoba had an average of about 50 days per year with 
temperatures above thresholds where heat-related deaths begin to occur. In the 2050s—when 
children born today are about 30 years old—the number of days above that threshold will increase 
by 1.5 times in Ontario and Manitoba. 
Our analysis suggests that even under the low-emissions scenario, heat-related hospitalization 
rates will increase by 21 per cent by mid-century compared to the current average and double by 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
VIII
the end of the century. Further, the costs of death and reduced quality of life from heat-related 
deaths are substantial. By mid-century, we project these costs will range from $3.0 billion to 
$3.9 billion per year. 
Rising temperatures are projected to have a large negative impact on productivity, especially in 
economic sectors where work takes place outdoors or in poorly cooled spaces. Our modelling 
estimates that under a high-emissions scenario climate change could lead to a projected loss of 
128 million work hours annually by end of century—the equivalent of 62,000 full-time equivalent 
workers, at a cost of almost $15 billion. 
 	 Impacts to mental health could be among the costliest climate-related 	 	
	
	
health impacts for Canada. 
In the years ahead, climate change will increase the frequency of weather-related disasters and 
accelerate permanent changes to landscapes and ecosystems. The psychological impacts of these 
changes will increase the risk of mental illness for many people across Canada, affecting mental 
health, eroding well-being, and imposing substantial costs on individuals and governments. 
Mental illness in Canada is already a critical issue with major social and economic implications. 
Productivity losses associated with depression currently cost about $34 billion per year in Canada; 
anxiety is estimated to cost $17 billion per year. An increase in rates of mental illness caused by 
climate change could therefore have major costs.
 	 It is not possible or appropriate to assign every loss a dollar value—but that 	
	
	
does not mean they are not important. 
Many people and communities are highly exposed to climate change impacts that threaten 
health, safety, culture, and ways of life. For example, in the North thawing permafrost and 
changing ice and snow conditions make homes uninhabitable, threaten drinking water supplies, 
make hunting and harvesting activities more challenging, and cut off community access to 
emergency medical care and services. Loss of traditional food sources also has a profound impact 
on the cultural and spiritual well-being of Indigenous Peoples, in addition to increasing food 
insecurity, which they already experience at a rate of three to five times the national average. 
These losses may not be on balance sheets or in government budgets, but to overlook them 
risks ignoring some of the most critical impacts of climate change on health and well-being.
 	 In addition to a growing burden of climate-related impacts, health systems in 	 	
	
Canada are also faced with physical risks to health infrastructure. 
The growing risk of weather-related disasters from climate change is not only a threat to the health 
of people in Canada, but a threat to the country’s hospitals, clinics, and emergency response 
facilities. Despite the importance of these facilities, less than 20 per cent of health authorities have 
assessed the vulnerability of their facilities to climate change risks, and about eight per cent of 
health centres in Canada are located in flood risk zones.
 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
IX
SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH 
In this country, health is defined more by a 
person’s postal code than their genetic code. 
While the COVID-19 pandemic has affected 
everyone in Canada, it has hit the most vulnerable 
hardest. And like COVID-19, the impacts of climate 
change will not be experienced equally.
From asthma complications to high blood pres­
sure, the likelihood that a person experiences 
poor health throughout life is largely determined 
by their social context. Income, access to quality 
housing, food and water security, and education 
shape the health of each and every person across 
Canada. These factors are influenced by where 
they live, their race, and their gender.
Indicators of health inequity have been trending 
in the wrong direction in Canada. For example, 
between 1991 and 2016, the difference in 
premature death risk between a poor woman and 
wealthy woman widened by about 40 per cent
(Shahidi et al., 2020). Similarly, between 1996 and 
2011, the gap in life expectancy between men 
who did not graduate from secondary school and 
men with university degrees increased by over 
20 per cent (Marshall-Catlin et al., 2019). 
Climate change is likely to increase these gaps in 
the coming decades. 

Racism, poverty, and geographic remoteness 
have already put many people in Canada at a 
disadvantage by increasing their exposure to 
health hazards and causing poor baseline health. 
Without adaptation, the climate change impacts 
on Canada’s horizon will worsen the health divide.
Those who are not personally at high risk can still 
be affected. Most people across Canada have family 
members and friends who will be more vulnerable 
to climate change health impacts. Healthcare costs 
may increase, potentially affecting quality of service 
and costing both taxpayers and patients. And as 
with the COVID-19 pandemic, impacts to labour 
productivity will affect the broader economy. 
Adapting to climate change means addressing 
both the symptoms of climate change health 
impacts and the root causes of health inequity 
and vulnerability. Addressing symptoms includes 
measures like improving emergency response 
systems for high heat and poor air quality events, 
retrofitting homes and buildings to improve 
cooling and ventilation, and developing vaccines 
for new climate-driven diseases. Addressing the 
root causes will require investing proactively in 
measures that improve health and well-being for 
all, such as increasing access to health services and 
ensuring everyone has healthy air, water, and food. 
 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
X
HEALTH ADAPTATION POLICY 
NEEDS TO CATCH UP
As the world discovered in 2020, countries that 
were prepared and proactive when faced with 
COVID-19 fared far better than those that were not.
The COVID-19 pandemic tested the capacity of 
Canada’s health systems. The economic costs 
were profound, and the human impact will be 
felt for years to come. We have seen how difficult 
it is for governments to catch up to a risk when it 
outpaced existing safeguards.
There are, of course, many differences between 
climate change and the sudden emergence of a 
novel pathogen. In particular, we are well aware 
of the threats from climate change and can 
reasonably predict what will happen next. Yet, as 
with COVID-19, if Canada does not prepare for the 
impacts of climate change, the crises ahead may 
overwhelm public health and healthcare systems. 
The challenge ahead is profound. Our analysis 
shows that the impacts of climate change could 
cost Canada’s healthcare system billions of dollars 
and reduce economic activity by tens of billions 
of dollars by later this century. Adding the value 
of lost quality of life and premature death, the 
societal costs of climate change impacts on health 
could amount to hundreds of billions of dollars. 
Over the past decade, adaptation policies and 
actions have not kept pace with the scale of 
emerging climate change risks to health and 
well-being. Only $71 million has been earmarked 
specifically for health adaptation programs in 
federal budgets since 2017—about three per cent 
of all climate change adaptation funding, or 
about 0.3 per cent of total federal climate change 
program funding. 
Canada is behind when it comes to adaptation 
policy, and now is the time to catch up. Policy 
makers will have to expand their arsenal to 
prepare for the risks ahead. Because of the broad 
scope of policies that affect health outcomes, 
intra- and inter-governmental collaboration and 
coordination is essential. National adaptation 
funding and coordination should reflect the 
importance of climate change health impacts 
and the imperative of treating the symptoms of 
climate-related diseases and vulnerability, while 
also addressing the root causes. 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
XI
RECOMMENDATIONS
As Canada moves beyond the COVID-19 crisis, governments have an opportunity to safeguard against 
future health threats. This is a critical juncture to redefine how public policy advances health and climate 
change adaptation. 
The following recommendations provide a starting point based on our analysis of climate-related health 
risks on Canada’s horizon: 
All orders of government should implement health adaptation policies to address both the 
symptoms and root causes of climate-related health threats.
Policies that tackle the symptoms of health impacts can play a clear role in reducing risks. For 
example, governments can enhance warnings about heat and poor air quality and ensure 
emergency response systems are primed for more extreme weather. Despite their benefits, 
however, health adaptation efforts that are limited to symptoms and proximate effects will 
ultimately be unable to keep up with growing and unpredictable climate change impacts. 
That means that governments should also implement policies that address the root causes of 
vulnerability and exposure to climate health hazards. 
Canada’s emerging national adaptation strategy should map all key adaptation policy levers 
across government departments and orders of government against top climate health impact 
areas.
When developing the forthcoming national adaptation strategy, the Government of Canada 
should explicitly recognize the decentralized nature of health adaptation and resilience building. 
It should work with provincial, territorial, Indigenous, and local government partners to identify 
bodies that make policy decisions to improve health resilience. Mapping these accountabilities 
can help start the discussion about how to coordinate policy decisions that advance health 
adaptation across orders of government. 
Central agencies in federal, provincial, and territorial governments should explicitly incorporate 
health resilience into climate lenses to inform cost-benefit analyses and policy decisions.
All government departments should be directed to identify their role in climate change health 
adaptation and resilience and to take responsibility for those roles in departmental goals, projects 
and decisions. Departments should consider not just overall quantitative costs and benefits of 
alternative actions with respect to climate change health impacts but also the distribution of 
costs and benefits—recognizing that improving the circumstances of disadvantaged groups 
builds overall resilience.
1
2
3
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
XII
Governments should invest in research on emerging, unknown, and local climate change 
health impacts.
Successful health adaptation policy must address health risks broadly, not only the narrower set 
of impacts of climate change that are most studied. Broad risks include mental health impacts, 
the effects of changes in wildfire regimes on air quality and respiratory health, the vulnerability of 
health systems themselves to climate change and extreme weather, and the direct and indirect 
effects of ecosystem change on health and well-being. Provincial, territorial, Indigenous, and 
local governments should also invest in better understanding the regional and local health 
implications of climate change, including the exposure and sensitivity of disadvantaged groups.
This report is the second in the Costs of Climate Change series. Our first report, Tip of the Iceberg, 
provides an introduction to the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada. Forthcoming 
reports will analyze the cost of climate change to Canada’s infrastructure and the national economy. 
 
4
Other 
causes
Ground-
level ozone 
deaths
The health costs of climate change  
in Canada
Climate change is not just an environmental and economic threat.  
It is also a threat to public health. 
Changes in climate are already affecting the health of people in Canada.  
In the decades to come, these health impacts will intensify,  
and costs will increase. Climate change will affect everyone living  
in Canada—but it won’t affect everyone equally.
Some people are more vulnerable because of 
age or genetics. Others are put at greater risk by 
economic disadvantage and discrimination. 
Health is determined more by a person’s postal 
code than their genetic code. From asthma 
complications to high blood pressure, the likelihood 
that a person experiences poor health—which also 
increases their vulnerability to climate change—
is largely determined by their social context. 
Unless governments work together to invest in 
preparation and prevention, climate change will 
worsen these existing health inequities and increase 
costs to Canada’s health system and economy.
Social Determinants
Three factors influence people’s vulnerability 
to climate-related health impacts:
Exposure: How much a person comes in contact 
with climate-related hazards—for example, 
exposure to heat is reduced if a person has  
access to a home with air conditioning.
Sensitivity: Factors such as age, pre-existing 
health conditions, and social and economic 
conditions—for example, unmanaged diabetes— 
can increase sensitivity to heat waves and 
infectious diseases.
Capacity to adapt: The ability to avoid, prepare 
for, and cope with exposure and sensitivity—
for example, someone who earns a high 
income likely has more access to prescription 
medications and health services than those  
who earn less.
PROJECTED HEALTH COSTS
Billions of $ per year by end of century
Canada does not need to be locked into a future of mounting costs, 
illness, and death resulting from climate change health impacts.
If governments accelerate action to strengthen 
health systems and address the root causes of 
vulnerability, the health risks and costs related to 
climate change can be substantially reduced.
Income  Education  Race
Age  Literacy  Working conditions
Climate Impact
Many people in Canada have already experienced 
health effects related to climate change. 
Some effects and costs are easy to quantify, such as 
heat-related hospitalizations, but the full scope and 
scale of potential climate change health impacts 
in Canada are uncertain. While some emerging 
threats, like mental health impacts, are difficult 
to estimate and model, they are nonetheless 
important and deeply felt across the country. 
Social determinants will dictate the severity 
of health outcomes that people experience 
from climate change impacts.
Adaptation
Adapting to climate change requires 
supporting the health of people in Canada 
over the coming decades. 
It’s essential to treat the symptoms of climate-
related health impacts. This involves preventing or 
reducing the negative impacts of specific health 
hazards related to climate change as they occur 
—for example, by increasing emergency response 
capacity, and developing early warning systems.
Addressing root causes is equally important.  
This requires tackling the factors that make  
people vulnerable to climate health hazards 
—for example, by reducing food and water 
insecurity, increasing access to preventive 
healthcare, and reducing economic inequities.
Ecosystem changes  Heat waves  Wildfire smoke
Permafrost thaw  Air pollution  Severe weather  Floods
Lyme 
disease
Heat-related 
deaths
Heat-related 
productivity 
losses
Ground-
level ozone 
illnesses
High-emissions scenario 
Low-emissions scenario
Social determinants 
reduce protection
Climate impacts 
reduce protection
Cooling centres  Primary healthcare  Medications  
Disaster response  Food and water  Flood protection 
Heat warning systems  Housing  Education and outreach
Unknown  
costs
$5.2B
$6.6B
$87B
$0.1B
$0.2B
$0.5B
$0.8B
$8.5B
$14.9B
$246B
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
1
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed long-standing 
vulnerabilities in health and social systems across 
Canada. The pandemic has caused immeasurable 
pain and loss, stretched health systems, raised 
unemployment to its highest levels in 45 years, 
and caused an economic recession. All of these 
impacts have disproportionately affected 
disadvantaged groups—people struggling with 
the effects of poverty, racism, discrimination, 
precarious employment, and limited healthcare 
access (Guttmann et al., 2020; OMH, 2020). It is 
clearer than ever that good health is intimately 
tied to healthcare access, stable housing, financial 
resources, and water and food security, among 
other factors.
Over time, climate change could further expose 
vulnerabilities in our society. A changing climate 
is expected to intensify risks to health and well-
being across Canada. Without preparation for 
these risks, the impacts to quality of life and to 
the Canadian economy will be substantial. Like 
COVID-19, these impacts will disproportionately 
affect disadvantaged people.
The impact of climate change on public health is 
becoming increasingly clear. Smoke from larger 
and more frequent wildfires is exacerbating 
asthma across parts of Western Canada 
(Kirchmeier-Young et al., 2019; Matz et al., 2020). 
The aftermath of climate-related fires and floods 
is eroding mental health (Belleville et al., 2019; 
Watts et al., 2020). Heat waves are becoming more 
frequent and deadly (Berry et al., 2014; Martin 
et al., 2012). Further, landscapes that have long 
sustained communities are rapidly changing in 
ways that are harming well-being and threatening 
ways of life (Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; Ly & Latimer, 2015; 
McDowell, 2020; Middleton et al., 2020).
The health impacts of climate change 
experienced to date are just a prelude and could 
INTRODUCTION
1
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
2
become much more widespread and severe 
across Canada in the decades ahead. Continued 
climate change will increase the frequency 
and severity of climate-related hazards. These 
hazards, including weather-related disasters 
and irreversible environmental changes, could 
intensify a broad range of physical and mental 
health impacts (ITK, 2019; PHAC, 2017; Schnitter 
& Berry, 2019; Watts et al., 2019).
Health impacts linked to climate change will 
disproportionately weigh on people who are 
already disadvantaged, unless additional 
steps are taken to prepare for coming hazards 
(Patterson & Veenstra, 2016; TRC, 2015; Watts et 
al., 2020; WHO, 2015). Any person can be more 
or less vulnerable to climate-related health 
impacts because of their age, their genetics, or 
pre-existing health conditions. But the playing 
field is not level. Groups that are disadvantaged 
because of disproportionate exposure to hazards, 
a lack of stable housing, challenges in accessing 
healthcare, and poverty are often more vulnerable 
to the health risks of climate change (Adger et al., 
2014; Doiron et al., 2020; Ready & Collings, 2020; 
Waldron, 2018).
Without careful preparation, no household in 
Canada will be spared the human and economic 
costs of health impacts related to climate change. 
Health systems may be increasingly strained, 
limiting their capacity to offer quality care to 
everybody (Austin et al., 2015; Paterson et al., 
2014). Impacts to labour productivity could affect 
economic growth and incomes at a national scale. 
Even those who are not personally at high risk will 
have family members and friends whose health 
could be compromised.
Canada does not need to be locked into a future of 
mounting costs, illness, and death resulting from 
climate change health impacts. If governments 
accelerate action to strengthen health systems 
and prepare for a climate that is increasingly 
threatening well-being in Canada, the health risks 
of climate change can be substantially reduced 
(Austin et al., 2015; Hess et al., 2014). 
This report responds in two ways to the growing 
challenge of climate-related health risks in 
Canada and the need to adapt and build resilience 
without delay.

THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
3
First, this report helps articulate the magnitude 
of the problem. Charting the risks that climate 
change poses to health and well-being offers a new 
perspective on climate change adaptation policy—
viewing it not as an environmental or healthcare 
policy problem with technical solutions but as 
a systemic challenge that requires integrated 
responses across and between governments. 
Improving decision makers’ understanding of 
why health risks exist is a prerequisite to efficiently 
directing attention and resources to solutions that 
improve health resilience.
Second, this report outlines a path forward for 
solutions that address root causes of risk. Until now, 
health adaptation to climate change in Canada 
has largely focused on what we call “reducing 
symptoms”—preventing or reducing the negative 
impacts of specific climate change health hazards. 
Yet this approach is incomplete: solutions are also 
needed to address the root causes of climate-
related health hazards and what makes people 
vulnerable to them. Better coordination within 
and across all orders of government is needed to 
tackle the root causes directly. 
This report combines new analysis with evidence 
from the literature in order to highlight key health 
risks and costs across Canada from a changing 
climate. It helps to address gaps in understanding 
of the health implications of climate change by 
evaluating costs of some important impacts. It 
also summarizes what is known about the social 
and economic dimensions of climate change 
health impacts, including their potential scale. 
We then illustrate opportunities to take health 
adaptation actions that treat climate change 
symptoms and address root causes.
The rest of this report is structured as follows. 
Section 2 lays out a map of the linkages between 
health, climate, and impacts on Canada’s economy 
and society. Section 3 lays out our methodological 
approach. Section 4 explores new analysis that 
quantifies health costs in Canada for key areas 
(ground-level ozone, Lyme disease, and illnesses 
from heat). Section 5 takes a wide-angle view, 
exploring hard-to-quantify (but hugely important) 
health impacts. And Section 6 summarizes our 
main findings and offers recommendations.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
4
CLIMATE CHANGE, 
HEALTH, AND ADAPTATION 
The impacts of climate change on public health 
in Canada will depend on three things:
1.	
Changes to the climate that pose hazards 
to health
2.	 Social and economic factors that deter­
mine who is vulnerable
3.	 Choices about how to prepare and adapt
Climate change health hazards
Human health has always been intimately 
connected to the climate. For millennia, 
Indigenous Knowledge Holders have observed 
and shared insights into the relationship between 
health and the land. Knowledge of weather 
patterns, hazards, and the land are often woven 
throughout Indigenous cultures and knowledge 
systems (Cruikshank, 2007; ITK, 2019; Prairie 
Climate Centre, 2019).
While humans have adapted for millennia to the 
environmental hazards, risks, and opportunities 
of their times, anthropogenic climate change 
and other environmental disruptions are creating 
new threats at an unprecedented pace. Canada is 
moving into an era where climate could impact 
human health more frequently, more severely, 
and with less warning than ever before. Table 2.1 
provides an overview of the health hazards that 
climate change is expected to exacerbate in 
Canada in the coming years and decades, based 
on what is understood so far.
2
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
5
Table 2.1
Threats to health
Category
Climate and related environmental hazards
Health impacts
TEMPERATURE 
EXTREMES
•	 More frequent and more severe heat waves are 
highly likely across most of Canada
•	 Increased heat-related illness
•	 Exacerbated cardiovascular disease, diabetes, 
and respiratory diseases
•	 Reduced cold exposure in some places
AIR QUALITY
•	 Warmer temperatures are likely to promote 
smog and degrade urban air quality
•	 More frequent and larger wildfires across much 
of Canada will increase exposure to smoke 
•	 Temperature and precipitation shifts will affect 
where and how much pollen is in the air
•	 Increased shortness of breath
•	 Worsening pulmonary disease and cardiovascu­
lar disease 
•	 Increased risk of cancer and cardiovascular 
disease with chronic exposure
LANDS AND 
ECOSYSTEMS
•	 Changing temperatures and snow conditions 
may impact recreational activities like skiing, 
skating, and canoeing 
•	 Sea level rise, ecosystem shifts, and permafrost 
thaw will damage places that are culturally 
significant 
•	 Shorter sea ice seasons, changing snow cover, 
and shifting wind patterns will impact travel 
conditions for Indigenous harvesters
•	 Severe weather may damage crops and disrupt 
food supplies
•	 Thawing permafrost and increased runoff could 
mobilize contaminants 
•	 Increased risk of mental illnesses, including 
anxiety disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), and depression
•	 Increased stress and uncertainty
•	 Threatened water and food security, particularly 
for communities that rely on fish, wildlife, and 
traditional medicines
POPULATION 
DISPLACEMENT
•	 Sea level rise will make some coastal neighbour­
hoods in Canada uninhabitable
•	 Increased risk of flooding and wildfires in some 
regions may cause people to move
•	 Droughts, fire, and other climate hazards will 
likely increase global displacement 
•	 Increased risk of mental illnesses, including anxi­
ety disorder, PTSD, and depression
•	 Increased stress and uncertainty
•	 Risk of emerging and infectious disease as popu­
lations move and urban areas become denser
INFECTIOUS 
DISEASES AND PESTS
•	 Changing ecosystems shift where and when 
diseases and pests are a risk
•	 Changed exposure to infectious diseases
•	 Threatened food security
EXTREME AND 
SEVERE WEATHER
•	 Severe weather-related disasters (including 
floods, wildfires, and tornadoes) will become 
more frequent and catastrophic in many 
regions
•	 Disrupted health services
•	 Increased risk of injuries
•	 Increased risk of mental illnesses, including anxi­
ety disorder, PTSD, and depression
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
6
Social determinants of health
Canadian health outcomes related to climate 
change will depend on whether people are 
vulnerable to the climate hazards described 
above. In the context of climate change and 
health, vulnerability refers to the risk of negative 
health effects when impacted by a climate-related 
hazard (Adger et al., 2014). Vulnerability, in turn, 
is a function of three primary factors (Figure 2.1).
Each of these factors has social, economic, and 
geographic dimensions.
Figure 2.1
The intersection of social determinants of health and vulnerability influences 
how climate change affects health outcomes
Climate change 
health hazards
Exposure
Sensitivity
Adaptive capacity
Racial discrimination
Occupation
Poverty
Underlying health 
disparities
Health, social, and 
economic policies, 
governance
E.g., people in poorer 
neighbourhoods are generally 
more likely to be exposed to 
climate change 
health hazards
E.g., people with chronic 
medical conditions are more 
likely to have a serious health 
problem during a heat wave
E.g., people with reduced 
access to care and preventative 
services are more likely to have 
severe health outcomes from 
their illness
Health 
outcomes
1.	 EXPOSURE: whether people are located 
where a climate-related health hazard 
occurs
2.	 SENSITIVITY: people’s physiological predis­
position to suffer a negative health 
outcome when exposed to a climate-re­
lated health hazard
3.	 ADAPTIVE CAPACITY: people’s ability to 
avoid, prepare for, and cope with health 
impacts. 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
7
Exposure to climate and environmental 
hazards varies across geography and 
between individuals
Not all people in Canada will be equally exposed 
to the health hazards linked to climate change. 
Climate change hazards are obviously different 
in Iqaluit than in Halifax, but exposure can also 
vary from neighbourhood to neighbourhood and 
even among individuals (Bélanger et al., 2014; Ebi 
& Hess, 2020; Ford et al., 2013). 
Some communities in Canada are in areas that are 
naturally more prone to hazards linked to climate 
change. In some cases, the way communities 
were built has increased exposure to hazards. For 
example, urban areas covered by concrete with 
few trees can be up to 12 degrees Celsius warmer 
than surrounding areas in the summer (Sarofim et 
al., 2016). At the individual level, employment can 
also determine exposure. For example, forestry, 
agriculture, and construction workers are more likely 
to be exposed to extreme heat than an office worker. 
Disadvantaged groups are often more likely to 
be exposed to climate change health hazards 
and experience their negative effects (Watts et 
al., 2015). People who are racialized and earn low 
incomes are more likely to live in areas prone 
to hazards that will be exacerbated by climate 
change, such as areas with poor air quality next 
to highways or hotter zones in urban areas. And 
people who are homeless or underhoused have 
far fewer options to escape climate-related health 
hazards like heat waves and flash floods. 
Sensitivity to hazards is affected by social 
and economic conditions
People with underlying health conditions or 
people who are otherwise more physically 
vulnerable, like children or the elderly, are more 
likely to become sick, be unable to work, or die 
because of exposure to climate hazards. However, 
sensitivity to climate health risks is not just a 
function of age or genetics; sensitivity also reflects 
broader social and economic factors (Bresnahan 
et al., 2017; Lucyk & McLaren, 2017; Marmot, 2005). 
Disadvantaged groups are much more likely to 
have underlying health conditions that make 
them more likely to be affected by climate hazards. 
In Canada today, for example, the average life 
expectancy of someone who did not graduate 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
8
from high school is 22 per cent shorter than 
someone with a university degree (PHAC, 2018). 
Infants are 1.5 times more likely to die in the first 
year of life if they are born into a low-income 
household compared to a high-income home 
(ibid). Black people in Canada experience higher 
rates of hypertension than white people, due 
in part to socioeconomic factors and stresses 
of racism and discrimination in everyday life 
(Veenstra & Patterson, 2016). 
Health and social systems that help people 
adapt are not equally available to all Canadians
Public health and healthcare systems are some 
of the most important resources that help people 
adapt to climate-related hazards and other health 
threats. Public health helps people maintain good 
health and provides advance warnings of potential 
health threats, while healthcare systems provide 
the emergency, acute, and chronic treatment that 
people need if they become sick. However, as the 
COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated, careful 
planning is needed to ensure critical resources 
are available in Canada when emergencies arise. 
Studies from Canada and other countries show 
increased rates of illness from climate change 
impacts could substantially increase the load on 
health systems, stretching budgets and increasing 
costs to governments and taxpayers (Burton et al., 
2016; Limaye et al., 2019).
In 2019, the average cost of healthcare was $7,064 per 
person (CIHI, 2019). As Figure 2.2 shows, this average 
has been increasing steadily over the past 40 years 
because of Canada’s aging population, increased 
life expectancy, and growing costs of healthcare 
delivery (PBO, 2017). Costs are already on an upward 
trajectory, and the added strain of health impacts 
linked to climate change will add to these costs—
perhaps substantially. In Canada, approximately 
70 per cent of medical costs are paid by govern­
ments, meaning that ultimately all taxpayers will feel 
the cost of climate change health impacts regard­
less of who is affected (CIHI, 2019). And the remain­
ing costs will be passed on to the individuals who are 
affected , either directly or in the form of increased 
supplemental health insurance premiums. 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
9
Figure 2.2
Healthcare costs in Canada are rising (CIHI, 2019)
Healthcare costs in Canada (2019 $)
$527 
$7.068 
1975
2019
Per capita
7,02%
11,60%
1975
2019
As % of GDP
Not everyone in Canada benefits from the same 
access to and quality of healthcare. Out-of-pocket 
medical costs, wait times, and quality of care 
vary across the country (CIHI, 2021). Canada’s 
size means that many communities are far 
from medical care. In the Northwest Territories, 
for example, 37 per cent of the population lives 
more than 100 km from a hospital. In Nunavut 
79 per cent of the population lives more than 
100 km from a hospital (Young et al., 2019). These 
barriers delay emergency treatment and access 
to specialists (Clark & Ford, 2017; Martin et al., 2018; 
OAG, 2017; Pong & Pitblado, 2005). The distances 
that individuals must travel for healthcare also 
hits government balance sheets and individual 
finances. The Government of Nunavut, for 
example, spends about 20 per cent of their 
health budget on aeromedical travel each year; 
per capita, Northern healthcare costs are twice 
as high as those in the south (Jong et al., 2019; 
Young et al., 2019).
Socioeconomic status also influences access to 
healthcare. Income and employment status are 
key factors in access to preventative health services 
and medications—approximately one in three 
working people in Canada do not have access 
to employer-based supplemental insurance for 
prescription medicines, mental health supports, 
or dental care (Guo et al., 2020; Martin et al., 2018). 
In about 25 per cent of households in Canada, 
someone is not taking a necessary medication 
because of an inability to pay (Angus Reid Institute, 
2015). Women, youth, and low-income individuals 
are more likely to lack supplemental insurance, 
potentially worsening existing chronic disease 
burdens (Guo et al., 2020). Racial bias also affects 
access to and quality of care. Systemic racism in 
healthcare means that Indigenous, Black, and 
other racialized people in Canada can be less likely 
to have their health concerns taken seriously and 
to receive culturally appropriate care (Phillips-Beck 
et al., 2020).
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
10
Healthcare is not the only resource that 
people need in order to adapt and cope. Social 
and economic factors also determine other 
health inequities. Low-income, homeless, and 
underhoused individuals have less money to take 
action to protect themselves from climate-related 
health hazards. For example, finding alternative 
accommodation or sourcing food and clean water 
in the event of emergencies can be more difficult 
without economic resources. Further, current 
and historic policies, including colonialism and 
discrimination against newcomers, means that 
Indigenous and racialized groups are more likely 
to have lower incomes, be precariously employed, 
or experience homelessness—and as a result, have 
less access to adaptive resources (PHAC, 2018).
Adapting and preparing for climate 
change health impacts
No matter how the world reduces greenhouse gas 
emissions from this point forward, the effect of 
historic emissions means Canada will experience 
shifts in climate until at least the middle of the 
century. These changes and the hazards they 
create will persist for decades, if not centuries. 
Therefore, protecting health from climate change 
in Canada will mean more than reducing emissions. 
Supporting the health of people in Canada over the 
coming decades hinges on adapting and building 
resilience to threats that loom on the horizon.
Climate change adaptation refers to actions 
that help to prevent or reduce climate change 
impacts or that capitalize on any benefits of 
climate change (Adger et al., 2014; Smit et al., 
2000; WHO, 2019). Adaptation actions can reduce 
exposure, decrease sensitivity, or increase adaptive 
capacity—or achieve any combination of these 
outcomes. Examples include building resources 
to respond to emergencies, strengthening 
infrastructure, and establishing government 
policies and programs that help individuals and 
businesses adapt (Adger, 2006; Watts et al., 2015).
Treat the symptoms and address the root 
causes
There are many types of climate change adaptation 
actions that can protect health. In this report we 
divide them into two groups and refer to the first 
as treating symptoms, meaning actions that 
are designed to prevent or reduce the negative 
impacts of specific health hazards related to 
climate change once they occur. The second, 
addressing root causes, refers to actions that tackle 
the underlying causes of climate health hazards 
and what makes people vulnerable to them. 
The following health adaptation actions are exam­
ples of treating symptoms of climate change:
	
▶
Monitoring and early warning of health 
hazards, such as infectious diseases or heat 
and air quality risks
	
▶
Creating temporary shelters, such as cooling 
centres or clean air shelters, that protect 
people during dangerous weather- and 
climate-related conditions
	
▶
Increasing education and outreach 
programs that create community awareness 
and encourage household preparedness for 
specific climate-related health hazards
	
▶
Improving emergency response capacity 
of hospitals, first responders, and disaster 
organizations so they can better handle 
surges in demand 
Actions to help address root causes of climate 
change health impacts include: 
	
▶
Increasing access to health services 
including family doctors, medications, and 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
11
public health resources—for disadvantaged 
individuals and communities to improve 
baseline health
	
▶
Reducing food and water insecurity—
ensuring that food is affordable, nutritious, 
culturally appropriate, and readily available 
to all, regardless of location, income, or 
circumstance
	
▶
Increasing housing security and creating 
housing, including for seniors, that is 
affordable, safe, and culturally appropriate
	
▶
Undertaking community planning that 
eliminates or reduces climate health hazards, 
such as flood protection infrastructure and 
urban greening actions to reduce heat islands 
	
▶
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 
minimize the degree of dangerous global 
and local climate change
Governance of adaptation policy is complex
As Table 2.3 illustrates, roles and responsibilities 
for health adaptation in Canada are complex, 
especially when it comes to addressing root 
causes. Doctors, social workers, and public health 
officials who generally have intimate knowledge 
of the health challenges of their communities are 
often disconnected from the policy levers that 
address the housing, socioeconomic, or healthcare 
access issues that make people sick (Austin et 
al., 2019; Awuor et al., 2020). Local governments 
and health authorities often lack the resources 
they need to implement health adaptations. 
Coordination on health adaptation between 
or within federal, provincial, Indigenous, and 
municipal governments is limited and knowledge 
is often not shared between jurisdictions (Austin 
et al., 2015, 2019; McKelvey & Heacock, 2017). 
Table 2.2
Government roles in health adaptation 
Health 
Adaptation Area
Healthcare
Emergency 
response 
Senior support
Food and water 
security
Education and 
early childhood 
development
Poverty reduction 
and employment 
security
Housing security
Hazard early 
warning systems
Government 
departments and 
units implicated
health, veteran 
affairs, Indigenous 
services
health, defence, 
emergency 
management, 
health services
health, social 
services, long-
term care
health, 
Indigenous 
services, 
agriculture, 
infrastructure
education, social 
services, youth, 
innovation/ 
science
social services, 
finance, innova­
tion, industry
housing, finance, 
social services, 
Indigenous 
services
meteorological 
services, water 
resources, health, 
emergency 
management 
Federal Role
veteran and 
Indigenous 
health, transfer 
payments 
response and 
recovery funding
social secu­
rity, transfer 
payments
social security, 
potable water 
infrastructure on 
reserve
taxation 
and transfer 
payments
industrial policy, 
taxation, social 
security, income 
security and CST
taxation, mone­
tary policy, social 
housing
weather forecast­
ing, coordination, 
standards
Provincial/ 
Territorial 
and Health 
Authority Role
health service 
delivery
public safety 
coordination 
and ambulance 
services
long-term care 
home regulation
social services 
early childhood 
education
social services, 
taxation, indus­
trial policy
social housing 
and land use 
planning
implementation 
of system
Indigenous 
Government 
Role*
public health 
programming
Elder services
harvester support
on-the-land 
programs
employment 
training and 
community 
supports
public awareness
Local/ 
Municipal Role
zoning and 
infrastructure
fire and police 
services
community 
programming
zoning policies, 
drinking water
community 
programming
promotion of local 
economy
land use plan­
ning, social 
housing
watershed 
monitoring
* We have created this figure to illustrate the complexity and integration need; the diagram is not intended to be comprehensive. Roles and responsibilities will vary across the country. For example, 
depending on whether Indigenous governments operate under the Indian Act or self-governing agreements, roles and responsibilities will vary.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
13
Canada has an adaptation policy deficit
Government policies and actions have not kept 
pace with the scale of emerging climate change 
risks to health and well-being (Austin et al., 2016; 
Ford et al., 2014; Labbé et al., 2017; OAG, 2018, Sawyer 
et al., 2020). Only $71 million has been earmarked 
in federal budgets since 2017 specifically for health 
adaptation programs—about three per cent of 
all funding explicitly linked to climate change 
adaptation and about 0.3 per  cent of total 
climate change funding (Department of Finance 
Canada, 2019; Ness et al., 2020). While all types of 
health adaptation actions have been historically 
underdelivered, the need to address root causes 
has been especially overlooked. 
Federal, provincial, and territorial government 
investments in health adaptation to date have 
been directed primarily to research and capacity 
building, with few actions that have tangibly 
reduced exposure or susceptibility to health 
hazards (Austin et al., 2015; ECCC, 2018b, 2019). In 
2015, more than 80 per cent of federal government 
health adaptation initiatives involved information 
gathering and capacity building, while only 
20 per cent involved implementing concrete 
actions (Austin et al., 2015), with little evidence to 
suggest that this balance has shifted since then. 
And while many health authorities in Canada’s 
provinces and territories now acknowledge the 
importance of health adaptation, they are also 
lagging in the delivery of substantive actions 
(Berry, 2019)
Most federal, provincial, and territorial government 
efforts have also been narrowly focussed on 
adapting to specific hazards, notably heat and 
insect-borne diseases such as Lyme disease 
(ECCC, 2019). Other climate change health risks, 
such as effects on mental health and impacts 
from declining air quality in urban centres and 
areas affected by wildfires, could have economic 
and human costs that are equally if not more 
concerning. Yet little research or funding is 
currently focussed on addressing these emerging 
climate change health impacts. And with the 
exception of preliminary efforts to support the 
adaptive capacity of First Nations, Inuit and Métis 
communities (Richards et al., 2019), governments 
have not been prioritizing the root causes of health 
vulnerability—such as the effects of systemic 
racism and economic marginalization on health 
system access—in their health adaptation work. 
Dylan Clark: Arviat, Nunavut
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
14
ANALYSIS: CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS AND COSTS
Our approach to characterizing the potential 
impacts and costs of climate change for Canada 
has two parts. First, we conducted quantitative 
analysis of the future impacts and costs of 
three major climate-related health risks: a) the 
impact of declining air quality associated with 
increasing ground-level ozone concentrations; 
b) increasing incidence of Lyme disease; and 
c) the health effects of hotter temperatures. 
A detailed description of our approach and 
complete results is published in a separate 
technical report (Boyd et al., 2020). Second, 
we reviewed and summarized the current 
understanding of other climate change health 
risks for Canada that are more difficult to quantify 
but still potentially harmful and costly.
Quantitative analysis
We chose to focus on air quality, Lyme disease, 
and heat because they are consistently identified 
as top health risks of climate change for Canada 
(BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
Strategy, 2019; Berry et al., 2014; CCA, 2019). Further, 
because urban smog, insect-borne diseases, and 
heat waves have been impacting health in Canada 
and similar countries like the U.S. for generations, 
the science of these risks is well developed and 
can be applied to estimate future health impacts 
under climate change. 
Calculating the extent to which climate change 
could influence these risks, impact health, and 
drive economic losses in Canada required three 
main steps:
1.	
Projecting future climate conditions across 
Canada
2.	 Modelling the connections between 
changing climate conditions, health 
hazards, and health outcomes
3.	 Calculating the economic impact of 
changes in health outcomes induced by 
climate change
3
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
15
Projecting future climate
To model the links between climate and health 
impacts, we first need to understand what Canada’s 
future climate will look like. Climate change impact 
studies usually draw on models that project future 
shifts in the global climate caused by greenhouse 
gas emissions. Climate change models do not 
give a single picture of the future climate under 
increasing global greenhouse gas emissions but a 
spread of possible changes. 
Models consider multiple scenarios for two reasons. 
First, the world’s leading climate research centres 
have developed climate models that represent 
the complexity of the global climate system in 
different ways, and therefore they produce different 
results. Second, since future global greenhouse gas 
emissions and concentrations of these gases in the 
atmosphere depend on many societal choices yet 
to be made, each climate model simulates multiple 
emissions and concentration pathways to represent 
a range of possible decisions and outcomes.
While there are over 20 global climate models 
(GCMs) available, we chose a subset of seven that 
captured most of the range of climate possibilities 
for Canada to keep the total number of modelling 
scenarios manageable. We obtained model data 
with help from Environment and Climate Change 
Canada’s Canadian Centre for Climate Services, 
drawing on datasets developed for Canada by 
the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium.1 These 
climate datasets are large, with projections of 
precipitation and temperature for every day from 
2041 to 2100 on a grid approximately 10km by 10km 
covering all of Canada. 
We also considered two different concentration 
pathways (IPCC, 2013) (Figure 3.1). One path is 
1 https://www.pacificclimate.org/data/statistically-downscaled-climate-scenarios
a moderate greenhouse gas concentration
scenario (RCP 4.5)—referred to as the low-emissions 
scenario in this report—which represents a world 
in which concerted action is taken to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by the middle of the 
current century. This scenario is projected to result in 
a global temperature increase of around 2.5 degrees 
Celsius by 2100 and is what most experts consider to 
now be the most realistic scenario of curbing global 
warming. However, given the possibility that global 
emissions may not be effectively reduced, we also 
examine costs and losses associated with a high 
greenhouse gas concentration scenario (RCP 8.5), 
known as the high-emissions scenario. This scenario 
represents the outcome of continued growth in 
emissions for the remainder of the century, resulting 
in about 4.5 degrees of global warming. 
Finally, for each combination of climate model and 
concentration scenario, we analyzed impacts and 
costs for two future time horizons: the middle of 
the century (2041 to 2070), which we refer to as 
“the 2050s,” and the end of the century (2071 to 
2100), which we refer to as “the 2080s.” The 2050s 
analyses provide a sense of the type of medium-
term impacts Canada is likely to experience, 
while the 2080s analyses show how impacts may 
accelerate, plateau, or decline over the remainder of 
the century. The analysis of 30-year time periods is 
common in climate change impact assessments, as 
they average out short-term variability in the climate 
so that trends can be more clearly seen (IPCC, 2013). 
As a result, we modelled 28 scenarios of health 
impacts—permutations of seven climate models, 
two emissions scenarios, and two time periods. Our 
modelling included all of Canada, examining future 
patterns down to daily time frames with a spatial 
resolution as fine as individual cities and towns. 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
16
Figure 3.1
Temperatures in Canada will rise for the remainder of the century
Projected average annual mean daily temperature for Canada
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
End of the
20th century
Beginning of the
21st century
Middle of the
21st century
End of the
21st century
°C
High-emissions 
scenario
Low-emissions 
scenario
Modelling connections between 
climate and health outcomes
To model impacts induced by expected changes 
in Canada’s climate, we first estimated future 
health hazards. In the case of heat, this was 
straightforward, as climate models produce direct 
projections of future temperature. For air quality, 
this required estimating future concentrations of 
ground-level ozone—our air pollutant of focus—
using temperature projections and the relationship 
between temperature and ground-level ozone. 
For Lyme disease, it required estimating future 
incidence based on an understanding of the 
connection between incidence and temperature. 
Once future hazards were established, we drew on 
established research to develop specific exposure-
response functions. Exposure-response functions 
are based on past studies of the health outcomes 
from exposure to different health hazards in large 
populations. Using these exposure-response 
functions for ground-level ozone, Lyme disease, 
and hot temperatures, we estimated the potential 
for illness, or morbidity, and premature death, or 
mortality, associated with those health hazards 
under climate change. 
To estimate future health outcomes under 
climate change, we also needed to consider future 
changes in Canada’s population, as a growing 
population with shifting age demographics will 
respond differently to health hazards. We used 
future population and age group estimates from 
Statistics Canada, which provides projections up 
to 2068 (Statistics Canada, 2019), and then we 
extended these trends to 2100. Because of the 
nature of the models we used, our ground-level 
ozone analysis reflected the effect of an aging 
By 2100, the average annual daily temperature for Canada is projected to increase by approximately two degrees Celsius 
to six degrees Celsius compared to the baseline average, depending on global emissions.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
17
population, but our analyses of heat and Lyme 
disease reflected total population growth only.
We showed the degree to which climate change 
was responsible for future health impacts in our 
estimates by also estimating what the health 
impacts would have been for Canada’s population 
in the 2050s and 2080s in the absence of climate 
change. To do this, we ran our models using 2050s 
and 2080s population projections and climate 
data from the 1971 to 2000 period. This period is 
frequently used as the 30-year baseline in climate 
change impact assessments that look at 30-year 
projections for the 2050s and 2080s time frames 
(Charron, 2016). The Canadian Centre for Climate 
Services was able to provide us with datasets 
from this period on the same 10 x 10 km grid as 
the climate model projections, allowing precise 
comparison. In some cases, we were also able to 
use this data and our exposure-response func­
tions to calculate health impacts for the current 
Canadian population. This provided another useful 
basis of comparison with our future estimates, as 
long-term measurements of past illness and death 
associated with ground-level ozone, Lyme disease, 
and heat are not available.
The following sections go into additional detail 
on our modelling, including how we examined 
the benefits of certain health adaptation actions 
for heat.
Climate change exacerbates local air 
quality risks
Air pollution contributes to approximately 14,600 
premature deaths in Canada every year and makes 
tens of thousands ill through respiratory and 
cardiac illnesses and other diseases (Health Canada, 
2019). Air pollutants that cause these effects include 
fine particles and chemical toxins from sources 
like industrial emissions; vehicle exhaust; electricity 
generation and home heating powered by coal, oil, 
or gas; and smoke from wildfires. 
Our analysis focusses on ground-level ozone. 
Although ozone naturally and safely occurs in the 
upper atmosphere, it can also form at ground 
level from the interaction of sunlight, warm 
temperatures, exhaust from vehicles, and other 
fossil fuel combustion. In this form, it is a major 
component of urban smog. Ground-level ozone can 
irritate lungs and airways, aggravating respiratory 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
18
illnesses, coronary vascular disease, and asthma 
and increasing risk of pregnancy complications. 
Studies have found significant increases in 
emergency department visits and deaths during 
and shortly after days with high ground-level ozone 
concentrations (Cakmak et al., 2016; Leung et al., 
2020). Further, long-term exposure to ground-level 
ozone may elevate an individual’s risk of respiratory 
and cardiovascular illnesses later in life (Atkinson 
et al., 2016). 
We chose to analyze the health effects of changing 
ground-level ozone concentrations because these 
are strongly linked to temperature and are thus 
expected to increase with climate change (Watts 
et al., 2015). Drawing on known relationships 
between temperature and ozone, we can forecast 
future ozone concentrations based on projected 
changes in temperature across Canada (Boyd et 
al., 2020). To model how changing ground-level 
ozone concentration could affect health, we use 
Health Canada’s Air Quality Benefits Assessment 
Tool (AQBAT 3.0) to assess changes in illness, 
healthcare demands, and deaths related to air 
quality. AQBAT is an application that allows the user 
to model changes in air quality and the resulting 
health impacts by defining various parameters, 
such as pollutants and demographic estimates. We 
used AQBAT to estimate three key health morbidity 
outcomes associated with ground-level ozone: 
asthma symptom days, acute respiratory symptom 
days, and respiratory emergency room visits.2
Climate change will negatively affect air quality in 
more ways than just through ground-level ozone. 
Another major climate-related air quality health 
hazard is the increasing size and frequency of 
wildfires, particularly in Western Canada, where 
smoke will affect air quality in many communities 
2 Asthma symptom days and acute respiratory symptom days count the number of days that one person experiences symptoms, such as coughing 
or shortness of breath. Asthma symptom days only apply to asthmatic children aged 5 to 19, while acute respiratory symptom days apply to the 
entire adult population and non-asthmatic children. Respiratory emergency room visits include the entire population. See Health Canada AQBAT 
for full definition.
more frequently during summer months. Higher 
pollen concentrations could also lead to surges 
of allergies, respiratory illness, and respiratory 
emergencies (Harun et al., 2019; Thien et al., 2018). 
The true scale of climate-induced air quality health 
impacts will be substantially larger than those we 
modelled for ground-level ozone, as these other 
impacts are still difficult to model accurately.
Rising temperatures are expected to enable 
the spread of Lyme disease
Lyme disease is caused by infection with the 
bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi from the bite of 
an infected tick. Most people with Lyme disease 
experience minor symptoms, including rash, 
fevers, heart arrythmias, and joint pain. All these 
symptoms usually fully resolve with antibiotics 
(Shapiro, 2014). However, if Lyme disease is not 
detected and treated early, it can cause severe and 
lifelong health problems. Over the past decade, 
Lyme disease in Canada has been most prevalent 
in Quebec and Ontario, where an average of about 
4.5 people per 100,000 are diagnosed each year 
(INSPQ, 2018; Public Health Ontario, 2020a).
Lyme disease is one of many infectious diseases 
whose distribution and incidence will shift as 
climate change alters the range and life cycle of 
the insects and animals that transmit the disease 
and as shifts in ecosystems disrupt balances that 
have historically kept diseases and transmission 
in check (Ogden & Gachon, 2019). Lyme disease 
has been the focus of much discussion in the 
context of the health impacts of climate change 
in Canada, as it was virtually unheard prior to the 
1990s (Bouchard et al., 2019; Ogden et al., 2009) but 
has now spread to at least six provinces as a result 
of a changing climate (Health Canada, 2020). 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
19
While there is still uncertainty about how 
climate change may affect the future spread and 
incidence of Lyme disease, data and tools exist 
to begin to estimate potential impacts and costs 
(Clow et al., 2016, 2017; Gasmi et al., 2017; Ogden, 
2008; Ogden et al., 2005). We drew on research 
that modelled the link between Lyme disease and 
changing temperatures to estimate the future 
incidence of Lyme disease infections in Canada 
and their costs (Dumic & Severnini, 2018).
Heat and hot weather increase illness and 
death and undermine productivity
When temperatures rise beyond what individuals 
can physiologically withstand, risk of illness and 
death increase rapidly from conditions such as 
heat stroke, as well as from increased risk of heart 
attack, stroke, and other forms of cardiovascular 
disease. In most cases, individuals who experience 
heat-related complications have underlying 
health conditions, such as cardiovascular disease, 
high blood pressure, diabetes, or respiratory 
diseases. Heat-related complications are also 
more likely to affect individuals who are not able 
to escape exposure to heat because of jobs that 
require them to be outside or a lack of adequate 
housing and access to green space. 
Recent heat waves in Canada have been deadly. 
For example, in Vancouver in 2009 an estimated 
72 deaths occurred over a two-week period (Ho et 
al., 2017; Stewart et al., 2017). A Montreal heat wave 
in 2018 killed 66 people (Santé Montréal, 2019). 
Climate change has the potential to substantially 
increase heat-related illness and death in Canada. 
Canada’s climate is warming almost twice as fast 
as the global average: between 1948 and 2016, 
the average annual temperature increased by 1.7 
degrees Celsius (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). And some 
parts of Canada are seeing even more extreme 
warming; Northern Canada has seen an increase 
of 2.3 degrees over that time—more than triple 
that of Atlantic Canada (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Across Canada, summer nighttime temperatures 
are warming at a quicker rate than summer 
daytime temperatures in many locations (Vincent 
et al., 2018), which is important because hot nights 
further increase the risk of illness and death 
(Murage et al., 2017).
To model how climate change could affect heat-
related illness and death, we looked at the research 
linking temperature and illness. Specifically, we 
drew from Canadian studies that analyzed regional 
relationships between high-temperature days and 
health outcomes to develop exposure-response 
functions and calculate health outcomes—both 
morbidity and mortality (Boyd et al., 2020). 
When assessing heat-related mortality, we 
considered both displaced and premature deaths. 
Displaced deaths refer to acute deaths that occur 
during a heat episode and concern people at the 
end of their lives who would have died within a few 
weeks even without heat exposure. Premature 
deaths refer to heat-related deaths in otherwise 
healthy individuals who die much earlier because 
of heat exposure. Premature death implies that an 
individual could have lived and worked longer, and 
the cost of their death is calculated differently, as 
described below.
Hot weather also affects economic output by 
reducing labour productivity, particularly for 
jobs that take place outside or in indoor spaces 
without proper climate control (Flouris et al., 2018; 
Orlov et al., 2020). We assessed how hot weather 
may affect labour productivity using exposure-
response functions based on analysis of historic 
lost work time for sectors and professions that are 
vulnerable to heat (Zivin & Neidell, 2014).
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
20
Costing climate impacts
Our modelling analysis looks at three types of 
costs. We estimate costs associated with the use 
of healthcare services, costs from losses in labour 
productivity, and the costs of lost life and qual­
ity of life. All costs are reflected in 2019 Canadian 
dollars in our analysis. We discounted future costs 
for some calculations, such as cost-benefit anal­
yses, using a real rate of three per cent (Boyd et 
al., 2020).
Healthcare costs include the costs of medical 
care, treatment, and drugs. To estimate the costs 
of specific illnesses, we used the Public Health 
Agency of Canada’s cost-of-illness database, which 
includes data on the average costs of hospital care, 
physician care, and drugs for all major types of 
illness and injury (Boyd et al., 2020). 
Productivity costs are the value of lost productivity 
when people are unable to work and participate 
in other activities because of environmental 
conditions, illness, or premature death. 
At first glance, it seems that if a warming climate increases heat-related health impacts and 
deaths it should also reduce cold-related health impacts—but it is not that straightforward 
(Åström et al., 2018; Barnett et al., 2012; Ebi & Mills, 2013; Kinney et al., 2015). In a study of 26 U.S. 
and three French cities, increased deaths during winter months were not primarily driven 
by colder temperatures but rather other seasonal factors, such as influenza (Kinney et al., 
2015). Additionally, extensive literature reviews have concluded that the association between 
temperature and higher rates of mortality in the winter is relatively weak (Barnett et al., 2012; 
Ebi & Mills, 2013).
Considering the uncertainty of the current science, we have not tried to estimate the effects 
of climate change on cold-related mortality and morbidity in this study. Other national-level 
assessments of health impacts and costs have made similar decisions (Boyd et al., 2020).
Cold-related 
health impacts
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
21
We estimate: 
	
▶
costs to individuals of missed or less efficient 
work based on the cost of the total work 
hours lost at current wages; 
	
▶
costs to the broader economy in terms of 
reduced economic value generated for the 
total number hours that are worked;
	
▶
costs of lost work time due to illness based 
on the length of hospital stays associated 
with the types of illness we examined multi­
plied by average salary rates;
	
▶
productivity costs of premature death by 
assessing the loss of an affected individual’s 
lifetime working income.
Costs of lost life and lost quality of life reflect the 
value that society places on avoiding ill health 
or premature death. Avoiding deaths won’t 
directly put more money in bank accounts and 
government treasuries. But putting a dollar sign 
to death does show how much people in Canada 
value reducing the risk that they or their loved 
ones will die prematurely from heat-related illness. 
Governments often use the “value of statistical life” 
(VSL) to estimate the societal benefits of policies 
that are expected to reduce the risk of premature 
death; VSL indicates how much people are willing 
to pay to reduce this risk. We used the VSL for 
Canada recommended by the Treasury Board 
Secretariat, adjusted to approximately $8 million in 
2019 Canadian dollars to reflect inflation (Chestnut & 
De Civita, 2009). We used this value to estimate the 
value of each premature and displaced death, with 
the VSL adjusted to reflect the number of life years 
that would be lost. We also used an adjusted VSL to 
calculate the value of lost quality of life for extended 
illness from Lyme disease, but we were unable to 
do so for heat-related illness because our models 
could not predict the length of illness (Boyd et al., 
2020). AQBAT uses research on willingness to pay to 
avoid specific health impacts related to air quality to 
directly calculate the value of ill-health outcomes.
When reporting our results, we show the range 
of estimates reflecting the 28 combinations of 
climate models, emissions scenarios, and time 
frames. For some analyses we include additional 
variable factors that create even more scenarios. 
We illustrate the range of outcomes in graphs, 
while discussing the average estimates of the 
seven climate models in the text. 
Assessing other potential health 
impacts 
Air quality, Lyme disease, and heat are only a small 
sample of the possible effects of climate change 
on health in Canada. Many other potential impacts 
call for attention but are not currently possible or 
appropriate to quantify.
We should not ignore important health impacts 
that we cannot model or quantify, just as we 
cannot wait to prepare and adapt to minimize 
those impacts even if we do not completely 
understand them. Therefore, to help paint a 
broader picture of climate-related health impacts 
that should be part of the adaptation discussion in 
Canada, we draw on existing research, literature, 
and knowledge to highlight the potential effects 
of climate change on: 
	
▶
Increased susceptibility to mental illnesses 
and effects on mental health and well-being
	
▶
Impacts to food security, identity, and 
well-being, particularly in Indigenous 
communities
	
▶
Threats to healthcare infrastructure and 
potential for disruption of critical services
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
22
ESTIMATING HEALTH COSTS OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE FOR CANADA
This section presents our estimates of health 
impacts and costs for heat and air quality in 
Canada’s changing climate. We present projected 
morbidity and mortality outcomes, healthcare 
costs, the value of lost life, and lost quality of life for 
low and high greenhouse gas emissions scenarios 
for both the 2050s (period from 2041 to 2070) and 
2080s (period from 2071 to 2100) We also present 
the projected productivity loss of labour hours 
and associated costs due to the impacts of heat 
on health. And we assess two adaptation scenarios 
that can reduce heat exposure and illustrate their 
costs and benefits.
In order to articulate the potential magnitude of 
costs more clearly, we describe “average” values for 
each impact and scenario throughout this section. 
However, the average value does not capture 
the uncertainty or the worst-case scenario. We 
present the broader range of potential outcomes 
in graphs throughout the section. In our figures, 
each line reflects the change projected under 
one global climate model. Blue bars reflect 
the change modeled under a low-emissions 
scenario. The orange lines reflect a high-emissions 
scenario. Therefore, the range between the lines 
in each graph reflects possible outcomes for each 
emissions scenario.
Costs of ground-level ozone 
impacts on health 
Ground-level ozone concentrations could increase 
substantially as temperatures rise, affecting air 
quality, undermining health and well-being, and 
imposing costs on the Canadian economy. 
Climate change will increase illnesses 
and deaths from ground-level ozone across 
the country 
As temperatures increase, ground-level ozone 
concentrations will increase across Canada. 
Our models show that, with the temperatures 
projected for the 2080s, the average summer 
urban ozone concentration may increase 
22 per cent from the baseline of 38 parts per billion 
4
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
23
(ppb) to 49 ppb under the low-emissions scenario 
and by 47 per cent to 56 ppb under the high-
emissions scenario. These levels would approach 
those currently experienced in Southern California, 
which consistently has the worst air quality in 
North America (Metropolitan Transportation 
Commission, 2017).
Figure 4.1 shows the combined annual healthcare 
costs of these three respiratory illnesses. Of the three 
respiratory impacts modelled here, acute respiratory 
symptom days (days a person experiences shortness 
of breath related to air quality) are projected to be 
the most expensive, making up about 77 per cent 
of the costs. Asthma symptom days comprise about 
16 per cent of costs, and respiratory emergency 
room visits make up the remaining seven per cent. 
The healthcare costs of ozone exposure are 
comparable to those of other high-priority illnesses. 
For example, the annual healthcare costs of cancer 
have been estimated between $3.5 and $7.5 billion 
(de Oliveira et al., 2018; PHAC, 2010). In the high-
emissions scenario, by the end of the century the 
healthcare costs of ozone exposure could total the 
equivalent of one quarter of current healthcare 
costs linked to cancer. Reducing local carbon 
emissions, such as those emitted by vehicles or 
industry, could reduce the formation of ground-
level ozone and significantly reduce health costs.
Figure 4.1
Increasing ground-level ozone from climate change will grow healthcare costs
Projected annual healthcare costs of illnesses related to ground-level ozone
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Climate 
models
$ billion
Mid-century
End of century
Mid-century
End of century
High-emissions scenario
Low-emissions scenario
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
24
Due to temperature rise, ground-level ozone is 
projected to increase in the coming decades 
unless action is taken. We estimate the increase 
in ground-level ozone will result in additional 
healthcare costs, although actions to reduce 
emissions could reduce costs. 
As temperatures increase, our calculations 
show that excess deaths associated with ozone 
exposure increase. Over a period of 10 years, we 
estimate that ozone-linked respiratory illnesses 
are associated with 270,000 hospitalizations or 
premature deaths—more than the population of 
Gatineau, Quebec. 
While healthcare costs from ozone exposure 
could be costly, the indirect costs of deaths and 
suffering represent a much more expensive and 
under-appreciated cost of climate change. As 
Figure 4.2 shows, ground-level ozone mortality 
costs are much greater than the costs we modelled 
for heat-related deaths. Without global mitigation, 
heat-related deaths are projected to cost 
$8.5 billion annually by the 2080s, while deaths 
from ozone exposure represent a cost of 
$246 billion. Costs are double current amounts 
under the high-emissions scenario at mid-century, 
and by the end of the century, almost triple. 
Figure 4.2
Costs of premature deaths from ground-level ozone could exceed $300B by 2080
Projected annual costs of deaths related to ground-level ozone
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Climate 
models
$ billion
Mid-century
End of century
Mid-century
End of century
High-emissions scenario
Low-emissions scenario
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
25
Urban air pollution disproportionately 
harms disadvantaged groups 
Most of the health impacts described here will be 
concentrated in urban areas, based on the current 
and future projected ozone distribution. According 
to recent data, urban areas in Ontario have the 
highest ground-level ozone concentrations: 
London (41.5 ppb), Niagara (40.0 ppb), and Windsor 
(39.5 ppb) top the list nationally (ECCC, 2018a).3 
Rural and remote communities typically have 
low ground-level ozone concentrations, although 
local industrial activities and wood heating 
affect exposure. Disadvantaged populations can 
experience higher incidence rates of diseases that 
can increase complications of air pollution, with 
evidence that risk of death from fine particulate 
matter is correlated with education and income 
(Christidis, 2019). Asthma complications have been 
shown to disproportionately affect low-income 
and racialized populations (Beck et al., 2014). 
National data from 2008 to 2010 shows that the 
3 Average annual concentration from 2002–2016 based on census metropolitan areas.	
prevalence of asthma among First Nations and 
Métis adults was, for both populations, 1.6 times 
the prevalence among non-Indigenous adults 
(PHAC, 2018). Among children from birth to age 
nine, asthma hospitalization rates nationally 
are 1.5 times higher in the lowest-income 
neighbourhoods compared to the highest-
income neighbourhoods (CIHI, 2018). 
Regions with older populations will see 
higher death rates
Regions of Canada with older populations will see 
an increase in rates of disease and mortality. The 
Atlantic provinces show particularly high mortality 
rates under all four scenarios, even though ozone 
concentrations are projected to increase most in 
other places like Ontario and Quebec. This high 
mortality rate may be explained by the projected 
future demographics of the Atlantic provinces 
(Boyd et al., 2020).
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
26
Wildfire impacts 
on health
From aggravating asthma to mental health impacts from the loss of homes and livelihoods, 
wildfires can have a major impact on health. A recent study estimated that the cost of 
health impacts from wildfire smoke in Canada between 2013 and 2018 (not including 
2016, the year of the Fort McMurray wildfire, because of data problems) ranged from 
$4.7 billion to $20.8 billion per year (Matz et al., 2020). Climate change has already increased 
the frequency and severity of wildfires across the country (Tan et al., 2019), and this trend 
is expected to continue, indicating that there are growing health impacts on the horizon 
(Sun et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Wotton et al., 2017).
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
27
Wildfire impacts on human health
There have been numerous destructive and record-
setting wildfire seasons recently across Canada. 
In 2016, a fire near Fort McMurray, Alberta, drove 
over 80,000 people from their homes across the 
region and produced smoke that affected much 
of Western Canada and the northwestern United 
States. A year later, wildfires in British Columbia 
burned over 1.3 per cent of the province’s land area 
and led to over 65,000 evacuations. These and 
other fires can have significant impacts on people’s 
health, including the following examples. 
	
▶
Respiratory impacts: Wildfire smoke 
is composed of fine particulate matter 
and toxic gases. Exposure can worsen 
pre-existing health conditions, including 
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), and there is mixed evidence 
of increased risk of cardiovascular diseases. 
Effects from smoke exposure can range from 
shortness of breath and use of outpatient 
medical resources to hospitalization and 
death (Liu et al., 2015; Reid et al., 2016).
	
▶
Mental health: Disasters and associated 
threats to health, well-being, and livelihoods 
are often traumatic. Wildfires can destroy 
personal possessions, transform cherished 
places and ecosystems, and threaten 
economic security. These effects have been 
linked to post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), depression, anxiety, and, in some 
cases, suicidal thoughts (Brown et al., 2019; 
Dodd et al., 2018; Hayes et al., 2019). Smoke 
and changes to the environment can also 
impact broader well-being; one study found 
that reduced visibility from smoke across 
the B.C. Lower Mainland was equivalent to 
between  $1 million and $62 million per year in 
economic welfare losses (Haider et al., 2019).
	
▶
Injury and death: Falling trees, emergency 
evacuations and response, and exposure 
to flames and heat can lead to burns, 
physical trauma, motor vehicle crashes, and 
asphyxiation. There is growing evidence that 
some disasters, including wildfires, increase 
risk of assault and intimate partner violence 
(Bell & Folkerth, 2016; Gearhart et al., 2018; 
Rao, 2020).
	
▶
Food and water security: The devastation 
of landscapes and ecosystems by wildfire 
can contaminate drinking water sources 
and harm wild plants and animals that some 
communities rely on for food (Dodd et al., 
2018; Robinne et al., 2019).
	
▶
Compounded impacts: Health impacts are 
compounded for communities that routinely 
experience wildfires. Twenty-nine per cent of 
communities that were evacuated due to 
wildfires between 1980 and 2007 had been 
evacuated at least once before during the 
same time period, some even during the 
same year (Beverly & Bothwell, 2011). Besides 
exposing residents to the effects of smoke or 
injury, repeat wildfires and evacuations are 
destabilizing and disruptive to communities. 
Lyme disease
Under a low-emissions future, projected additional 
cases of Lyme disease due to demographic 
change and climate change amount to about 
8,500 annually by mid-century and 9,900 by the 
end of the century. This represents a rate of about 
17.8 annually per 100,000 by mid-century and 18.2 
annually by end of century. The rates are lower 
under the high-emissions scenario than under 
the low-emissions scenario because the research 
from the United States that we used for our 
modelling observed that Lyme disease incidence 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
28
decreases above a certain temperature. However, 
it is unclear if the same pattern would occur in 
Canada. Despite this uncertainty, the figures 
represent a substantial increase: Lyme disease 
incidence rates were 2.7 per 100,000 nationally in 
2016 and averaged 1.4 per 100,000 between 2009 
and 2016 (PHAC, 2020).
Figure 4.3 shows the projected total costs of Lyme 
disease, comprising both healthcare costs and 
costs of lost quality of life. Lyme disease does not 
often result in death, so most of the costs come 
from lost quality of life as a result of illness. In both 
low- and high-emissions scenarios, these costs 
make up about 97 per cent of projected costs, while 
healthcare costs make up only about three per cent. 
Lyme disease is projected to be the least costly 
of the health impacts we modelled. Under the 
low-emissions scenario, healthcare costs of acute 
respiratory symptom days alone could total 
$210 million annually by mid-century, while 
healthcare costs of Lyme disease are only 
$3 million annually. Similarly, costs of heat-related 
healthcare are modelled to be much greater 
than Lyme disease, totalling $100 million by 
mid-century. 
Costs of illness from heat and hot 
weather
Heat-related health impacts are already a 
climate-related threat to the well-being of 
Canadians. Increasing warming will worsen this 
risk, with significant economic implications.
Climate change will increase the frequency 
of potentially deadly hot days
As the climate warms, the number of days when 
temperatures reach levels where heat-related 
deaths begin to occur is going to increase. These 
temperature thresholds are determined for major 
Figure 4.3
Estimated costs of healthcare and lost quality of life from Lyme disease
Projected annual Lyme disease costs for healthcare and lost quality of life
High-emissions scenario
Low-emissions scenario
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Climate 
models
$ million
Mid-century
End of century
Mid-century
End of century
High-emissions scenario
Low-emissions scenario
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
29
Canadian cities and are based on analysis of 
historic mortality data to define the temperature 
at which deaths begin to increase. We use these 
thresholds to estimate future mortality rates 
associated with warming temperatures.
Between 1971 and 2000, Ontario and Manitoba 
had an average of about 50 days per year with 
temperatures above thresholds for heat-related 
deaths, and Yukon had an average of one day per 
year. In the 2050s—when children born today are 
30 years old—the number of days above thresholds 
will increase by 1.5 times in Ontario and Manitoba 
and more than six times in Yukon. By the 2080s, 
the average number of days above thresholds 
across Canada will range from 75 days each year 
in the low-emissions scenario to 100 days each 
year if emissions go unchecked: an increase of two 
to 2.5 times the 1970–2000 baseline.
By province and territory, there is more variation: as 
Figure 4.4 illustrates, Ontario, Quebec, Manitoba, 
and the Atlantic provinces are projected to have 
the highest number of potentially deadly hot days 
annually. However, given that Northern Canada is 
experiencing more rapid temperature increases 
compared to the rest of Canada, Nunavut, Yukon, 
and the Northwest Territories are projected to 
see the greatest amount of change in days above 
thresholds for heat-related deaths over the coming 
decades. Compared to a scenario without climate 
change, we project the number of days above these 
thresholds will increase by a multiple of three to 
10 in the territories over the next 30 years, with the 
largest increases in Yukon and Nunavut. In British 
Columbia and Newfoundland and Labrador, where 
days with heat that can cause premature death 
have also historically been rare, we model a twofold 
to threefold increase over the next 30 years.
Figure 4.4
The number of days where heat can cause premature death will increase across Canada
Percentage of days in the year over heat danger thresholds
35–40
Low-emissions 
scenario
High-emissions 
scenario
LEGEND
End of 
century
1971–2000
average
Mid-century
30–35
25–30
20–25
15–20
10–15
5–10
0–5
YT
YT
BC
BC
AB
AB
SK
SK
MB
MB
ON
ON
QC
QC
NB
NB
PE
PE
NS
NS
NT
NT
NU
NU
NL
NL
% of days
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
30
Climate change will increase heat-related 
hospitalization and healthcare costs
Climate change will increase heat-related illness 
and hospitalization across Canada. We estimated 
the change in hospitalizations from four diseases: 
coronary heart disease, stroke, hypertensive 
disease, and diabetes, all of which have a strong 
relationship with temperature. Figure 4.5 shows 
the projections for hospital visits nationally. 
These increases in hospitalizations will mean 
substantial healthcare system costs. Even 
under the low-emissions scenario, heat-related 
hospitalization rates represent a 21 per cent 
increase by mid-century and a 102 per cent 
increase by the end of the century as compared 
to current average rates. 
We project that the greatest impacts in absolute 
and per capita terms will occur in Ontario and 
Quebec, both because of their larger populations 
and because they will experience a greater 
temperature increase in the areas where most of 
their population lives.
While some increases in heat-related 
hospitalizations would be expected due to growing 
populations, projected hospitalizations due to 
climate change generally far exceed the increases 
from population growth alone. For example, 
without climate change, British Columbia would 
be expected to see an additional 10 heat-related 
hospital visits per year in 2080, based simply 
on population growth. However, this number 
increases to 50 under the low-emissions scenario 
and 80 under the high-emissions scenario. 
Figure 4.5
Hotter days mean more hospital visits
Projected annual heat-related hospitalizations
High-emissions scenario
Low-emissions scenario
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Climate 
models
thousand people
Mid-century
End of century
Mid-century
End of century
High-emissions scenario
Low-emissions scenario
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
31
Heat impacts will undermine 
labour productivity
Rising temperatures are projected to have a large 
negative impact on working hours, especially in 
economic sectors where a great deal of work takes 
place outdoors or in poorly cooled spaces. This 
includes manufacturing, quarrying, oil and gas 
extraction, utilities, transportation, forestry and 
fisheries, and construction. 
Of the high-risk sectors our modelling examines 
(Figure 4.6), productivity losses will be highest 
in the manufacturing sector primarily because 
manufacturing represents a larger relative 
share of national employment than other 
high-risk sectors. Productivity losses from the 
manufacturing, transportation, and warehousing 
sectors could also impact supply chains, creating 
a ripple effect in other sectors that is not reflected 
in our analysis. 
Under the high-emissions scenario, climate 
change will lead to a projected loss of 
128 million hours annually by end of century. 
This is the equivalent of 62,000 full time workers, 
representing lost productivity of $14.8 billion 
annually. Labour productivity losses are much 
smaller under the low-emissions scenario, with 
57 million labour hours across these high-risk 
industries lost annually by the 2080s—less than 
half the projected loss in the high-emissions 
scenario—with a cost of $6.7 billion. 
Figure 4.6
Climate change will reduce productivity in high-risk sectors 
Projected annual labour productivity change
-6.7
-3.9
0
-2
-4
-6
Low-emissions scenario
High-emissions scenario
-14.8 End of century
-5.4 Mid-century
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12
-14
Total
Manufacturing 
Construction 
Transportation & 
warehousing 
Mining, quarrying, 
oil & gas extraction 
Utilities 
Agriculture, forestry, 
fishing & hunting 
$ billion
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
32
Figure 4.7 shows the financial value of projected 
labour hours by province. Even after normalizing 
for the size of the workforce across provinces and 
territories, Ontario and Quebec will experience 
the largest share of lost labour hours. This is 
because of the large proportion of workers in 
those provinces employed in manufacturing and 
other exposed industries and because Ontario 
and Quebec are projected to see the highest 
increase in number of days above the heat 
thresholds where productivity declines.
Figure 4.7
All provinces will see reductions in labour productivity 
Projected annual labour productivity losses
-6.7
-3.9
0
-2
-4
-6
Ontario
Quebec
Alberta
Saskatchewan
Manitoba
Newfoundland & Labrador
British Columbia
New Brunswick
Nova Scotia
Total
Low-emissions scenario
High-emissions scenario
-14.8 End of century
-5.4 Mid-century
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12
-14
$ billion
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
33
Climate change will increase heat-related 
deaths in Canada
More frequent hot days in Canada will lead to 
more deaths, as Figure 4.8 shows. Under the 
high-emissions scenario, our modelling estimates 
an additional 400 heat-related deaths annually 
by mid-century. Mortalities will nearly double by 
the end of the century, reaching 790 annually. This 
is about 1.1 additional deaths per 100,000 people 
annually in the 2050s and 1.7 additional deaths per 
100,000 annually by the 2080s. 
The costs of lost life and reduced quality of life 
from heat-related deaths are substantial. At 
mid-century, annual costs are similar under 
the low- and high-emissions scenarios—
$3.0 billion and $3.9 billion respectively—but 
by the end of the century, the cost of failure 
to reduce emissions becomes much more 
apparent. In the high-emissions scenario, 
heat-related deaths are modelled to cost 
$8.5 billion annually by end of century, compared 
to $5.2 billion if global emissions are substantially 
reduced. 
While these costs are clearly much higher than 
healthcare costs, it is important to put them 
into context. Avoiding these deaths won’t put 
more money in bank accounts and government 
treasuries. But it does show how much people 
in Canada value reducing the risk that they 
or their loved ones will die prematurely from 
heat-related illness.
Figure 4.8
Hotter days means more deaths due to extreme heat
Projected annual heat-related death
High-emissions scenario
Low-emissions scenario
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Climate 
models
Mid-century
End of century
people
Mid-century
End of century
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
34
Disadvantaged groups are at higher risk of 
heat-related illnesses and death
Some of the pre-existing diseases that affect 
heat risk are associated more strongly with 
disadvantaged groups. For example, in Canada, 
rates of diabetes among low-income adults are 
1.8 times greater than among high-income adults 
(CIHI, 2016). Between 2010 and 2013, the prevalence 
of diabetes among Black people in Canada was 2.1 
times the rate among white people (Abdillahi & 
Shaw, 2020). Key risk factors for diabetes, such as 
chronic stress and lifestyle, are strongly shaped by 
social factors like education and income. 
Not only are people with lower incomes more likely 
to develop diabetes, they are also less likely to receive 
suitable care and are at higher risk of complications 
or premature death from it (CIHI, 2016). Rates of 
coronary heart disease are also higher among 
lower-income people, as well as among racialized 
people, regardless of income (Kreatsoulas & Anand, 
2010; Veenstra & Patterson, 2016). A higher proportion 
of disadvantaged individuals are more sensitive to 
climate change heat hazards and are thus more 
likely to become ill or die from them.
Further, the productivity losses detailed above 
are concentrated in sectors where employment 
is lower-paid and more precarious. Recent 
immigrants and low-income individuals make up a 
disproportionate component of this labour force, in 
part because newcomers often encounter systemic 
and cultural barriers to finding employment at 
a level consistent with their training and work 
experience in their country of origin. For example, 
immigrants make up about 30 per cent of the 
workforce in manufacturing (Yssaad & Fields, 
2018) and thus are more likely to be exposed to 
dangerous heat. 
The benefits of heat adaptation
We also analyze two adaptation options that could 
reduce heat-related deaths (and their associated 
costs). One of these solutions reduces the exposure 
of people to health-related climate hazards by 
modifying buildings and urban landscapes to 
reduce air temperatures during hot weather. The 
other builds more general resilience by reducing 
homelessness, which reduces exposure to extreme 
heat of individuals without secure housing and 
also decreases their vulnerability to other health 
risks and challenges.
Green roofs and building shading can 
reduce exposure
Modifying buildings can reduce air temperatures 
for occupants and surrounding communities. 
Green roofs can reduce air temperature in urban 
areas while also serving to improve air quality, 
manage storm runoff, and sequester carbon. It is 
relatively inexpensive to install shades on homes 
and other buildings, and they have been shown 
to reduce internal daytime temperatures by two 
to three degrees Celsius (Vivid Economics, 2019)
Green roofs have a cooling effect that can reduce 
overall ambient temperatures in urban areas by 
about 0.04 degrees Celsius for each 10 per cent 
of roof space that is converted (Rosenzweig et 
al., 2003; Smart Prosperity, 2020). The benefits of 
green roofs therefore extend to all residents of 
an area where they are constructed, not just to 
building occupants (Kjellstrom et al., 2016; Vivid 
Economics, 2019). 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
35
In addition to estimated reductions in heat-related 
deaths and associated costs, we also modelled the 
benefits that green roofs and shading confer in 
energy savings from reduced heating and cooling. 
We also incorporated other economic benefits of 
green roofs including those linked to improved air 
quality, reduced storm runoff, and carbon seques­
tration. Our results show the following:
	
▶
If shading technologies were installed on 
25 per cent of homes in Canada by the 
2050s, there would be an average of 21 fewer 
deaths per year; if shading was installed on 
50 per cent of homes by 2085, there would 
be an average of 90 fewer deaths per year. 
The social benefit of the avoided premature 
heat-related deaths by the 2080s would be 
approximately $540 million (using VSL), and 
the total energy savings are estimated at 
almost $1.4 billion. After taking into account 
the initial investment and operating and 
maintenance costs, the annual net benefit 
is over $1.3 billion.
	
▶
If 50 per cent of all residential, commercial, 
and institutional buildings had green 
roofs installed by the 2050s, an average of 
46 deaths would be avoided annually; 
putting green roofs on 100 per cent of 
buildings by the 2080s would result in an 
average of 99 fewer deaths. The annualized 
investment and operating costs of this 
many green roofs would be substantial, at 
$17 billion by 2080. The total annual benefit 
would amount to $28 billion ($1.1 billion in 
social benefit from avoided deaths and 
$26.9 billion from energy savings and other 
savings listed above). The annual net benefit 
of implementing green roofs at this scale 
would be about $12 billion.
	
▶
Installing shading technologies on 25 per cent 
of Canada’s manufacturing facilities by 
the 2050s, and 50 per cent by the 2080s, 
would save an average of 4 million and 
15 million labour hours, respectively. The 
costs of installation and maintenance of 
shading technology at this scale are modest, 
at only $86 million annually by the 2080s, but 
would save workers in Canada $250 million 
annually in wages that would otherwise 
be lost. Labour productivity benefits to the 
Canadian economy would be even larger, 
estimated to boost GDP by over $430 million.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
36
Increasing housing security can address 
root causes of vulnerability
Investing in reducing homelessness gives 
housing-insecure individuals safe housing 
during hot weather, among other benefits. For 
our analysis, we assumed that current rates of 
homelessness reported in the 2016 census for each 
province and territory are constant over the next 
80 years (McDermott et al., 2019). We then test 
the reduced death toll if 50 per cent of people 
who are homeless are provided with housing and 
supportive services.
This analysis draws on evidence from Housing 
First public health programs that move people 
experiencing homelessness into independent 
housing and provide additional supports and 
services to make the transition permanent (Gaetz & 
Gulliver, 2013)—an approach that has been adopted 
by many provincial and territorial governments in 
Canada (ESDC, 2019). The Housing First approach 
is designed to address some of the root causes of 
homelessness, especially severe mental illness and 
barriers to health services. For our analysis, we looked 
at the costs and benefits of supplying both housing 
and supportive services to people that are housing 
insecure and that have severe mental illness.
Based on studies in multiple Canadian cities, we 
assumed incremental costs of $22,900 for housing 
and supportive services per person for the first year 
(Aubry et al., 2016; Latimer et al., 2020; Ly & Latimer, 
2015). We also assumed a benefit of $16,500 per year 
in cost savings from reduced justice system costs 
and healthcare costs not associated with climate 
impacts. These assumptions provide a conservative 
estimate of savings, given that studies have found 
many individuals are able to support themselves 
after one year and no longer require housing 
subsidies and supportive services (Aubry et al., 2016; 
Latimer et al., 2020; Ly & Latimer, 2015).
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
37
We assumed that moving someone from being 
unsheltered to housed reduces their exposure 
to heat by four degrees Celsius. This assumption 
is based on the difference between street-level 
temperatures in dense urban environments 
and housing with air circulation but no air 
conditioning; urban heat islands can make street-
level temperatures as much as five degrees Celsius 
higher than indoors (Rinner & Hussain, 2011; 
Wang et al., 2014). We also assume that people 
who are homeless with severe mental illness face 
a disproportionate rate of pre-existing health 
conditions and have an increased baseline risk of 
death, including 50 per cent greater likelihood of 
dying of heat exposure (Lim et al., 2008; Schmeltz 
& Gamble, 2017; Smetanin et al., 2015). Our findings 
are as follows:
	
▶
The annualized cost of the Housing First 
intervention would be $65 million in 2055 
and $85 million in 2085.
	
▶
The annualized yearly co-benefit from 
reduced healthcare expenditures and justice 
system costs would be $54 million in 2055 
and $70 million in 2085.
	
▶
The Housing First intervention would save an 
average of 1.6 lives per year by mid-century, for 
a benefit of $15 million. By the end of century, 
our modelling shows a reduction of 2.6 deaths 
per year and a benefit of $27 million.
4 If increasing housing for people only reduces temperature exposure by 2.5 degrees Celsius and if people who are homeless do not have any 
increased risk of death compared to the average population, then the benefit is reduced by about 20 per cent.	
	
▶
Under these assumptions, there would be 
roughly a break-even by mid-century and 
a net savings of $7.5 million per year by the 
2080s.4
While the number of heat deaths that we model 
is the same order of magnitude as some actual 
observations (Condon & McDermid, 2014), we 
believe that the model underestimates the 
benefits of providing housing, given that we do 
not consider reduced exposure to cold and other 
health risks of being housing insecure.
Adaptation has multiple benefits
Our analysis shows that thoughtful and evidence-
based adaptation investments can substantially 
reduce health impacts and deliver positive returns, 
often when just considering health costs alone. 
However, when examining the other co-benefits 
of adaptation—whether energy savings from 
shading, the variety of amenities from green roofs, 
or cost savings in social programs from curbing 
homelessness—the economic case for adaptation 
becomes even stronger. 
These are not isolated cases. Many types of 
adaptations that have health benefits also 
deliver economic, social, and environmental 
benefits that can make Canada a fairer, safer, 
and more prosperous place to live, irrespective 
of a changing climate. 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
38
A WIDE-ANGLE VIEW OF CLIMATE-
RELATED HEALTH COSTS
The costs and impacts of increasing heat, Lyme 
disease, and ground-level ozone we have considered 
above are significant but also incomplete. Many 
other health impacts and costs may affect Canada 
(Figure 5.1), which are challenging to model and 
estimate but are nonetheless material for decision 
makers and significant to people across Canada. To 
gain a big-picture perspective on climate health 
impacts, we draw on the growing body of evidence 
documenting recent impacts and costs in Canada 
associated with climate-related health hazards. 
Even though we can’t predict exactly what the 
future may bring, understanding current impacts 
can help envision the implications for Canada as 
climate change progresses. 
In this section we specifically focus on three 
major emerging climate change risks to health 
in Canada: a) mental health impacts; b) changes 
to cultures, livelihoods, security, and identities of 
Indigenous Peoples; and c) physical threats to 
healthcare infrastructure.
Mental illness
In the years ahead, climate change will increase the 
risk of mental illness for many people across Canada, 
affecting mental health, eroding well-being, and 
imposing substantial costs on individuals and 
society. Moreover, the individuals most affected 
are those already facing social and economic 
disadvantages (Hayes et al., 2018, 2019). 
Mental illness and climate change are 
clearly linked 
The acute fear and trauma associated with weather-
related disasters such as floods, wildfires, and severe 
storms can lead to PTSD. In one study of evacuees 
from the 2016 Fort McMurray fire, 29 per cent met 
5
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
39
Mental health impacts of weather-related 
disasters and environmental grief
Effects of more frequent and widespread 
wildfire smoke on respiratory health
Impacts to food- and water-borne illnesses
Decreased exposure to extreme cold
Arrival and spread of new infectious 
diseases such as Zika virus
Disruption affecting the operation and 
capacity of healthcare facilities, medical 
supply chains, and critical infrastructure 
during weather-related disasters
Effects of domestic and international 
shortages on food and water security
Injury and death from unprecedented 
weather-related disasters such as Northern 
heat waves or winter flash floods
Climate change is bringing new threats onto Canada’s horizon while amplifying existing hazards. 
A small number of the risks that Canadian households, communities, and businesses face are well 
understood. Many other risks are looming under the surface—researchers don’t know yet how the 
risks will change over time or how they may interact with other social, environmental, and economic 
systems. Faced with this uncertainty, decision makers—and individuals—need to avoid the trap of 
inaction and instead adaptively manage these risks.
RISKS IN OUR PATH 
for which we can start 
to calculate the scale 
of impact and cost
CLIMATE IMPACTS WE 
SUSPECT WILL AFFECT CANADA 
but whose scope and scale 
we don’t yet have the tools 
to understand
RISKS THAT MAY HAVE 
MAJOR IMPACTS through 
complex interactions and 
processes and that are 
very challenging 
to predict
Impacts of heat and heat waves
Effects of rising temperatures on urban 
air quality
Spread of certain infectious diseases
Impacts to Indigenous cultures and 
ways of life
Figure 5.1: 
Known and unknown health-related risks in Canada: the climate costs iceberg
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
40
criteria for PTSD, 26 per cent for depression, and 
43 per cent for insomnia (Belleville et al., 2019). 
Another study showed a significant correlation 
between the 2013 Calgary flood and increased 
rates of PTSD symptoms in pregnant people 
(Hetherington et al., 2018). And it is not only those 
directly affected who are at risk; first responders 
and recovery personnel can be bombarded with 
traumatic stories and images during the response, 
which may also lead to mental illness (Osofsky 
et al., 2011). The link between floods and mental 
illnesses has been seen in other countries too, with 
consistent increases in PTSD and depression left 
behind by floodwaters (Neria & Galea, 2008; Rezayat 
et al., 2020).
Stress and uncertainty during post-disaster 
reconstruction and from the loss of landscapes 
and livelihoods can also increase the risk of 
depression and anxiety. For example, in the 
aftermath of the Fort McMurray wildfire, 
incidences of depression were 50 per cent 
higher for the general population and 14 per cent 
higher among children who lived through the 
disaster as compared to a nearby community not 
directly affected (Brown et al., 2019). After the 2013 
Calgary flood, the number of patients seeking 
new prescriptions for anti-anxiety medications 
increased by approximately 65 per cent in affected 
neighbourhoods (Sahni et al., 2016). A recent 
study that looked at the impacts of disasters on 
substance use disorder showed upticks in fatal 
and non-fatal drug overdoses during and after 
the events (Public Health Ontario, 2020b). 
More gradual climate changes can affect mental 
health as much as disasters. Changes to familiar 
landscapes and ecosystems are risk factors for 
“ecological grief”—intense feelings of sadness 
linked to these losses that can contribute to 
depression and anxiety and affect well-being 
(Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; Tschakert et al., 2017).
Climate change will exacerbate the costs of 
mental illness 
Mental illness in Canada is already a critical issue 
with major social and economic implications. 
About 12 per cent of adults in Canada self-report 
having a mood or anxiety disorder (Statistics 
Canada, 2013). One study estimates the costs of 
depression and anxiety to the Canadian economy at 
$34 billion and $17 billion per year, respectively, in 
lost productivity alone (Sutherland, 2016). In 2011, 
the annual direct costs of healthcare, social services, 
and income supports attributable to mental illness 
were conservatively estimated to be approximately 
$42 billion (Smetanin et al., 2015). Substance-use 
disorder—among the deadliest mental illnesses—
is estimated to cost $35 billion per year due to 
healthcare costs, criminal justice costs, and 
productivity losses (Stockwell & Young, 2018). 
Not accounting for climate change, the direct 
costs of mental illness in Canada are expected 
to grow to some $291 billion per year by 2041 
(a 590 per cent increase), with cumulative costs 
over that 30-year period reaching more than 
$2.3 trillion. Even if climate change only 
moderately increases rates of mental illness, this 
could be among the costliest climate-related 
health impacts for Canada. And mental health 
services are already limited and underfunded, 
particularly for low-income people and those 
without supplementary health insurance. Climate 
change will therefore increase demand on a 
system that is already stretched thin (Kowalewski 
et al., 2011; Nader et al., 2017; Patel, 2019; Thomson 
et al., 2015). 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
41
Mental illnesses further affect those facing 
social disadvantages
Just like any other disease, many factors 
influence mental illness, including life experience, 
environment, and socioeconomic conditions. 
Mental health is strongly connected to housing, 
education, and income status, which influence 
social connectedness, control, access to medical 
care, and personal sense of dignity (Allan & 
Smylie, 2015; CMHA, 2008). At the same time, 
mental illness may contribute to poverty through 
exclusion from employment and education, 
particularly for individuals with severe mental 
illness (Poremski et al., 2015).
Inuit, First Nations, and Métis Peoples often have a 
higher baseline incidence of mental illness rooted 
in colonialism, disempowerment, and a lack of 
appropriate and accessible healthcare. Losses 
to landscapes, livelihood, and culture caused by 
climate change will likely worsen mental health 
5 LGBTQ2S+ is an acronym for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer/questioning, Two-Spirit, and non-normative gender identity.
challenges for many Indigenous Peoples (Do et 
al., 2013; Nelson & Wilson, 2017; Pollock et al., 2018).
Gender will also affect susceptibility to the 
mental health impacts of climate change. 
Evidence of gendered effects of weather-related 
disasters on mental health suggests that women 
disproportionately bear the burden because 
of norms related to gender roles, caregiving 
responsibilities, and underpaid and undervalued 
work (Williams et al., 2018). 
Additionally, LGBTQ2S+5 populations experience 
a disproportionate incidence of mental illness 
due largely to discrimination and challenges in 
accessing services. Lesbian, gay, and bisexual 
youth are seven times more likely to attempt 
suicide compared to their straight peers (Suicide 
Prevention Resource Centre, 2008). Disaster 
response and recovery policies designed for 
straight, nuclear families have also been shown 
to underserve LGBTQ2S+ populations (Dominey-
Howes et al., 2014; Sellers, 2018). 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
42
Weather-related disasters and the resulting instability can compound existing risk factors 
for family and interpersonal violence (Capaldi et al., 2012). While climate change is not solely 
responsible for violence, weather-related disasters cause trauma and instability that can 
compound existing risk factors. Disasters can disrupt social support networks and strain 
finances, making it more challenging for people to leave dangerous living situations (Gearhart 
et al., 2018). Disasters have also been shown to increase the need for resources like shelters or 
helplines; these services are often already limited, and disasters can overwhelm their capacity 
(Bell & Folkerth, 2016; Enarson, 1999). Further, the budgets of these services are often cut during 
economic downturns and are highly dependent on donations, meaning that they may be 
underfunded exactly when they are needed most. In the U.S., domestic violence reports and 
helpline calls increased in the aftermath of disasters like Hurricane Katrina (Parkinson, 2019). 
In Alberta, social agencies reported an increase in domestic violence after the 2013 floods 
(Graveland, 2014; Sahni et al., 2016). 
While a person of any gender can be the survivor of intimate partner violence, the majority 
are women. In 2016, women made up 79 per cent of survivors of self-reported intimate 
partner violence in Canada, at an estimated rate of 483 per 100,000 (Statistics Canada, 2016). 
Indigenous women, in particular, are at risk of violence, experiencing rates three times that of 
non-Indigenous women (MMIWG, 2019).
While climate-related stresses can exacerbate the risk of violence, other factors such as 
unemployment, income, and personal history are the most important underlying risk factors. 
Therefore, the most effective adaptations will need to address these root causes.
Family and interpersonal violence
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
43
Impacts on culture, livelihoods, 
and identity
The effects of climate change on food and water 
security, livelihoods, culture and identity, and 
safety could have substantial impacts on physical, 
mental, and spiritual health for people across 
Canada. This is especially true for Indigenous 
Peoples, whose livelihoods and cultures are often 
intimately connected to local landscapes and 
ecosystems (Bourque & Cunsolo Willox, 2014; 
Middleton et al., 2020; Tester, 2010; TRC, 2015). 
Climate change amplifies threats to 
Indigenous culture and identity 
Indigenous Peoples across Canada are strong 
and resilient, but many communities are highly 
exposed to climate change impacts that threaten 
health, safety, culture, and ways of life. Thawing 
permafrost and changing ice and snow conditions 
make Northern homes uninhabitable, threaten 
drinking water supplies, and cut off community 
access to emergency medical care and services 
(Native Women’s Association of Canada, 2020; 
Streicker, 2016). Ecosystem and landscape 
changes lead to the loss of traditional food sources 
and harvesting practices, livelihoods, medicinal 
plants used in traditional healing, and important 
spiritual and ceremonial sites (Wyllie de Echeverria 
& Thornton, 2019). 
In many cases, historic and ongoing colonial 
policies and practices have also diminished 
Indigenous Peoples’ ability to adapt to climate 
change. Economic poverty, unsafe housing 
conditions, water insecurity, and infrastructure 
disparities are a lived reality in many communities. 
These crises often demand immediate response 
from local governments, pulling already limited 
resources away from planning for future risks. 
Policies that criminalized Indigenous culture, 
forced displacement, and caused economic 
marginalization—all associated with colonialism—
continue to also impact the baseline health and 
well-being of many Indigenous communities 
(Ford et al., 2015; Lawson, 2019). While Indigenous 
knowledge continues to support the livelihoods 
and safety of Indigenous Peoples, historic 
and ongoing colonialism continues to impact 
socioeconomic conditions, impeding access to the 
land that is integral to Indigenous ways of knowing 
and being. This has subsequently affected the 
capacities of many Indigenous Peoples to adapt to 
new or emerging hazards (Clark et al., 2016b; Ford 
et al., 2013, 2017; Ready & Collings, 2020; Ribot, 2014).
Climate-related food insecurity threatens 
health and cultural identity 
Food security is not only an important element of 
physical health for Indigenous Peoples but also 
of cultural identity and well-being. Traditional 
food is integrally connected to identity, culture, 
community, knowledge, and relationships 
with the land (Durkalec et al., 2015; Neufeld 
et al., 2017). Indigenous Peoples in Canada 
experience food insecurity at a rate of three to 
five times the national average (Chan et al., 
2019; Tarasuk & Mitchell, 2020). Food insecurity 
is tied to colonialism, dispossession of land and 
traditional food harvesting areas, environmental 
degradation, and economic disadvantage, all of 
which can make it difficult to access food through 
either traditional or market systems (Power, 2008; 
Richmond et al., 2021; Richmond & Ross, 2009). 
Climate change further threatens traditional 
food sources with shifting seasons, changing 
habitats, and emerging diseases that threaten 
the abundance and quantity of native plants and 
animals. Warming temperatures thaw the snow, 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
44
Inuit cultural impacts
Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit (IQ), or Inuit traditional knowledge, has successfully guided Inuit 
adaptation to changing environmental conditions for millennia (Karetak et al., 2017). While 
the current pace of environmental change across the Inuit Nunangat was never experienced 
by the ancestors, the cultural tenets of Qanuqtuurniq (innovation and resourcefulness), 
Piliriqatigiinniq (collaboration with a common goal), and Avatittinnik Kamatsiarniq (care and 
respect for the land and environment), among others, have provided and continue to provide 
a foundation for community resilience across Inuit Nunangat (Aporta et al., 2005; Brody, 1987; 
Healey et al., 2011; Tester & Irniq, 2008). While communities across the North are strong and 
resilient, the impacts of food and housing insecurity and economic barriers to subsistence 
activities can limit their capacity to adapt (Ford et al., 2014, 2015). 
For many Inuit, engaging in activities on the land is foundational to identity and culture. 
However, participation in travel, harvesting, and other traditional activities has been 
challenged by changes to the ways Indigenous knowledge is used and passed down, changes 
in technology, and colonialization (Clark et al., 2016b; Huntington et al., 2017; Wenzel, 2009, 
2013). On top of these changes, climate change is now affecting the seasonality and range 
of wildlife and plants and the predictability of ice and weather, altering the relevance of 
centuries of knowledge, making travel more dangerous, and making harvesting of safe and 
culturally appropriate foods difficult, if not impossible (Clark et al., 2016a; Durkalec et al., 2015; 
Ford et al., 2019a; 2019b). These losses to traditional cultural practices and identity represent 
intangible loss and damage: they are incalculable in economic terms but are nonetheless 
profound (Tschakert et al., 2017).
ice, and permafrost, impacting hunting and travel 
on the land. Climate change is making it more 
difficult for remote Indigenous communities to 
access store-bought foods, as snow and ice roads 
are becoming less reliable and supplies need to be 
transported by air (Human Rights Watch, 2020).
Dylan Clark: Pangnirtung, Nunavut
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
45
Impacts on land and wildlife affect cultures, 
economic well-being, and identity 
Non-Indigenous peoples across Canada have also 
described losses of culture and identity associated 
with climate change. While these impacts are 
distinct from the losses that Indigenous Peoples 
are facing and have faced, they are nonetheless 
significant to the health and well-being of many 
people across Canada (Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; Ellis 
& Albrecht, 2017; Tschakert et al., 2017).
For example, hunters, anglers, and trappers 
across Canada that depend on annual migrations 
and healthy ecosystems to sustain their annual 
harvests are seeing changes in their surroundings. 
Climate change impacts to forests, including the 
proliferation of pests like the mountain pine beetle, 
increases in the frequency and size of wildfires, 
and reduced growth rates due to drought are 
devastating forest-dependent communities 
(NRCan, 2020). Similarly, communities reliant on 
fishing are also being affected by changes to fish 
habitat, health, and abundance—some of which 
are linked to climate change (Brander, 2010; CCA, 
2019; Le Bris et al., 2018). 
The declining health of landscapes and 
ecosystems across Canada not only has economic 
implications but also affects mental and physical 
health (McDowell, 2020). As climate change 
accelerates shifts already underway as a result 
of development and resource extraction, it may 
become more difficult for communities and 
individuals to maintain a sense of place that 
sustains their physical and mental well-being 
(Hess et al., 2008; Tschakert et al., 2017).
Physical risks to health 
infrastructure
Health systems across Canada are staring down two 
storms in a changing climate: increasing demand 
from climate-related impacts on health and physical 
risks to health infrastructure and supply chains. Until 
this point in the report, we have focussed on the 
former—how weather-related disasters and other 
climate change health impacts could increase 
illness and strain health systems across Canada. 
Climate change also poses risks for electricity, 
drinking water, emergency response facilities, road 
and air medical evacuation services, and supply 
chains for equipment and medicine. When this 
infrastructure is damaged by a climate hazard, the 
effects can ripple out to health systems. Not only 
could weather-related disasters like wildfires and 
floods incapacitate infrastructure that is critical to 
health systems in Canada at all times but it could 
knock out this critical infrastructure exactly when 
it is most needed (Ebi et al., 2018; Ghazali et al., 
2018; Paterson et al., 2014).
Ensuring people can access medical care in an 
emergency requires more proactive preparation 
across health systems. Healthcare infrastructure 
will benefit from general disaster preparedness and 
planning by local or regional governments, such as 
policies to prevent new facilities from being built 
in high-risk zones (Burton et al., 2016; Feltmate & 
Moudrak, 2016). There are also specific actions 
that individual health facilities and networks can 
undertake, such as developing emergency disaster 
plans that account for ways severe weather can 
directly and indirectly affect their buildings and 
supply chains (Paterson et al., 2014). Despite how 
important resilient health infrastructure is, less than 
20 per cent of health authorities have assessed the 
vulnerability of their healthcare facilities to climate 
change risks (Berry, 2019).
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
46
As temperatures rise, floods are projected to become more frequent and severe in many 
communities across Canada. Floods can directly damage healthcare facilities and can also 
affect health systems by affecting medical supply chains, causing electrical and water service 
outages, and increasing patient loads. During past floods in other countries, disruptions have 
created a deadly cascade, with health facilities facing both diminished capacity and increased 
demand (Achour & Price, 2010). In response to the increasing risks, healthcare facilities need 
to adapt and plan accordingly. 
To illustrate the scale of this risk, we analyzed the percentage of healthcare facilities in each 
province and territory that are currently at risk of flooding, based on commercially available 
flood risk mapping for Canada (Table 5.1). Healthcare facilities analyzed include hospitals, 
long-term care centres, and community health centres. There are a surprising number of 
facilities at risk of flooding in most provinces and territories. Manitoba and Yukon have the 
largest percentage at risk of flooding, likely because their largest population centres are beside 
major rivers with much development in the floodplain. Yukon’s high percentage of facilities 
in the floodplain and small total number of facilities illustrate how weather-related disasters 
driven by climate change could disrupt and damage important health infrastructure when 
it is most needed. Many Northern residents already face substantial barriers to accessing 
healthcare, as health facilities are sparse. If a facility is damaged or closed, residents could be 
forced to travel even farther to access care.
Flood risk to healthcare facilities
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
47
Our findings align with other research that concluded a similar number of healthcare facilities are at 
risk of flooding and that also found a similar proportion of police and fire stations were at risk (Scott et 
al., 2020).
Table 5.1
Percentage of healthcare centres at risk of flooding
Province/Territory
Number of facilities
20-year flood
50-year flood
75-year flood
100-year flood
YT
24
21 %
21 %
21 %
21 %
MB
373
9 %
15 %
17 %
18 %
NL
144
8 %
10 %
11 %
12 %
NWT
30
1 %
10 %
10 %
10 %
BC
619
6 %
8 %
9 %
9 %
AB
1,072
4 %
7 %
8 %
8 %
PEI
55
7 %
7 %
7 %
7 %
QC
804
5 %
6 %
7 %
7 %
SK
389
3 %
4 %
6 %
6 %
NB
213
2 %
5 %
5 %
5 %
NS
203
4 %
5 %
5 %
5 %
ON
1,440
4 %
5 %
5 %
5 %
NU
27
4 %
4 %
4 %
4 %
Total
5,393
5 %
7 %
7 %
8 %
Note: Healthcare facility data from DMTI Spatial, flood data from JBA Analytics
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
48
CONCLUSIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS
The following conclusions emerge from our analysis: 
Climate change is a major threat to health and well-being across Canada. 
The health impacts of extreme heat, urban smog, wildfires, floods, and infectious disease are already 
being felt across the country and will only continue to get worse. Our analysis shows that heat and 
smog alone could lead to hundreds of thousands of early deaths and compromise the health and 
productivity of hundreds of thousands of people by the end of the century. Each year, these impacts 
could cost Canada’s healthcare system billions of dollars, reduce economic activity to the tune of tens 
of billions, and reflect hundreds of billions in social costs of lost quality of life and premature death. 
And these costs are just the tip of the iceberg, representing only a small slice of potential health effects 
related to climate change. 
The full scope and scale of potential climate change health impacts in Canada remain uncertain. 
Most health adaptation research and policy in Canada is guided by the federal government and has so 
far focussed on a relatively narrow range of health impacts and adaptation solutions. Emerging threats 
(such as mental health impacts) have not been widely studied yet may hugely exceed the costs of 
relatively narrow areas that have received significant focus (such as Lyme disease). Other critical risks 
that threaten the ability to safeguard health in a changing climate, such as the vulnerability of healthcare 
infrastructure to extreme weather, are also not well understood. Health impacts that are specific to 
locations or regions have not been given as much attention from the largely top-down national research 
agenda. And most of the limited health adaptation activity in Canada focusses on addressing symptoms, 
not delivering systemic solutions.
6
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
49
Disadvantaged individuals and groups will bear the brunt of climate change health impacts.
Racism, colonialism, poverty, and homelessness are social determinants of health that are just as 
significant to health outcomes as age and genetics, if not more so. These structural factors put up 
roadblocks to health and well-being at the best of times. That unequal footing means the health impacts 
of climate change are not going to be felt equally. However, the economic costs of these impacts—if 
not prevented or reduced through adaptation—will be borne by the entire country. 
We have an opportunity to reduce these impacts—both known and unknown—before they occur. 
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions will lessen the health impacts induced by climate change. However, 
even with significant emissions reductions, Canada will still face growing health impacts and financial 
and human costs. Protecting health and well-being across Canada in the face of climate change will 
require adaptation to prepare for current and future impacts and build resilience. This means that, while 
health adaptation will require new activities and policies, in some cases it also requires that governments 
cease activities or policies that are increasing vulnerability.
Canada has a substantial deficit in health-related adaptation. 
Although we did not conduct a systematic health adaptation gap analysis, the available evidence suggests 
that progress on health adaptation in Canada is not keeping pace with the growing threat. Our research 
uncovered a number of possible reasons: the scale of health impacts is not yet understood; health 
adaptation is underfunded and underprioritized; coordination across and within governments to address 
root causes of health risks is lacking; and slow overall progress on adaptation in Canada means there has 
been little headway on reducing the risk of climate change health hazards like extreme weather and 
flooding. Continued inequity in social determinants of health is further limiting progress in building the 
health resilience of disadvantaged communities. 
Health adaptation faces a big governance challenge.
Potential policy solutions for health adaptation and resilience implicate multiple departments across all 
orders of government—social services, housing, infrastructure, education, finance, and more. Solutions 
that address root causes obviously have complex implications and trade-offs that go well beyond climate 
change. At the same time, current policies are failing to generate health adaptation and resilience benefits, 
precisely because the complexities of climate risks and impacts are being insufficiently considered in 
decision-making. This governance challenge is critical: without addressing it, the default focus of health 
adaptation in Canada will be on decentralized management of symptoms—an approach that will 
ultimately be ineffective.
Greenhouse gas emissions need to be addressed. 
As our analysis shows, the health impacts of climate change are much more severe and costly in a future 
of high global emissions. Ultimately, one of the most effective ways to reduce health impacts will be to 
ensure that greenhouse gas emissions are minimized. Further, domestic action in Canada on reducing 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
50
greenhouse gas emissions will create direct and immediate benefits by reducing some of the health 
impacts we have analyzed. For example, a transition to electric vehicles and non-combustive heating will 
reduce the prevalence of air pollutants that lead to the formation of ground-level ozone, counteracting 
the effects of rising temperatures that will drive additional ozone formation. Other actions to reduce 
emissions such as insulating buildings and transitioning gas and oil heating to heat pumps—which can 
also act as air conditioners—will help protect residents from exposure to dangerous heat.
Recommendations for policy makers 
How then can Canadian governments respond to these challenges? The following recommendations 
outline key policy choices that can accelerate climate change adaptation for health in Canada:
All orders of government should implement health adaptation policies to address both 
symptoms and root causes. 
Policies that tackle the symptoms of health impacts can play a clear role in reducing risks. For 
example, governments can enhance warnings about heat and poor air quality, ensure emergency 
response systems are primed for more extreme weather, fund data-tracking and treatment 
of new or changing infectious diseases such as Lyme disease, and fund or require training for 
healthcare professionals to deal with these new threats. 
Despite their benefits, however, health adaptation efforts that are limited to symptoms and 
proximate effects will ultimately be unable to keep up with growing and unpredictable climate 
change impacts. That means that governments should also implement policies that address 
the root causes of vulnerability and exposure. 
Some root causes are social. Improving access for all people to public health and healthcare 
resources, quality education, safe and affordable housing, and social and cultural supports can 
tackle some of the roots of vulnerability to climate change. 
Other root causes are physical. Building codes can be updated to improve resilience to flooding 
and extreme heat. Changes to land use planning policies can reduce urban heat island 
effects. Policies to promote the shift toward electric and zero-emissions vehicles can reduce 
ground-level ozone that combines with warmer temperatures to worsen air quality.
Canada’s emerging national adaptation strategy should map all key adaptation policy 
levers across government departments and orders of government against top climate 
health impact areas. 
Given the governance complexity around health adaptation, identifying specific opportunities 
to address symptoms and root causes is a challenge. The current ad hoc, compartmentalized 
approach to health adaptation in Canada will not address the root causes of inequitable 
vulnerability and exposure to climate change health risks. 
1
2
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
51
As a result, when developing the forthcoming national adaptation strategy, the Government of 
Canada should explicitly recognize the decentralized nature of health adaptation and resilience 
building. It should work with provincial, territorial, Indigenous, and local government partners 
to identify bodies that make policy decisions to improve health resilience. Mapping these 
accountabilities can more concretely articulate the governance problem that we have framed 
and help start the discussion about how policy decisions that advance health adaptation will 
be coordinated within and across orders of government. 
Central agencies in federal, provincial, and territorial governments should explicitly incorporate 
health resilience into climate lenses to inform cost-benefit analyses and policy decisions. 
All government departments should be directed to identify their role in climate change health 
adaptation and resilience and to take responsibility for those roles in departmental goals, projects 
and decisions. Departments should consider not just overall quantitative costs and benefits of 
alternative actions with respect to climate change health impacts but also the distribution of 
costs and benefits—recognizing that improving the circumstances of disadvantaged groups 
builds overall resilience.
Governments should invest in research on emerging, unknown, and local climate change 
health impacts. 
Successful health adaptation policy must address health risks broadly, not only the narrower set 
of impacts of climate change that are most studied. Broad risks include mental health impacts, 
the effects of changes in wildfire regimes on air quality and respiratory health, the vulnerability of 
health systems themselves to climate change and extreme weather, and the direct and indirect 
effects of ecosystem change on health and well-being. Provincial, territorial, Indigenous, and local 
governments should also invest in better understanding the regional and local health implications 
of climate change, including the exposure and sensitivity of disadvantaged groups.
3
4
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
52
GLOSSARY
The definitions in this section reflect how key terms below are used in this paper and in the discipline 
of climate change adaptation research. Many terms here also have alternate meanings or application 
outside of climate-related contexts.
Adaptation
The ways in which human and natural systems adjust to reduce the harmful effects of 
climate-related changes and capitalize on the benefits.
Adaptive capacity
The combination of the strengths, attributes, and resources available to an individual, 
community, society, or organization that can be used to prepare for and undertake 
actions to reduce negative impacts, reduce harm, or exploit beneficial opportunities 
resulting from climate change.
Baseline
The baseline (or reference) is the state against which change is measured. A “current 
baseline” represents observable, present-day conditions. A “future baseline” is a 
projected future set of conditions excluding the driving factor of interest. Alternative 
interpretations of the reference conditions can give rise to multiple baselines.
Climate
The average weather in a place over a long period of time, typically decades or longer.
Climate change
Changes in the usual climate of the Earth, predominantly caused by the burning of 
fossil fuels, which add heat-trapping gases to Earth’s atmosphere. It manifests as 
overall global warming but also in sea level rise, melting of previously permanent snow 
and ice, and more extreme weather.
Climate extreme 
(extreme weather or 
climate event)
The occurrence of a weather or climate variable (such as temperature) that falls above 
or below the upper or lower limits of observed values for that variable. For simplicity, 
both extreme weather events and extreme climate events are referred to collectively 
as “climate extremes.”
Climate model
A numerical representation of the climate system that is based on the physical, 
chemical, and biological properties of its components, their interactions, and feedback 
processes and that accounts for all or some of its known properties. Climate models 
are applied as a research tool to study and simulate the climate and for operational 
purposes, including monthly, seasonal, and interannual climate predictions.
Climate projections
Estimates of the response of the Earth’s climate to a range of plausible pathways that 
capture the relationships between human choices, greenhouse gas concentrations, and 
temperature change. Climate projections are distinguished from climate predictions to 
emphasize that there is major uncertainty associated with this range of plausible futures 
and that none can generally be predicted to be more likely than others.
Disadvantaged
Individuals or groups that experience barriers in accessing resources and are 
underrepresented in societal institutions. 
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
53
Disaster
Severe alterations in the normal functioning of a community or a society due to hazardous 
physical events interacting with conditions of social vulnerability, leading to widespread 
negative human, material, economic, or environmental effects that require an immediate 
emergency response to satisfy critical needs and may require external support for 
recovery. Disaster risk is the likelihood that a disaster will occur within a specified period.
Exposure
The presence of people; livelihoods; environmental services and resources; 
infrastructure; or economic, social, or cultural assets in places that could be adversely 
affected by climate change.
Hazard
The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event that may 
cause loss of life, injury, or other health impacts, as well as damage or loss to property, 
infrastructure, livelihoods, service provision, or environmental resources.
Heat wave
A period of temperatures higher than what is normally expected (based on historic 
climate averages). Heat waves may span several days to several weeks.
Impacts
Effects on natural and human systems. In this report, the term “impacts” is used to 
refer to the effects on natural and human systems of physical events, disasters, and/or 
climate change.
Incidence
A measure of the frequency with which a symptom or disease, such as heart attack, 
happens in a given population over time.
Mental Illness
A wide range of disorders that affect mood, thinking, and behaviour. Examples include 
depression, anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, and substance use disorders.
Morbidity
Illness. One person can have multiple illnesses (“co-morbidities”). 
Mortality
Death. Rates are typically expressed as the number of deaths per year per 100,000 people. 
Racialized
The process by which people are identified by racial characteristics. Since white people 
have historically held economic and political power in Canada, racialized is generally used 
in a Canadian context to refer to visible minorities.
Resilience
The ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, absorb, accommodate, 
or recover from the effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner, 
including through ensuring the preservation, restoration, or improvement of its 
essential basic structures and functions.
Risk
The potential for consequences where something of value is at stake and where the 
outcome is uncertain. Risk is often represented as probability of the occurrence of 
hazardous events or trends, multiplied by the impacts if these events or trends occur. 
Risk results from the interaction of vulnerability, exposure, and hazard. In this report, 
the term risk is used primarily to refer to the risks of impacts related to climate change.
Sensitivity or 
susceptibility
The degree to which an individual, asset, household, community, business, or 
ecosystem is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by climate variability or change. 
Social determinants 
of health
The broad range of personal, social, economic, and political factors that determine a 
person’s access to healthcare and resources and influence their health. 
Vulnerability
The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, negative effects 
of climate change, including climate variability and extremes.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
54
REFERENCES
Abdillahi, I., & A. Shaw. 2020. Social determinants and inequities in health for Black Canadians: A Snapshot. Social Determinants 
of Health Division, Public Health Agency of Canada.
Achour, N., A.D.F Price. 2010. “Resilience strategies of healthcare facilities: present and future.” International Journal of Disaster 
Resilience in the Built Environment 1(3): 264-276. 
Adger, W. N. 2006. “Vulnerability.” Global Environmental Change 16(3): 268–281.
Adger, W. N., J. M. Pulhin, J. Barnett, G. D. Dabelko, G. K. Hovelsrud, M. Levy, S. Ú. Oswald, C. H. Vogel, U. Oswald Spring & C. H. 
Vogel. 2014. “Human security.” In Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral As­
pects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change, eds. 
C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. 
Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. White. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Allan, B., & J. Smylie. 2015. First Peoples, Second Class Treatment: the Role of Racism in the Health and Well-being of Indige­
nous Peoples in Canada, Discussion Paper. Wellesley Institute.
Angus Reid Institute. 2015. Prescription Drug Access and Affordability an Issue for Nearly a Quarter of all Canadian 
households. Angus Reid Institute. Vancouver, Canada. 
(APA) American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). American Psy­
chiatric Publications.
Aporta, C., E. Higgs, D. Hakken, L. Palmer, M. Palmer, R. Rundstrom, B. Pfaffenberger, G. Wenzel, & T. Widlok. 2005. “Satellite 
culture: global positioning systems, Inuit wayfinding, and the need for a new account of technology.” Current Anthropology 
46(5): 729–753.
Åström, D. O., K. L. Ebi, A. M. Vicedo-Cabrera, & A. Gasparrini. 2018. “Investigating changes in mortality attributable to heat and 
cold in Stockholm, Sweden.” International Journal of Biometeorology 62(9): 1777–1780.
Atkinson, R. W., B. K. Butland, C. Dimitroulopoulou, M. R. Heal, J. R. Stedman, N. Carslaw, D. Jarvis, C. Heaviside, S. Vardoulakis, & 
H. Walton. 2016. “Long-term exposure to ambient ozone and mortality: a quantitative systematic review and meta-analysis of 
evidence from cohort studies.” BMJ Open 6(2), e009493.
Aubry, T., P. Goering, S. Veldhuizen, C. E. Adair, J. Bourque, J. Distasio, E. Latimer, V. Stergiopoulos, J. Somers, D. L. Streiner, & 
S. Tsemberis. 2016. “A multiple-city RCT of housing first with assertive community treatment for homeless Canadians with 
serious mental illness.” Psychiatric Services 67(3): 275–281. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201400587
Austin, S. E., R. Biesbroek, L. Berrang-Ford, J. D. Ford, S. Parker, & Fleury, M. D. 2016. “Public health adaptation to climate 
change in OECD countries.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 13(9): 889.
Austin, S. E., J. D. Ford, L. Berrang-Ford, M. Araos, S. Parker, & M. D. Fleury. 2015. “Public health adaptation to climate change 
in Canadian jurisdictions.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 12(1): 623–651. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph120100623
Austin, S. E., J. D. Ford, L. Berrang-Ford, R. Biesbroek, & N. A. Ross. 2019. “Enabling local public health adaptation to climate 
change.” Social Science & Medicine 220 (January): 236–244.
Awuor, L., R. Meldrum, & E. N. Liberda. 2020. “Institutional engagement practices as barriers to public health capacity in 
climate change policy discourse: Lessons from the Canadian province of Ontario.” International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health 17(17): 1–35. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17176338
Barnett, A. G., S. Hajat, A. Gasparrini, & J. Rocklöv. 2012. “Cold and heat waves in the United States.” Environmental Research 112 
(January): 218–224.
BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy. 2019. Preliminary Strategic Climate Risk Assessment for British 
Columbia. Government of British Columbia.
Beck, A. F., B. Huang, J. M. Simmons, T. Moncrief, H. S. Sauers, C. Chen, P. H. Ryan, N. C. Newman, & R. S. Kahn. 2014. “Role of 
financial and social hardships in asthma racial disparities.” Pediatrics 133(3): 431–439. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-2437

THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
55
Bélanger, D., P. Gosselin, P. Valois, & B. Abdous. 2014. “Perceived adverse health effects of heat and their determinants in de­
prived neighbourhoods: a cross-sectional survey of nine cities in Canada.” International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health 11(11): 11028–11053.
Bell, S. A., & L. A. Folkerth. 2016. “Women’s Mental Health and Intimate Partner Violence Following Natural Disaster: A Scoping 
Review.” Prehospital and Disaster Medicine 31(6): 648–657. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1049023X16000911
Belleville, G., M. C. Ouellet, & C. M. Morin. 2019. “Post-traumatic stress among evacuees from the 2016 Fort McMurray wildfires: 
Exploration of psychological and sleep symptoms three months after the evacuation.” International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health 16(9). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16091604
Berry, P. 2019. “Health Risks and Vulnerabilities Due to Climate Change in Canada: New Evidence and HealthADAPT.” NCCEH 
Seminar by Climate Change and Innovation Bureau, Safe Environments Directorate, Health Canada. May 2019. https://www.nc­
ceh.ca/sites/default/files/NCCEH%20EH%20Seminar%20May%2029%202019_Risks%20and%20Vulnerabilities%20due%20to%20
Climate%20Change%20in%20Canada.pdf
Berry, P., K. Clarke, M. D. Fleury, & S. Parker. 2014. Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adap­
tation. Natural Resources Canada. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Chap­
ter7-Human-Health_Eng.pdf
Beverly, J. L., & P. Bothwell. 2011. “Wildfire evacuations in Canada 1980–2007.” Natural Hazards 59(1): 571–596. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11069-011-9777-9
Bouchard, C., A. Dibernardo, J. Koffi, H. Wood, P. Leighton, & L. Lindsay. 2019. “Increased risk of tick-borne diseases with climate 
and environmental changes.” Canada Communicable Disease Report 45(4): 83–89. https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v45i04a02
Bourque, F., & A. Cunsolo Willox. 2014. “Climate change: The next challenge for public mental health?” International Review of 
Psychiatry 26(4): 415–422. https://doi.org/10.3109/09540261.2014.925851
Boyd, R., J. Eyzaguirre, F. Poulsen, M. Siegle, A. Thompson, S. Yamamoto, A. Osornio-Vargas, & A. Urcelay. 2020. Costing Climate 
Change Impacts on Human Health Across Canada. Canadian Institute for Climate Choices.
Brander, K. 2010. “Impacts of climate change on fisheries.” Journal of Marine Systems 79(3–4): 389–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmarsys.2008.12.015
Bresnahan, A., M. Brindamour, C. Charles, & R. Meili. 2017. Upstream Medicine: Doctors for a Healthy Society. Vancouver, B.C.: 
UBC Press.
Brody, H. 1987. Living Arctic: Hunters of the Canadian North. London, U.K.: Faber and Faber Limited.
Brown, M. R. G., V. Agyapong, A. J. Greenshaw, I. Cribben, P. Brett-MacLean, J. Drolet, C. McDonald-Harker, J. Omeje, M. Man­
kowsi, & S. Noble. 2019. “After the Fort McMurray wildfire there are significant increases in mental health symptoms in grade 
7–12 students compared to controls.” BMC Psychiatry 19(1): 18.
Burton, H., F. Rabito, L. Danielson, & T. K. Takaro. 2016. “Health effects of flooding in Canada: A 2015 review and description of 
gaps in research.” Canadian Water Resources Journal 41(1–2): 238–249. https://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2015.1128854
Bush, E., & D. S. Lemmen, eds. 2019. Canada’s Changing Climate Report. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://chang­
ingclimate.ca/CCCR2019
Cakmak, S., C. Hebbern, J. Vanos, D. L. Crouse, & R. Burnett. 2016. “Ozone exposure and cardiovascular-related mortality in the 
Canadian Census Health and Environment Cohort (CANCHEC) by spatial synoptic classification zone.” Environmental Pollu­
tion 214: 589–599.
Capaldi, D. M., N. B. Knoble, J. W. Shortt, & H. K. Kim. 2012. “A systematic review of risk factors for intimate partner violence.” 
Partner Abuse 3(2): 231–280.
(CCA) Council of Canadian Academies. 2019. Canada’s Top Climate Change Risks: the Expert Panel on Climate Change Risks 
and Adaptation Potential. https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Report-Canada-top-climate-change-risks.pdf
Chan, L., M. Batal, T. Sadik, C. Tikhonov, H. Schwartz, K. Fediuk, A. Ing, L. Marushka, K. Lindhorst, L. Barwin, P. Berti, K. Singh, & 
O. Receveur. 2019. FNFNES Final Report for Eight Assembly of First Nations Regions: Draft Comprehensive Technical Report. 
Assembly of First Nations.
Charron, I. 2016. A Guidebook on Climate Scenarios: Using Climate Information to Guide Adaptation Research and Decisions, 
2016 Edition. Ouranos. https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/Guidebook-2016.pdf
Chestnut, L. G., & P. De Civita. 2009. Economic Valuation of Mortality Risk Reduction. Government of Canada, Policy Research 
Initiative.

THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
56
Christidis, T., A. C. Erickson, A. J. Pappin, D. L. Crouse, L. L. Pinault, S. A. Weichenthal, J. R. Brook, A. van Donkelaar, P. Hystad, 
R. V. Martin, M. Tjepkema, R. T. Burnett, M. Brauer. 2019. “Low concentrations of fine particle air pollution and mortality in the 
Canadian Community Health Survey cohort.” Environmental Health 18(84). 
(CIHI) Canadian Institute for Health Information. 2016. Trends in Income-Related Health Inequalities in Canada: Technical 
Report.
(CIHI) Canadian Institute for Health Information. 2018. Asthma Hospitalizations Among Children and Youth in Canada: Trends 
and Inequalities Chartbook. 
(CIHI) Canadian Institute for Health Information. 2019. National Health Expenditure Trends, 1975 to 2019. https://www.cihi.ca/en/
national-health-expenditure-trends-1975-to-2019
(CIHI) Canadian Institute for Health Information. 2021. “OECD Interactive Tool: International Comparisons.” https://www.cihi.ca/
en/oecd-interactive-tool-international-comparisons
Clark, D. G., & J. D. Ford. 2017. “Emergency response in a rapidly changing Arctic.” CMAJ 189(4): e135–e136). https://doi.org/10.1503/
cmaj.161085
Clark, D. G., J. D. Ford, L. Berrang-Ford, T. Pearce, S. Kowal, & W. A. Gough. 2016a. “The role of environmental factors in search 
and rescue incidents in Nunavut, Canada.” Public Health 137: 44–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2016.06.003
Clark, D. G., J. D. Ford, T. Pearce, & L. Berrang-Ford. 2016b. “Vulnerability to unintentional injuries associated with land-
use activities and search and rescue in Nunavut, Canada.” Social Science and Medicine 169: 18–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2016.09.026
Clow, K. M., P. A. Leighton, N. H. Ogden, L. R. Lindsay, P. Michel, D. L. Pearl, & C. M. Jardine. 2017. “Northward range expansion of 
Ixodes scapularis evident over a short timescale in Ontario, Canada.” PLoS One 12(12), e0189393.
Clow, K. M., N. H. Ogden, L. R. Lindsay, P. Michel, D. L. Pearl, & C. M. Jardine. 2016. “Distribution of ticks and the risk of Lyme dis­
ease and other tick-borne pathogens of public health significance in Ontario, Canada.” Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases 
16(4): 215–222.
(CMHA) Canadian Mental Health Association. 2008. Mental Health Promotion in Ontario: A Call to Action. https://ontario.cmha.
ca/documents/mental-health-promotion-in-ontario-a-call-to-action/
Condon, S., J. McDermid. 2014. Dying on the Streets: Homeless Deaths in British Columbia. Street Corner Media Foundation.
Cruikshank, J. 2007. Do Glaciers Listen? Local knowledge, colonial encounters, and social imagination. Vancouver, B.C.: UBC 
Press.
Cunsolo, A., & N. R. Ellis. 2018. “Ecological grief as a mental health response to climate change-related loss.” Nature Climate 
Change 8(4): 275–281. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0092-2
de Oliveira, C., S. Weir, J. Rangrej, M. D. Krahn, N. Mittmann, J. S. Hoch, K. K. W. Chan, & S. Peacock. 2018. “The economic burden 
of cancer care in Canada: a population-based cost study.” CMAJ Open 6(1): E1–E10. https://doi.org/10.9778/cmajo.20170144
Department of Finance Canada. 2019. Federal Budget. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://www.canada.ca/en/depart­
ment-finance/services/publications/federal-budget.html
Do, M. T., M. Fréchette, S. McFaull, B. Denning, M. Ruta, & W. Thompson. 2013. “Injuries in the North — analysis of 20 years of 
surveillance data collected by the Canadian Hospitals Injury Reporting and Prevention Program.” IJCH 72:1.
Dodd, W., P. Scott, C. Howard, C. Scott, C. Rose, A. Cunsolo, & J. Orbinski. 2018. “Lived experience of a record wildfire season in 
the Northwest Territories, Canada.” Canadian Journal of Public Health 109(3): 327–337.
Doiron, D., E. M. Setton, K. Shairsingh, M. Brauer, P. Hystad, N. A. Ross, & J. R. Brook. 2020. “Healthy built environment: Spatial 
patterns and relationships of multiple exposures and deprivation in Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver.” Environment Interna­
tional 143 (June). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106003
Dominey-Howes, D., A. Gorman-Murray, & S. McKinnon. 2014. “Queering disasters: on the need to account for LGBTI experienc­
es in natural disaster contexts.” Gender, Place & Culture 21(7): 905–918. https://doi.org/10.1080/0966369x.2013.802673
Dumic, I., & E. Severnini. 2018. “‘Ticking Bomb’: The impact of climate change on the incidence of Lyme disease.” Canadian 
Journal of Infectious Diseases and Medical Microbiology Volume 2018. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/5719081
Durkalec, A., C. Furgal, M. W. Skinner, & T. Sheldon. 2015. “Climate change influences on environment as a determinant of In­
digenous health: Relationships to place, sea ice, and health in an Inuit community.” Social Science & Medicine 136: 17–26.
Ebi, K. L., T. Hasegawa, K. Hayes, A. Monaghan, S. Paz, & P. Berry. 2018. “Health risks of warming of 1.5° C, 2° C, and higher, above 
pre-industrial temperatures.” Environmental Research Letters 13(6): 63007.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
57
Ebi, K. L., & J. J. Hess. 2020. “Health risks due to climate change: Inequity in causes and consequences.” Health Affairs 39(12): 
2056–2062. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01125
Ebi, K. L., & D. Mills. 2013. “Winter mortality in a warming climate: a reassessment.” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate 
Change 4(3): 203–212.
(ECCC) Environment and Climate Change Canada. 2018a. Canadian Environmental Sustainability Indicators: Air quality. Gov­
ernment of Canada. https://canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/environmental-indicators/air-quality
(ECCC) Environment and Climate Change Canada. 2018b. Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change: 
Second Annual Synthesis Report on the Status of Implementation. Government of Canada. http://publications.gc.ca/collec­
tions/collection_2018/eccc/En1-77-2018-eng.pdf 
(ECCC) Environment and Climate Change Canada. 2019. Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change: 
Third Annual Synthesis Report on the Status of Implementation. Government of Canada Canada. http://publications.gc.ca/col­
lections/collection_2020/eccc/En1-77-2019-eng.pdf 
Ellis, N. R., & G. A. Albrecht. 2017. “Climate change threats to family farmers’ sense of place and mental wellbeing: A case 
study from the Western Australian Wheatbelt.” Social Science & Medicine 175: 161–168. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2017.01.009
Enarson, E. 1999. “Violence Against Women in Disasters: A Study of Domestic Violence Programs in the United States and Can­
ada.” Violence Against Women 5(7): 742–768. https://doi.org/10.1177/10778019922181464
(ESDC) Employment and Social Development Canada. 2019. Housing First. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://www.
canada.ca/en/employment-social-development/programs/homelessness/resources/housing-first.html
Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience Results. 2018. Measuring Progress on Adaptation and Climate 
Resilience: Recommendations to the Government of Canada. Environment Climate Change Canada.
Feltmate, B., & M. Moudrak. 2016. Climate Change and the Preparedness of Canadian Provinces and Yukon to Limit Potential 
Flood Damage. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/
wp-content/uploads/docs/Climate%20Change%20and%20the%20Preparedness%20of%20Canadian%20Provinces%20and%20
Yukon%20%28Oct%2031%202016%29.pdf
Flouris, A. D., P. C. Dinas, L. G. Ioannou, L. Nybo, G. Havenith, G. P. Kenny, & T. Kjellstrom. 2018. “Workers’ health and productivity 
under occupational heat strain: a systematic review and meta-analysis.” The Lancet Planetary Health 2(12): e521–e531.
Ford, J. D., A. Cunsolo Willox, S. Chatwood, C. Furgal, S. Harper, I. Mauro, & T. Pearce. 2014. “Adapting to the Effects of Climate 
Change on Inuit Health.” American Journal of Public Health 104: e9–e17. https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2013.301724
Ford, J. D., D. G. Clark, & A. Naylor. 2019a. “Food insecurity in Nunavut: Are we going from bad to worse?” CMAJ 191(20): e550–
e551. https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.190497
Ford, J. D., D. G. Clark, T. Pearce, L. Berrang-Ford, L. Copland, J. Dawson, M. New, & S. L. Harper. 2019b. “Changing access to ice, 
land and water in Arctic communities.” Nature Climate Change 9(4): 335–339. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0435-7
Ford, J. D., J. Labbé, M. Flynn, M. Araos, & I. R. Team. 2017. “Readiness for climate change adaptation in the Arctic: a case study 
from Nunavut, Canada.” Climatic Change 145(1–2): 85–100.
Ford, J. D., G. McDowell, J. Shirley, M. Pitre, R. Siewierski, W. Gough, F. Duerden, T. Pearce, P. Adams, & S. Statham. 2013. “The 
Dynamic Multiscale Nature of Climate Change Vulnerability: An Inuit Harvesting Example.” Annals of the Association of Amer­
ican Geographers 103(5): 1193–1211. https://doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2013.776880
Ford, J. D., T. Pearce, & G. McDowell. 2015. “The adaptation challenge in the Arctic.” Nature Climate Change 5(12): 1046–1053.
Gaetz, S., F. Scott, & T. Gulliver. 2013. Housing First in Canada. Canadian Homelessness Research Network. http://www.home­
lesshub.ca/sites/default/files/HousingFirstInCanada.pdf
Gasmi, S., N. H. Ogden, L. R. Lindsay, S. Burns, S. Fleming, J. Badcock, S. Hanan, C. Gaulin, M. A. Leblanc, & C. Russell. 2017. “Emerg­
ing Infections: Surveillance for Lyme disease in Canada, 2009–2015.” Canada Communicable Disease Report 43(10): 194.
Gearhart, S., M. Perez-Patron, T. A. Hammond, D. W. Goldberg, A. Klein, & J. A. Horney. 2018. “The Impact of Natural Disasters on 
Domestic Violence: An Analysis of Reports of Simple Assault in Florida (1999-2007).” Violence and Gender 5(2): 87–92. https://
doi.org/10.1089/vio.2017.0077
Ghazali, D. A., M. Guericolas, F. Thys, F. Sarasin, P. Arcos González, & E. Casalino. 2018. “Climate change impacts on disaster and 
emergency medicine focusing on mitigation disruptive effects: An international perspective.” International Journal of Envi­
ronmental Research and Public Health 15(7): 1–13. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15071379

THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
58
Graveland, B. 2014. “2013 Alberta flood credited with rises in domestic violence, stress.” CTV News, June 25 2014. https://www.
ctvnews.ca/canada/increased-domestic-violence-and-stress-in-aftermath-of-last-year-s-alberta-floods-1.1885861
Guo, E. X., A. Sweetman, & G. E. Guindon. 2020. “Socioeconomic differences in prescription drug supplemental coverage in 
Canada: A repeated cross-sectional study.” Health Policy 124(3): 252–260. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2019.12.007
Guttmann A., S. Gandhi, S. Wanigaratne, H. Lu, L.E. Ferreira-Legere, J. Paul, P. Gozdyra, T. Campbell, H. Chung, K. Fung, B. Chen, 
J. C. Kwong, L. Rosella, B. R. Shaw, N. Saunders, J. M. Patterson, S.E. Bronskill, M. Azimaee, M. J. Vereulen, & M. J. Schull. 2020. 
COVID-19 in Immigrants, Refugees and Other Newcomers in Ontario: Characteristics of Those Tested and Those Confirmed 
Positive, as of June 13, 2020. ICES. https://www.ices.on.ca/Publications/Atlases-and-Reports/2020/COVID-19-in-Immigrants-Ref­
ugees-and-Other-Newcomers-in-Ontario 
Haider, W., D. Knowler, R. Trenholm, J. Moore, P. Bradshaw, & K. Lertzman. 2019. “Climate Change, Increasing Forest Fire Inci­
dence and the Value of Visibility: Evidence from British Columbia, Canada.” Canadian Journal of Forest Research 49(10).
Harun, N.-S., P. Lachapelle, & J. Douglass. 2019. “Thunderstorm-triggered asthma: what we know so far.” Journal of Asthma 
and Allergy 12: 101–108.
Hayes, K., P. Berry, & K. L. Ebi. 2019. “Factors influencing the mental health consequences of climate change in Canada.” Inter­
national Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 16(9). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16091583
Hayes, K., G. Blashki, J. Wiseman, S. Burke, & L. Reifels. 2018. “Climate change and mental health: Risks, impacts and priority 
actions.” International Journal of Mental Health Systems 12(1): 28. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13033-018-0210-6
Healey, G. K., K. M. Magner, R. Ritter, R. Kamookak, A. Aningmiuq, B. Issaluk, K. Mackenzie, L. Allardyce, A. Stockdale, & P. Moffit. 
2011. “Community perspectives on the impact of climate change on health in Nunavut, Canada.” Arctic 64(1): 89–97.
Health Canada. 2019. Health Impacts of Air Pollution in Canada: Estimates of Morbidity and Premature Mortality Outcomes, 
2019 Report. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Health Canada. 2020. “Risk of Lyme disease to Canadians.” Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://www.canada.ca/en/
public-health/services/diseases/lyme-disease/risk-lyme-disease.html
Hess, J. J., M. Eidson, J. E. Tlumak, K. K. Raab, & G. Luber. 2014. “An evidence-based public health approach to climate change 
adaptation.” Environmental Health Perspectives 122(11): 1177.
Hess, J. J., J. N. Malilay, & A. J. Parkinson. 2008. “Climate Change. The Importance of Place.” American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine 35(5): 468–478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.024
Hetherington, E., S. McDonald, M. Wu, & S. Tough. 2018. “Risk and protective factors for mental health and community cohesion 
after the 2013 Calgary flood.” Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness 12(4): 470–477. https://doi.org/10.1017/dmp.2017.91
Ho, H. C., A. Knudby, B. B. Walker, & S. B. Henderson. 2017. “Delineation of spatial variability in the temperature-mortality rela­
tionship on extremely hot days in greater Vancouver, Canada.” Environmental Health Perspectives 125(1): 66–75.
Human Rights Watch. 2020. “My Fear Is Losing Everything”: The Climate Crisis and First Nations’ Right to Food in Canada. 
https://www.hrw.org/report/2020/10/21/my-fear-losing-everything/climate-crisis-and-first-nations-right-food-canada# 
Huntington, H. P., S. Gearheard, L. K. Holm, G. Noongwook, M. Opie, & J. Sanguya. 2017. “Sea ice is our beautiful garden: indige­
nous perspectives on sea ice in the Arctic.” In Sea Ice, Third Edition, ed. D. N. Thomas. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
(INSPQ) Institut National de Santé Publique du Québec. 2018. Rapport de Surveillance de la maladie de Lyme: Année 2017. 
Gouvernement du Québec. Quebec City, QC. https://www.canada.ca/fr/sante-publique/services/maladies/maladie-lyme/sur­
veillance-maladie-lyme.html
(IPCC) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, Contributions of 
Working Group I to The Fifth Assessment Report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
(ITK) Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami. 2019. National Inuit Climate Change Strategy. https://www.itk.ca/national-inuit-cli­
mate-change-strategy/
Jong, M., I. Mendez, & R. Jong. 2019. “Enhancing access to care in northern rural communities via telehealth.” International 
Journal of Circumpolar Health 78(2). https://doi.org/10.1080/22423982.2018.1554174
Karetak, J., F. Tester, & S. Tagalik. 2017. What Inuit Have Always Known to Be True. Fernwood Publishing.
Kinney, P. L., J. Schwartz, M. Pascal, E. Petkova, A. Le Tertre, S. Medina, & R. Vautard. 2015. “Winter season mortality: will climate 
warming bring benefits?” Environmental Research Letters 10(6): 64016.
Kirchmeier-Young, M. C., N. P. Gillett, F. W. Zwiers, A. J. Cannon, & F. S. Anslow. 2019. “Attribution of the Influence of Human-In­
duced Climate Change on an Extreme Fire Season.” Earth’s Future 7(1): 2–10. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018EF001050
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
59
Kjellstrom, T., D. Briggs, C. Freyberg, B. Lemke, M. Otto, & O. Hyatt. 2016. “Heat, Human Performance, and Occupational Health: 
A Key Issue for the Assessment of Global Climate Change Impacts.” Annual Review of Public Health 37: 97–112. https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-032315-021740
Kowalewski, K., J. D. McLennan, & P. J. McGrath. 2011. “A preliminary investigation of wait times for child and adolescent mental 
health services in Canada.” Journal of the Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 20(2): 112–119.
Kreatsoulas, C., & S. S. Anand. 2010. “The impact of social determinants on cardiovascular disease.” Canadian Journal of Cardi­
ology 26: 8C-13C. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0828-282X(10)71075-8
Labbé, J., J. D. Ford, M. Araos, & M. Flynn. 2017. “The government-led climate change adaptation landscape in Nunavut, Cana­
da.” Environmental Reviews 25(1): 12–25.
Latimer, E. A., D. Rabouin, Z. Cao, A. Ly, G. Powell, T. Aubry, J. Distasio, S. W. Hwang, J. M. Somers, A. M. Bayoumi, C. Mitton, E. E. 
M. Moodie, & P. N. Goering. 2020. “Cost-effectiveness of housing first with assertive community treatment: Results from the 
Canadian at home/chez soi trial.” Psychiatric Services 71(10): 1020–1030. https://doi.org/10.1176/APPI.PS.202000029
Lawson, M. 2019. “The Science of the Sacred: Bridging Global Indigenous Medicine Systems and Modern Scientific Principles.” 
Whispering Wind 47(3): 42.
Le Bris, A., K. E. Mills, R. A. Wahle, Y. Chen, M. A. Alexander, A. J. Allyn, J. G. Schuetz, J. D. Scott, & A. J. Pershing. 2018. “Climate 
vulnerability and resilience in the most valuable North American fishery.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America 115(8): 1831–1836. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1711122115
Leung, K. H. Y., C. A. Arnillas, V. Y. S. Cheng, W. A. Gough, & G. B. Arhonditsis. 2020. “Seasonality patterns and distinctive signature of 
latitude and population on ozone concentrations in Southern Ontario, Canada.” Atmospheric Environment 246 (February): 118077.
Lim, K.-L., P. Jacobs, A. Ohinmaa, & C. S. Dewa. 2008. “A new population-based measure of the economic burden of mental 
illness in Canada.” Chronic Diseases in Canada 28(3). 
Limaye, V. S., W. Max, J. Constible, & K. Knowlton. 2019. “Estimating the Health-Related Costs of 10 Climate-Sensitive U.S. Events 
During 2012.” GeoHealth 3(9): 245–265. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019GH000202
Liu, J. C., G. Pereira, S. A. Uhl, M. A. Bravo, & M. L. Bell. 2015. “A systematic review of the physical health impacts from non-occu­
pational exposure to wildfire smoke.” Environmental Research 136: 120–132.
Lucyk, K., & L. McLaren. 2017. “Taking stock of the social determinants of health: A scoping review.” PLOS ONE 12(5): e0177306. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0177306
Ly, A., & E. Latimer. 2015. “Housing First impact on costs and associated cost offsets: A review of the literature.” Canadian Jour­
nal of Psychiatry 60(11): 475–487. https://doi.org/10.1177/070674371506001103
Marmot, M. 2005. “Social determinants of health inequalities.” The Lancet 365(9464): 1099–1104. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(05)71146-6 
Marshall-Catlin, E., T. Bushnik, & M. Tjepkema. 2019. Health Reports Trends in mortality inequalities among the adult house­
hold population. Statistics Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Martin, D., A. P. Miller, A. Quesnel-Vallée, N. R. Caron, B. Vissandjée, & G. P. Marchildon. 2018. “Canada’s universal health-care 
system: achieving its potential.” The Lancet 391(10131): 1718–1735. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30181-8
Martin, S. L., S. Cakmak, C. A. Hebbern, M. L. Avramescu, & N. Tremblay. 2012. “Climate change and future temperature-related 
mortality in 15 Canadian cities.” International Journal of Biometeorology 56(4): 605–619. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-011-
0449-y
Matz, C. J., M. Egyed, G. Xi, J. Racine, R. Pavlovic, R. Rittmaster, S. B. Henderson, & D. M. Stieb. 2020. “Health impact analysis of 
PM2.5 from wildfire smoke in Canada (2013–2015, 2017–2018).” Science of the Total Environment 725: 138506.
McDermott, S., A. Harding, & J. Randle. 2019. The Characteristics of Shelter Residents. Statistics Canada. https://www150.stat­
can.gc.ca/n1/pub/75f0002m/75f0002m2019004-eng.htm
McDowell, G. 2020. “Why mountains matter in Canada.” Canadian Geographic. https://www.canadiangeographic.ca/article/
why-mountains-matter-canada
McKelvey, L., & H. Heacock. 2017. “Environmental health officers and climate change adaptation in British Columbia.” BCIT 
Environmental Public Health Journal 2: 1–14. https://doi.org/10.47339/ephj.2017.76
Metropolitan Transportation Commission. 2017. “Ozone Concentrations.” https://www.vitalsigns.mtc.ca.gov/ozone-concentra­
tions
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
60
Middleton, J., A. Cunsolo, A. Jones-Bitton, C. J. Wright, & S. L. Harper. 2020. “Indigenous mental health in a changing climate: 
A systematic scoping review of the global literature.” Environmental Research Letters 15(5). https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/
ab68a9
(MMIWG) National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls. 2019. Reclaiming Power and Place: The 
Final Report of the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls. 
Murage, P., S. Hajat, & R. S. Kovats. 2017. “Effect of night-time temperatures on cause and age-specific mortality in London.” 
Environmental Epidemiology 1(2): e005. https://doi.org/10.1097/EE9.0000000000000005
Nader, F., F. Kolahdooz, & S. Sharm. 2017. “Assessing health care access and use among indigenous peoples in Alberta: A sys­
tematic review.” Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 28(4): 1286–1303. https://doi.org/10.1353/hpu.2017.0114
Native Women’s Association of Canada. 2020. Toolkit — Impact of Climate Change on Indigenous Women, Girls, Gender-Di­
verse, and Two-Spirit People.
Nelson, S. E., & K. Wilson. 2017. “The mental health of Indigenous peoples in Canada: A critical review of research.” Social Sci­
ence and Medicine 176: 93–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.01.021
Neria, Y, N., & S. Galea. 2008. “Post-traumatic stress disorder following disasters: a systematic review.” Psychological medicine 
38(4): 467–480. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291707001353
Ness, R., D. Sawyer, & R. Street. 2020. “Climate Impacts Are Getting Worse. Canada Must Adapt.” Canadian Institute for Climate 
Choices. https://climatechoices.ca/climate-impacts-are-getting-worse-canada-must-adapt/
Neufeld, H. T., C. A. M. Richmond, & Southwest Ontario Aboriginal Health Access Centre. 2017. “Impacts of place and social 
spaces on traditional food systems in southwestern Ontario.” International Journal of Indigenous Health 12(1): 93. https://doi.
org/10.18357/ijih112201716903
(NRCan) Natural Resources Canada. 2020. The State of Canada’s Forests. Annual Report 2020. Government of Canada. Otta­
wa, ON. https://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/publications?id=40219&lang=en_CA
(OAG) Office of the Auditor General. 2017. “Civil aviation infrastructure in the North — Transport Canada.” In Reports of the 
Auditor General of Canada to the Parliament of Canada. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON.
(OAG) Office of the Auditor General. 2018. Perspectives on Climate Change Action in Canada — A Collaborative Report from 
Auditors General. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Ogden, N. 2008. “Risk maps for range expansion of the Lyme disease vector, Ixodes scapularis, in Canada now and with 
climate change.” International Journal of Health Geographics 7: 24. https://ij-healthgeographics.biomedcentral.com/arti­
cles/10.1186/1476-072X-7-24
Ogden, N., & P. Gachon. 2019. “Climate change and infectious diseases: What can we expect?” Canada Communicable Dis­
ease Report 45(4): 76–80. https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v45i04a01
Ogden, N. H., L. R. Lindsay, M. Morshed, P. N. Sockett, & H. Artsob. 2009. “The emergence of Lyme disease in Canada.” CMAJ 
180(12): 1221–1224. https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.080148
Ogden, N. H., A. Maarouf, I. K. Barker, M. Bigras-Poulin, L. R. Lindsay, M. G. Morshed, C. J. O’Callaghan, F. Ramay, D. Walt­
ner-Toews, & D. F. Charron. 2005. “Climate change and the potential for range expansion of the Lyme disease vector Ixodes 
scapularis in Canada.” International Journal for Parasitology 36(1): 63–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpara.2005.08.016
(OMH) Ontario Ministry of Health. 2020. COVID-19 Infection in Toronto: Ethno-racial Identity and Income. Government of On­
tario. Toronto, ON.
Orlov, A., J. Sillmann, K. Aunan, T. Kjellstrom, & A. Aaheim. 2020. “Economic costs of heat-induced reductions in worker produc­
tivity due to global warming.” Global Environmental Change 63.
Osofsky, H. J., J. D. Osofsky, J. Arey, M. E. Kronenberg, T. Hansel, & M. Many. 2011. “Hurricane Katrina’s first responders: The strug­
gle to protect and serve in the aftermath of the disaster.” Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness 5(S2): S214–S219. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/dmp.2011.53
Parkinson, D. 2019. “Investigating the Increase in Domestic Violence Post Disaster: An Australian Case Study.” Journal of Inter­
personal Violence 34(11): 2333–2362. https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260517696876
Patel, A. 2019. “Access to Mental Healthcare in Indigenous Communities Across Canada.” Global Health: Annual Review 1(4).
Paterson, J., P. Berry, K. Ebi, & L. Varangu. 2014. “Health care facilities resilient to climate change impacts.” International Jour­
nal of Environmental Research and Public Health 11(12): 13097–13116. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph111213097
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
61
Patterson, A. C., & G. Veenstra. 2016. “Black-White health inequalities in Canada at the intersection of gender and immigra­
tion.” Canadian Journal of Public Health 107(3): e278–e284. https://doi.org/10.17269/CJPH.107.5336
(PBO) Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer. 2017. FSR 2017 — Provincial-Territorial Health Care Cost Drivers.
(PHAC) Public Health Agency of Canada. 2010. Economic Burden of Illness in Canada, 2010. Government of Canada. Ottawa, 
ON. https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/phac-aspc/documents/services/publications/science-research/economic-burden-ill­
ness-canada-2010/economic-burden-illness-canada-2010.pdf
(PHAC) Public Health Agency of Canada. 2017. Science Narrative: Climate Change Impacts on the Health of Canadians. Gov­
ernment of Canada. Ottawa, ON. http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2017/aspc-phac/HP5-122-2017-eng.pdf
(PHAC) Public Health Agency of Canada. 2018. Key Health Inequalities in Canada: A National Portrait. Government of Canada. 
Ottawa, ON.
(PHAC) Public Health Agency of Canada. 2020. Surveillance of Lyme Disease. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Phillips-Beck, W., R. Eni, J. G. Lavoie, K. A. Kinew, G. K. Achan, & A. Katz. 2020. “Confronting racism within the Canadian health­
care system: Systemic exclusion of First Nations from quality and consistent care.” International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health 17(22): 1–20. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17228343
Pollock, N. J., G. K. Healey, M. Jong, J. E. Valcour, & S. Mulay. 2018. “Tracking progress in suicide prevention in Indigenous 
communities: A challenge for public health surveillance in Canada.” BMC Public Health 18(1): 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12889-018-6224-9
Pong, R. W., & J. R. Pitblado. 2005. Geographic Distribution of Physicians in Canada: Beyond How Many and Where. Cana­
dian Institute for Health Information. Ottawa, ON. https://secure.cihi.ca/free_products/Geographic_Distribution_of_Physi­
cians_FINAL_e.pdf 
Poremski, D., J. Distasio, S. W. Hwang, & E. Latimer. 2015. “Employment and income of people who experience men­
tal illness and homelessness in a large Canadian sample.” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 60(9): 379–385. https://doi.
org/10.1177/070674371506000902
Power, E. M. 2008. “Conceptualizing food security for Aboriginal people in Canada.” Canadian Journal of Public Health 99(2): 
95–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf03405452
Prairie Climate Centre. 2019. Climate Atlas of Canada.
Public Health Ontario. 2020a. “Lyme Disease.” https://www.publichealthontario.ca/en/diseases-and-conditions/infectious-dis­
eases/vector-borne-zoonotic-diseases/lyme-disease
Public Health Ontario. 2020b. Rapid Review: Substance Use-related Harms and Risk Factors During Periods of Disruption. 
https://www.publichealthontario.ca/-/media/documents/ncov/main/2020/08/substance-use-related-harms-disruption.pdf?la=en
Rao, S. 2020. “A natural disaster and intimate partner violence: Evidence over time.” Social Science & Medicine 247: 112804. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.112804
Ready, E., & P. Collings. 2020. “‘All the problems in the community are multifaceted and related to each other’: Inuit concerns 
in an era of climate change.” American Journal of Human Biology e23516. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/ajhb.23516
Reid, C. E., M. Brauer, F. H. Johnston, M. Jerrett, J. R. Balmes, & C. T. Elliott. 2016. “Critical review of health impacts of wildfire 
smoke exposure.” Environmental Health Perspectives 124(9): 1334–1343.
Rezayat, A. A., S. Sahebdel, S. Jafari, A. Kabirian, A. M. Rahnejat, R. H. Farahani, R. Mosaed, & M. G. Nour. 2020. “Evaluating the 
Prevalence of PTSD among Children and Adolescents after Earthquakes and Floods: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” 
Psychiatric Quarterly 91(4): 1265–1290. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11126-020-09840-4
Ribot, J. 2014. “Cause and response: vulnerability and climate in the Anthropocene.” Journal of Peasant Studies 41(5): 667–705.
Richards, G., J. Frehs, E. Myers, & M. Van Bibber. 2019. “The climate change and health adaptation program: Indigenous climate 
leaders’ championing adaptation efforts.” Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada 39(4): 127–130. https://
doi.org/10.24095/hpcdp.39.4.03
Richmond, C., R. B. Kerr, H. Neufeld, M. Steckley, K. Wilson, & B. Dokis. 2021. “Supporting food security for Indigenous families 
through the restoration of Indigenous foodways.” Canadian Geographer 65(1): 97-109. https://doi.org/10.1111/cag.12677
Richmond, C. A. M., & N. A. Ross. 2009. “The determinants of First Nation and Inuit health: A critical population health ap­
proach.” Health and Place 15(2): 403–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2008.07.004
Rinner, C., & M. Hussain. 2011. “Toronto’s urban heat island — Exploring the relationship between land use and surface tem­
perature.” Remote Sensing 3(6): 1251–1265. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs3061251
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
62
Robinne, F. N., K. D. Bladon, U. Silins, M. B. Emelko, M. D. Flannigan, M. A. Parisien, X. Wang, S. W. Kienzle, & D. P. Dupont. 
2019. “A regional-scale index for assessing the exposure of drinking-water sources to wildfires.” Forests 10(5): 1–21. https://doi.
org/10.3390/f10050384
Rosenzweig, C., S. Gaffin, & L. Parshall. 2003. Green Roofs in the New York Metropolitan Region. Columbia University Center for 
Climate Systems Research & NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies.
Sahni, V., A. N. Scott, M. Beliveau, M. Varughese, D. C. Dover, & J. Talbot. 2016. “Public health surveillance response following the 
southern Alberta floods, 2013.” Canadian Journal of Public Health 107(2): e142–e148. https://doi.org/10.17269/CJPH.107.5188
Santé Montréal. 2019. Extreme Heat: 66 Deaths in Montreal in 2018. Gouvernement du Québec. Quebec City, QC
Sarofim, M. C., S. Saha, M. D. Hawkins, D. M. Mills, J. Hess, R. Horton, P. Kinney, J. Schwartz, & A. St. Juliana. 2016. “Ch. 2: Tem­
perature-Related Death and Illness.” In The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific 
Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program. https://doi.org/10.7930/J0MG7MDX
Sawyer, D., R. Ness, D. G. Clark, & D. Beugin. 2020. Tip of the Iceberg: Navigating the Known and Unknown Costs of Climate 
Change for Canada. Canadian Institute for Climate Choices. https://climatechoices.ca/reports/tip-of-the-iceberg/
Schmeltz, M. T., & J. L. Gamble. 2017. “Risk characterization of hospitalizations for mental illness and/or behavioral disorders 
with concurrent heat-related illness.” PLoS ONE 12(10): 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0186509
Schnitter, R., & P. Berry. 2019. “The climate change, food security and human health nexus in Canada: a framework to protect 
population health.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 16(14): 2531.
Scott, D., A. Minano, L. Chakraborty, D. Henstra, J. Thistlethwaite, & Y. Apajee. 2020. Flood Risk Analysis of Canadian Health and 
Emergency Infrastructure. Health Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Sellers, S. 2018. Climate Change and Gender in Canada: A Review. Women’s Environment & Development Organization. 
https://wedo.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/GGCA-CA-RP-07.pdf
Shahidi, F. V., A. Parnia, & A. Siddiqi. 2020. “Trends in socioeconomic inequalities in premature and avoidable mortality in Cana­
da, 1991–2016.” CMAJ, 192(39), E1114–E1128. https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.191723
Shapiro, E. D. 2014. “Lyme disease.” New England Journal of Medicine 370(18): 1724–1731.
Smart Prosperity. 2020. Thinking about Health Co-benefits in a Green Recovery.
Smetanin, P., C. Briante, D. Stiff, S. Ahmad, & M. Khan. 2015. The Life and Economic Impact of Major Mental Illnesses in Cana­
da: 2011 to 2041. RiskAnalytics, on behalf of Mental Health Commission of Canada.
Smit, B., I. Burton, R. J. T. Klein, & J. Wandel. 2000. “An anatomy of adaptation to climate change and variability.” Climatic 
Change 45(1): 223–251. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1005661622966
Statistics Canada. 2013. Canadian Community Health Survey: Annual Component. 
Statistics Canada. 2016. Family Violence in Canada: A Statistical Profile, 2016. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/85-
002-x/2018001/article/54893-eng.htm
Statistics Canada. 2019. Population Projections for Canada (2018–2068), Provinces and Territories (2018–2043): Technical Re­
port on Methodology and Assumptions. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/91-620-x/91-620-x2019001-eng.htm
Stewart, R. E., D. Betancourt, J. B. Davies, D. Harford, Y. Klein, R. Lannigan, L. Mortsch, E. O’Connell, K. Tang, & P. H. Whitfield. 2017. 
“A multi-perspective examination of heat waves affecting Metro Vancouver: Now into the future.” Natural Hazards 87(2): 791–815.
Stockwell, T., & M. Young. 2018. Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms (2007-2014). Canadian Centre on Substance Use and 
Addiction. https://www.ccsa.ca/sites/default/files/2019-04/CSUCH-Canadian-Substance-Use-Costs-Harms-Report-2018-en.pdf
Streicker, J. 2016. Yukon Climate Change Indicators and Key Findings 2015. Northern Climate ExChange, Yukon Research 
Centre, Yukon College. 
Suicide Prevention Resource Centre. 2008. Sexual Minorities and Suicide Prevention.
Sun, Q., C. Miao, M. Hanel, A. G. L. Borthwick, Q. Duan, D. Ji, & H. Li. 2019. “Global heat stress on health, wildfires, and agricultural 
crops under different levels of climate warming.” Environment International 128: 125–136.
Sutherland, G. 2016. Healthy Brains at Work: Estimating the Impact of Workplace Mental Health Benefits and Programs. The 
Conference Board of Canada.
Tan, X., S. Chen, T. Y. Gan, B. Liu, & X. Chen. 2019. “Dynamic and thermodynamic changes conducive to the increased occur­
rence of extreme spring fire weather over western Canada under possible anthropogenic climate change.” Agricultural and 
Forest Meteorology 265: 269–279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2018.11.026
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
63
Tarasuk, V., & A. Mitchell. 2020. “Household Food Insecurity in Canada.” Topics in Clinical Nutrition 20(4): 299–312. https://doi.
org/10.1097/00008486-200510000-00003
Tester, F. J. 2010. “Mad dogs and (mostly) Englishmen: Colonial relations, commodities, and the fate of Inuit sled dogs.” Études/
Inuit/Studies 34(2): 129–147. https://www.erudit.org/en/journals/etudinuit/2010-v34-n2-etudinuit5000473/1004073ar.pdf
Tester, F. J., & P. Irniq. 2008. “Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit: Social history, politics and the practice of resistance.” Arctic 61(5) 48–61.
Thien, F., P. J. Beggs, D. Csutoros, J. Darvall, M. Hew, J. M. Davies, P. G. Bardin, T. Bannister, S. Barnes, & R. Bellomo. 2018. “The 
Melbourne epidemic thunderstorm asthma event 2016: An investigation of environmental triggers, effect on health services, 
and patient risk factors.” The Lancet Planetary Health 2(6): e255–e263.
Thomson, M. S., F. Chaze, U. George, & S. Guruge. 2015. “Improving Immigrant Populations’ Access to Mental Health Services in 
Canada: A Review of Barriers and Recommendations.” Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health 17(6): 1895–1905. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10903-015-0175-3
(TRC) Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. 2015. Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada: Calls to Action. 
Tschakert, P., J. Barnett, N. Ellis, C. Lawrence, N. Tuana, M. New, C. Elrick-Barr, R. Pandit, & D. Pannell. 2017. “Climate change and 
loss, as if people mattered: Values, places, and experiences.” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 8(5): 1–19. https://
doi.org/10.1002/wcc.476
Veenstra, G., & A. C. Patterson. 2016. “Black–White Health Inequalities in Canada.” Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health 
18(1): 51–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10903-014-0140-6
Vincent, L. A., X. Zhang, É. Mekis, H. Wan, & E. J. Bush. 2018. “Changes in Canada’s Climate: Trends in Indices Based on Daily 
Temperature and Precipitation Data.” Atmosphere-Ocean 56(5): 332–349. https://doi.org/10.1080/07055900.2018.1514579
Vivid Economics. 2019. Accelerated Electrification and the GB Electricity System. Report prepared for Committee on Climate 
Change. https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/CCC-Accelerated-Electrification-Vivid-Economics-Imperial.pdf
Waldron, I. 2018. There’s Something in the Water: Environmental Racism in indigenous and Black Communities. Halifax, NS: 
Fernwood Publishing.
Wang, X., E. Lavigne, H. Ouellette-Kuntz, & B. E. Chen. 2014. “Acute impacts of extreme temperature exposure on emergency 
room admissions related to mental and behavior disorders in Toronto, Canada.” Journal of Affective Disorders 155(1): 154–161. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2013.10.042
Wang, X., K. Studens, M.-A. Parisien, S. W. Taylor, J.-N. Candau, Y. Boulanger, & M. D. Flannigan. 2020. “Projected changes in fire 
size from daily spread potential in Canada over the 21st century.” Environmental Research Letters 15(10): 104048.
Watts, N., W. N. Adge, P. Agnolucci, J. Blackstock, P. Byass, W. Cai, S. Chaytor, T. Colbourn, M. Collins, & A. Cooper. 2015. “Health 
and climate change: policy responses to protect public health.” The Lancet 386(10006): 1861–1914.
Watts, N., M. Amann, N. Arnell, S. Ayeb-Karlsson, J. Beagley, K. Belesova, M. Boykoff, P. Byass, W. Cai, & D. Campbell-Lendrum. 
2020. “The 2020 report of The Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: responding to converging crises.” The Lancet 
397(10269): 129–170.
Watts, N., M. Amann, N. Arnell, S. Ayeb-Karlsson, K. Belesova, M. Boykoff, P. Byass, W. Cai, D. Campbell-Lendrum, & S. Capstick. 
2019. “The 2019 report of The Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: ensuring that the health of a child born today 
is not defined by a changing climate. The Lancet 394(10211): 1836–1878.
Wenzel, G. 2009. “Canadian Inuit subsistence and ecological instability—if the climate changes, must the Inuit?” Polar Re­
search 28(1): 89–99.
Wenzel, G. 2013. “Inuit and Modern Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence.” Inuit Studies 37(2): 181–200.
(WHO) World Health Organization. 2015. Operational Framework for Building Climate Resilient Health Systems. World Health 
Organisation.
(WHO) World Health Organization. 2019. Health and Climate Change Survey Report Tracking Global Progress. http://apps.
who.int/bookorders
Williams, L., A. Fletcher, C. Hanson, J. Neapole, & M. Pollack. 2018. Women and Climate Change Impacts and Action in Can­
ada: Feminist, Indigenous, and Intersectional Perspectives. Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women & 
the Alliance for Intergenerational Resilience. https://www.criaw-icref.ca/images/userfiles/files/Women%20and%20Climate%20
Change_FINAL.pdf
Wotton, B. M., M. D. Flannigan, & G. A. Marshall. 2017. “Potential climate change impacts on fire intensity and key wildfire sup­
pression thresholds in Canada.” Environmental Research Letters 12(9): 95003.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
64
Wyllie de Echeverria, V. R., & T. F. Thornton. 2019. “Using traditional ecological knowledge to understand and adapt to climate 
and biodiversity change on the Pacific coast of North America.” Ambio 48(12): 1447–1469. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-019-
01218-6
Young, T. K., T. Tabish, S. K. Young, & G. Healey. 2019. “Patient transportation in Canada’s northern territories: patterns, costs and 
providers’ perspectives.” Rural and Remote Health 19(2): 5113. https://doi.org/10.22605/RRH5113
Yssaad, L., & A. Fields. 2018. The Canadian Immigrant Labour Market: Recent Trends from 2006 to 2017. Statistics Canada. 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/71-606-x/71-606-x2018001-eng.htm
Zivin, J., & M. Neidell. 2014. “Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications for climate change.” Journal of Labor Eco­
nomics 32(1): 1–26.
THE HEALTH COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE: How Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives
65
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Staff Authors:
Dylan Clark, Senior Research Associate, Canadian Institute 
for Climate Choices
Ryan Ness, Adaptation Research Director, Canadian Institute 
for Climate Choices
Dena Coffman, Research Assistant, Canadian Institute for 
Climate Choices
Dale Beugin, Vice President, Research and Analysis, 
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices
Adaptation Panel Report Working Group: 
Ashlee Cunsolo, Founding Dean, School of Arctic and 
Subarctic Studies, Labrador Institute of Memorial University
Daniel Scott, Executive Director, Interdisciplinary Centre on 
Climate Change, University of Waterloo
Deborah Harford, ACT (the Adaptation to Climate Change 
Team), Faculty of Environment, Simon Fraser University
Ian Mauro, Executive Director, Prairie Climate Centre 
Deborah McGregor, Canada Research Chair, Indigenous 
Environmental Justice, York University
External Reviewers:
Sherilee Harper, Associate Professor, University of Alberta
Renée Monchalin, Assistant Professor, University of Victoria
Other Reviewers and Guidance:
Julien Bourque, Research Associate, Canadian Institute for 
Climate Choices
Maria Shallard, Senior Advisor, Indigenous Engagement and 
Research, Canadian Institute for Climate Choices
Consultant Research Team:
Jimena Eyzaguirre, ESSA Technologies Ltd.
Richard Boyd, All One Sky Foundation
Frank Poulsen, ESSA Technologies Ltd.
Matthew Siegle, ESSA Technologies Ltd.
Shelby Yamamoto, University of Alberta
Alvaro Osornio-Vargas, University of Alberta
Production Support:
Design and layout: Laurie Barnett, Graphic Designer 
Proofreading: Julie Stauffer, Cadmium Red Communications 
(English); Edith Sans Cartier (French) 
Information design by Voilà: chezVoila.com
Translation: Edgar (report text) and Sabine Monnin (figures) 
Cover design: Alex Wittholz
Disclaimer: This report is a consensus document 
representing the views of the Canadian Institute for 
Climate Choices. It does not necessarily reflect the 
views of the organizations with which it is affiliated. Any 
potential errors in this report are attributable to the 
Institute. 
Copyright © 2021 Canadian Institute for Climate Choices. 
All rights reserved. Permission granted to reproduce all 
or part of this publication for non-commercial purposes, 
with proper source citation. 
Recommended citation: 
Clark, D. G., R. Ness, D. Coffman, D. Beugin. 2021. The 
Health Costs of Climate Change: How Canada Can 
Adapt, Prepare, and Save Lives. Canadian Institute 
for Climate Choices. https://climatechoices.ca/reports/
the-health-costs-of-climate-change/
This project was undertaken with the financial support of:
66
MARKING THE WAY: 
How legislating climate milestones 
clarifies pathways to long-term goals 
11 WAYS TO MEASURE 
CLEAN GROWTH: 
Unlocking prosperity through progress 
on climate change, economic and 
social goals 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: 
Navigating the known and unknown 
costs of climate change for Canada 
CANADA’S NET ZERO FUTURE: 
Finding our way in the global transition 
MORE PUBLICATIONS FROM 
THE INSTITUTE: 
climatechoices.ca
