 
 
IEc 
Costing Climate Change Impacts on 
Canada’s Infrastructure: 
Results for “Deep Dive” Statistical 
and Process-based Models 
 
Final Report  |  31 December 2020 
prepared for: 
Canadian Climate Institute 
 
prepared by: 
Industrial Economics, Incorporated 
2067 Massachusetts Avenue 
Cambridge, MA 02140 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
ACRONYM LIST 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
CHAPTER 1  |  INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER 2  | TECHNICAL APPROACH 
 
2.1 Damage Estimation Framework 
 
 
 
2 
2.2 Descriptions of Damage Categories  
 
 
5 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3  |  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS: METHODS AND RESULTS 
3.1 Homes, Buildings, and Real Estate  
 
 
9 
3.2 Transportation 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
3.3 Northern Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
3.4 Electricity and Energy 
 
 
 
 
83 
3.5 Delay Costs  
 
 
 
 
 
106 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4  |  SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
4.1 Summary of Findings 
 
 
 
 
113 
4.2 Recommendations for Future work  
 
 
115 
 
REFERENCES 
 
APPENDIX A  |  CCI NOTE ON CLIMATE SCENARIO SELECTION 
APPENDIX B  |  CLIMATE CHANGE PROJECTIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACRONYM LIST 
ACE 
Air Cooled Embankments 
ADR 
Annual Damage Ratio 
DEM 
Digital Elevation Model 
CAD 
Canadian Dollars 
CCI 
Canadian Climate Institute 
CIRA 
Climate Change Impacts and Risk Analysis 
CMA 
Census Metropolitan Area 
CO2 
Carbon Dioxide 
DEM 
Digital Elevation Model 
FDD 
Freezing Degree Days 
FDI 
Freezing Degree Index 
FEMA 
U.S. Federal Emergency Management Authority 
GCM 
General Circulation Model 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GIC 
Ground Ice Content 
GWh 
Giga-watt hour 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
IPSS  
Infrastructure Planning and Support System 
M&I 
Municipal and Industrial 
MWh 
Megawatt hour 
NCPM 
National Coastal Property Model 
NRCan 
Natural Resources Canada 
NRTEE 
National Round Table for the Environment and the Economy 
PET 
Potential Evapotranspiration 
RCP 
Representative Concentration Pathway 
SLR 
Sea Level Rise 
TDD 
Thawing Degree Days 
TDI 
Thaw Degree Index 
TWh 
Terawatt hour 
USD 
U.S. Dollars 
USEPA 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
VKT 
Vehicle Kilometers Traveled 
 
 
 
ES-1 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
ES.1 
INTRODUCTION 
The report provides the results of an analysis of the economic impacts of climate change across Canada. 
The approach relies on a two phased approach to developing thematic impact estimates.  First, we applied 
a new, published screening level approach to characterizing multi-sectoral climate impacts in North 
America based on reduced-form damage functions, which were derived from a set of existing process-
model runs.  Application of these functions to the Canadian context, because they were originally 
developed for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, required infrastructure and climate data inputs 
that have been collected by CCI and our own research, from both government and commercial sources.  
The methodologies and results of this screening analysis are documented in a separate IEc report to CCI.1 
Based on the results of the reduced-form analysis and peer reviewer input, we apply process-based 
modeling approaches to a subset of the infrastructure categories to develop more in-depth results.  These 
selected categories, which are the focus of this report, include coastal properties, inland flooding, roads, 
rail, permafrost, winter roads, the electrical grid, and hydropower generation.  In addition, we consider 
delay costs, which are motorist and freight delays associated with out-of-service or underperforming 
infrastructure attributable to changes in climate.  Each of these process-based modeling approaches is an 
adaptation from peer-reviewed work that our team conducted in the U.S. 
 
ES.2 
TECHNICAL APPROACH 
The spatial and temporal resolutions of the process-based modeling activities vary considerably 
depending on data availability and model configuration.  By temporal resolution, we are referring to the 
modeling time step of the analysis.  Damages are estimated for two “eras”: the 2050s (2040 to 2069) and 
the 2080s (2070 to 2099).  In some cases, as in the permafrost and electrical grid analyses, an earlier era 
(2020 to 2039) is presented for context on those effects.  Our analyses consider seven General Circulation 
Models (GCMs) and two greenhouse gas emissions scenarios (i.e., 14 scenarios total), selected to 
represent a range of potential Canadian climate futures. The results presented in this report focus on the 
average and range of damages from the seven GCMs for each emissions scenario.  For the six 
infrastructure categories with adaptation alternatives, we present the reactive adaptation damages as the 
primary “status quo” scenario. We also present a “proactive adaptation” scenario, where adaptation 
investments are forward-looking, considering anticipated climate change.   
Damage estimates for infrastructure primarily represent the increased costs of protection, repair, or 
replacement of infrastructure under a changing climate. Damage models for these categories are 
 
1 The screening-level approach builds on a recent study by Neumann et al. (2020) that econometrically identifies 
relationships between commonly available climate projection variables (i.e. temperature, precipitation, and sea 
level rise) and damage, by analyzing the results of consistently parameterized, process-based, econometric, or 
combination damage model runs for the contiguous United States under varying climate scenarios. 
 
 
 
ES-2 
developed using damage estimates scaled by the regional infrastructure network inventory (i.e., road 
miles, vulnerable bridges, rail miles, coastal property value, or urban area).  Brief descriptions of each 
category follows. 
• 
The coastal properties study estimates the potential future property value damages as a result of 
sea-level rise combined with storm surge attributed to climate change. Damages are estimated for 
properties (land and structure) in coastal regions.  
• 
The inland flooding study estimates the potential increase in flooding damages as a result of 
more frequent and severe high river flow events associated with climate change.  
• 
The roads study estimates the cost of road repair, user costs (vehicle damage) and road delays 
due to degrading road surface quality as a result of climate change.  
• 
The rail study estimates repair, equipment, and delay costs due to rail track buckling or the 
threat/risk of buckling associated with elevated temperatures.  
• 
Permafrost thaw represents an important climate stressor for Northern Canada that will impose 
costs on multiple types of infrastructure, including roads, buildings, and runways.   
• 
The winter roads analysis quantifies costs under climate change assuming winter roads become 
impassable during a given month if the monthly average temperature exceeds a threshold. 
• 
The electric transmission and distribution study estimates damages to the electric transmission 
and distribution infrastructure due to climate change, and considers extreme temperature, extreme 
rain, vegetation growth, and coastal flooding.   
• 
The hydropower analysis provides a high level, initial estimate of the potential effects of climate 
change on hydropower generation.  This category is not monetized and is therefore not included 
in the summary of findings below. 
 
ES.3 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 
Table ES-1 summarizes the costs of climate change by the eight infrastructure categories presented in this 
report, and delay costs resulting from road and rail impacts.  Under the reactive strategy, inland flooding 
has the highest annual costs with mid-range estimates between $5 billion and $8 billion per year, which is 
15 to 135 percent larger than the next highest category, depending on RCP and era.2  Road-related costs 
are next, then resulting delay cost effects in the 2080s, then impacts to the electrical grid, which 
collectively range between $600 million and $7 billion per year.  The next tier includes impacts to coastal 
properties, driven by permafrost thaw, and to winter roads in the 2050s under RCP8.5 range between 
$120 million and $450 million.  Effects on winter roads in the 2080s and 2050s under RCP4.5, and to rail 
are generally lower, ranging from $7 million to $60 million.   
Adopting a proactive adaptation strategy generally has dramatic benefits, driving reactive costs down 76 
to 98 percent for roads, rail, and delay costs; 45 to 77 percent for coastal properties; and 38 to 47 percent 
for the electrical grid.  Cost reductions for permafrost thaw and inland flooding impacts are more modest.  
In the case of permafrost thaw, this is because of the challenge of adapting to this climate hazard – 
 
2 Note that mid-range estimates are an average across GCMs. The range of GCM specific results for each impact 
category is reported in the relevant sector chapters of this report. 
 
 
 
ES-3 
generally costs can be delayed but not avoided, which is why a proactive strategy increases costs in the 
2050s and 2080s under RCP 8.5.  For flooding, the proactive costs consider only a single adaptation 
response – abandoning or relocating the most vulnerable properties to flood-free areas – so these 
adaptation savings are best seen as a partial estimate.      
TABLE ES-1. SUMMARY OF ANNUAL NATIONAL COSTS AND ADAPTATION SAVINGS ($MIL 2015 CAD)  
Category 
Reactive 
Proactive 
Proactive Reduction in Costs 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
Coastal Properties 
$131  
$240  
$146  
$453  
$71  
$90  
$78  
$104  
-45% 
-62% 
-47% 
-77% 
Inland Flooding 
$5,269  
$5,011  
$5,961  
$8,289  $4,922  $4,684  $5,579  $7,751  
-7% 
-7% 
-6% 
-6% 
Roads 
$2,242  
$3,117  
$3,270  
$7,229  
$532  
$295  
$591  
$118  
-76% 
-91% 
-82% 
-98% 
Rail 
$6.7  
$6.7  
$18  
$61  
$1.2  
$1.3  
$1.2  
$1.3  
-83% 
-81% 
-93% 
-98% 
Permafrost Thaw 
$193  
$206  
$196  
$172  
$152  
$174  
$200  
$211  
-22% 
-16% 
2% 
23% 
Winter roads 
$38  
$29  
$117  
$51  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Electrical Grid 
$1,223  
$582  
$1,621  
$1,467  
$663  
$307  
$997  
$790  
-46% 
-47% 
-38% 
-46% 
Delay Costs 
$545  
$768  
$853  
$2,478  
$98  
$86  
$152  
$275  
-82% 
-89% 
-82% 
-89% 
 
Figure ES-1 presents the variability in total costs across GCMs under the RCP 8.5 scenario, in the 2050s.  
The reactive costs are split onto two vertical axes to accommodate the large difference in costs between 
the flooding and roads impacts, and all remaining categories of reactive and proactive costs.  Generally, 
costs vary much more significantly across GCMs for the flooding, roads, the electrical grid, and delay 
cost categories than the others.  This is because impacts in these four categories are driven partly by 
precipitation projections, which vary much more across GCMs than temperature projections.   
FIGURE ES-1. VARIATION IN AVERAGE ANNUAL COSTS ACROSS GCMS, RCP 8.5 SCENARIO, 2050 s 
($MIL 2015 CAD) 
 
Note: The red dot for each category is the average across GCMs; the blue box surrounding the dot shows the range. 
 
 
 
ES-4 
The distribution of these costs over provinces and territories varies considerably across the infrastructure 
damage categories.  Table ES-2 provides an example of this distribution for RCP 8.5 in the 2080s, where 
the size of bars within the cells reflects the magnitude of values wthin a given infrastructure category 
rather than across all categories.  Some categories, such as roads, rail, the electrical grid, and delay costs, 
tend to scale roughly based on population (i.e., Ontario has the highest impacts, and British Columbia, 
Quebec, and Alberta tend to have large effects).  Although there are notable exceptions, such as the low 
flooding impacts in Quebec and the high rail impacts in Saskatchewan.  Other impacts are also driven 
based on geography, such as coastal property, permafrost, and winter road effects.   
In particular, the combined impacts of permafrost thaw and winter road effects are pronounced for the 
three territories (about $170 million per year), considering their combined population is roughly 100 
times lower than that of Ontario (i.e., 120,000 versus 14.5 million).    
TABLE ES-2. AVERAGE ANNUAL COSTS BY PROVINCE/TERRITORY AND INFRASTRUCTURE DAMAGE 
CATEGORY, RCP 8.5 SCENARIO, 2080 s ($MIL 2015 CAD) 
 
Note: the size of bars within cells reflect the magnitude of values within a single infrastructure impact category (i.e., 
table column), rather than across all categories.   
ES.4 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE WORK  
This study provides a partial estimate of the potential economic impacts of climate change to Canada and 
the possible benefits of adaptation. Areas of ongoing research, modeling, and data collection will open 
avenues to consider a wider range of damages.  Below, we provide several recommendations for future 
work in the specific categories we analyze in this study.   
• 
A more comprehensive update to a National coastal risk analysis, incorporating sea-level rise 
and storm surge threats, could be useful in guiding GHG mitigation, adaptation, and economic 
development policy.    
Province/Territory
Coastal 
Properties
Inland 
Flooding
Roads
Rail
Permafrost 
Thaw
Ice Roads
Electrical 
Grid
Delay Costs
Alberta
-
$968
$1,580
$8.5
$0.1
$3
$169
$383
British Columbia
$276
$1,209
$916
$7.0
$1.5
$0
$120
$370
Manitoba
-
$592
$582
$5.6
$6.4
$17
$90
$173
New Brunswick
$63
$156
$256
$0.8
$0.0
$0
$56
$53
Newfoundland and Labrador
-
$135
$66
$0.3
$0.0
$0
$27
$20
Northwest Territories
-
$5
$21
$0.1
$54
$12
$5.2
$2.8
Nova Scotia
$59
$209
$155
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$42
$34
Nunavut
-
$1.3
$1.4
$0.0
$54
$0.1
$5.2
$0.1
Ontario
-
$4,111
$1,510
$15
$0.3
$16
$446
$679
Prince Edward Island
$16
$7
$104
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$21
$17
Quebec
$39
$780
$1,574
$10
$2.1
$0.0
$408
$418
Saskatchewan
-
$103
$447
$13
$0.2
$3.6
$74
$325
Yukon
-
$12
$18
$0
$54
$0.0
$5.2
$2.6
TOTAL
$453
$8,289
$7,229
$61
$172
$51
$1,467
$2,478
 
 
 
ES-5 
• 
Potentially important omissions in the sectoral scope of the coastal sector analysis that may 
be worth considering for enhancement in future work include intensification of wind damage 
from coastal storms; accelerated loss of coastal wetlands and other natural areas that provide 
ecosystem service flows such as flood protection and commercial fish nursery grounds; effects of 
sea-level rise on the extent of high-tide flooding and other high frequency/low consequence 
coastal events; and the potential for disproportionate impacts of coastal vulnerability and 
adaptation decision on socially vulnerable populations. 
• 
Disproportionate impacts of inland and coastal flooding on small and disadvantaged 
communities that rely critically on access to coastal or riverine resources, particularly in 
Northern Canada, should be assessed with specialized methods that consider both the unique 
nature of the climate stressors (e.g., loss of winter ice pack in the Arctic Ocean and Hudson’s 
Bay) and the relatively larger economic reliance on these resources among these communities. 
• 
Refining hydrologic and hydraulic modeling.  There appears to be continued effort across 
Canada, mostly at the urban scale, to further refine the hydrologic and hydraulic modeling basis 
to assess impacts of inland flooding.  We recommend use of the national-scale analyses presented 
here, which by necessity rely on more simplified hydrologic and hydraulic modeling methods, to 
guide geographic priorities for refining hydrologic, hydraulic, and infrastructure impact modeling 
under future climatic conditions. 
• 
More comprehensive consideration of benefits of climate change in the roads and rail 
analysis will be important to develop a more complete view of impacts to those sectors. 
Currently, we exclude the benefits to rail of fewer extreme cold temperature breaks, and the 
benefits to asphalt maintenance of higher minimum temperatures.    
• 
A process-based permafrost modeling approach, similar to the Melvin et al. (2017) study of 
Alaska’s infrastructure, would allow for a much more refined analysis of permafrost impacts.  
Although no such model is currently available for Canada, the Permafrost Partnership Network 
for Canada is currently developing projected permafrost conditions under a range of climate 
models that could be leveraged once available. 
• 
Considering the costs of electric power outages from more frequent damaging weather events 
such as ice storms, lightning strikes, and wildfires.  Although data and modeling needed to 
conduct such research in Canada is currently limited, a starting point could be adapting the 
Interruption Cost Estimate (ICE) Calculator from Lawrence Berkeley National Labs (LBNL) to 
the Canada context.  This research will be particularly important as electrification initiatives for 
transport and home heating advance. 
• 
More detailed analysis of hydropower impacts that allows for analysis of firm power effects.  
Boehlert et al. (2016) found that although annual hydropower generation rises in the U.S. under 
climate change, firm power declines.  Most importantly, this assessment will require a more 
detailed hydrological dataset so that rainfall runoff models can be properly calibrated to low 
flows, and more detailed data on hydropower generation facilities. 
 
 
  
 
1 
 
CHAPTER 1  |  INTRODUCTION 
The report provides the results of an analysis of the economic impacts of climate change across Canada. 
The approach relies on a two phased approach to developing thematic impact estimates.  First, we applied 
a new, published screening level approach to characterizing multi-sectoral climate impacts in North 
America based on reduced-form damage functions, which were derived from a set of existing process-
model runs.  Application of these functions to the Canadian context, because they were originally 
developed for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA 2017), required infrastructure and 
climate data inputs that have been collected by CCI and our own research, from both government and 
commercial sources.  The methodologies and results of this screening analysis are documented in a 
separate IEc report to CCI.3 
Based on the results of the reduced-form analysis and peer reviewer input, we apply process-based 
modeling approaches to a subset of the infrastructure categories to develop more in-depth results.  The 
selected categories, which are the focus of this report, include coastal properties, inland flooding, roads, 
rail, permafrost, winter roads, the electrical grid, and hydropower generation.  In addition, we consider 
delay costs, which are motorist and freight delays associated with out-of-service or underperforming 
infrastructure attributable to changes in climate.  Each of these process-based modeling approaches is an 
adaptation from peer-reviewed work that our team conducted in the U.S.   
Climate projections were from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, which has generated statistically 
downscaled and bias corrected scenarios for a range of General Circulation Models (GCMs) and 
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs), or emissions scenarios.4  Sea level rise projections are 
derived from Natural Resource Canada. Results across all infrastructure categories are presented for a 
1986-2005 baseline, and two 30-year eras that CCI intends to use for their overall cost of climate impacts 
study (2050s: 2041-2070 and 2080s: 2071-2100). 
In the remainder of this report, Chapter 2 reviews the technical approach of the study, including analytical 
frameworks for the reduced form and process modeling approaches.  Chapter 3 summarizes the methods 
and results for each of the eight categories considered in this work, as well as delay cost effects.  This 
chapter also includes the limitations and caveats of each approach.  Chapter 4 summarizes the results and 
provides recommendations for future work.   
 
 
 
3 The screening-level approach builds on a recent study by Neumann et al. (2020) that econometrically identifies 
relationships between commonly available climate projection variables (i.e. temperature, precipitation, and sea 
level rise) and damage, by analyzing the results of consistently parameterized, process-based, econometric, or 
combination damage model runs for the contiguous United States under varying climate scenarios. 
4 See https://pacificclimate.org/data/statistically-downscaled-climate-scenarios. 
 
 
  
 
2 
 
CHAPTER 2  | TECHNICAL APPROACH 
As described above, this study uses a set of process-based modeling approaches to develop estimates of 
the costs of climate change to Canada.  This chapter describes our analytical framework, then describes 
the infrastructure categories we estimate.  Further details about the individual modeling approaches are 
provided in Chapter 3, additional details about selection of climate change scenarios are provided in 
Appendix A, and documentation of the climate projections is in Appendix B.     
 
 
2.1  
DAMAGE ESTIMATION FRAMEWORK  
2.1.1 
SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL SCALE  
The spatial and temporal resolutions of the process-based modeling activities vary considerably 
depending on data availability and model configuration.  By temporal resolution, we are referring to the 
modeling time step of the analysis.  The methodological details of these modeling approaches are 
provided in Chapter 3.  Damages are estimated for the 2050s and 2080s eras described above. In some 
cases, as in the permafrost and electrical grid analyses, an earlier era (2020 to 2039) is presented for 
context on those effects.   
2.1.2  CLIMATE SCENARIOS 
Our analyses consider seven GCMs and two RCPs, selected to represent a range of potential Canadian 
climate futures. See Appendix A for the procedure that CCI and IEc used to select the set of seven GCMs, 
and Appendix B for a more detailed review of the climate projections employed than provided here.  Each 
of the GCMs (CCSM4, GFDL-CM3, GFDL-ESM2M, HadGEM2-AO, HadGEM2-ES, MIROC-ESM-
CHEM, and MRI-CDCM3) is applied for RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
scenarios. The results presented in this report focus on the average and range of damages from the seven 
GCMs for each RCP; damage estimates for each individual GCM are also available.   
For illustration of regional differences, Table 2-1 presents the average projected changes in temperature 
and precipitation for each region, era, and RCP employed in this analysis. Projections vary by GCM, with 
the GCMs projecting a range of increases in temperature over time.  On average across GCMs, all 
Provinces and Territories are projected to have increasing rainfall, with British Columbia showing the 
largest increases.  Individual GCMs do show drying conditions in some areas.  Details are presented in 
Appendix B.    
 
 
 
 
  
 
3 
 
TABLE 2-1. AVERAGE PROJECTED CHANGE IN TEMPERATURE AND PRECIPITATION FROM BASELINE  
Province/ Territory 
 Change in Mean Temperature (°C ) 
Change in Precipitation 
RCP 4.5, 
2050S 
RCP 4.5, 
2080S 
RCP 8.5, 
2050S 
RCP 8.5, 
2080S 
RCP 4.5, 
2050S 
RCP 4.5, 
2080S 
RCP 8.5, 
2050S 
RCP 8.5, 
2080S 
Alberta 
2.76 
3.36 
3.62 
5.9 
3% 
6% 
5% 
13% 
British Columbia 
3.06 
3.71 
4 
6.52 
14% 
17% 
18% 
26% 
Manitoba 
2.52 
3.05 
3.33 
5.38 
5% 
7% 
8% 
12% 
New Brunswick 
2.97 
3.47 
3.77 
5.84 
3% 
5% 
6% 
12% 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
2.35 
2.89 
3.15 
5.1 
5% 
7% 
7% 
10% 
Northwest Territories 
2.97 
3.45 
3.79 
5.87 
5% 
7% 
6% 
10% 
Nova Scotia 
2.73 
3.22 
3.53 
5.54 
2% 
5% 
5% 
10% 
Nunavut 
2.99 
3.46 
3.81 
5.91 
7% 
9% 
8% 
12% 
Ontario 
2.78 
3.3 
3.62 
5.72 
4% 
6% 
8% 
13% 
Prince Edward Island 
2.48 
2.99 
3.29 
5.26 
0% 
2% 
2% 
5% 
Quebec 
2.87 
3.4 
3.71 
5.87 
4% 
6% 
7% 
14% 
Saskatchewan 
2.72 
3.28 
3.56 
5.73 
2% 
5% 
5% 
11% 
Yukon 
3.18 
3.94 
4.14 
6.86 
6% 
10% 
11% 
19% 
Note: Temperature and precipitation values are averages across the seven GCMs. See Appendix B for detailed results. 
2.1.3  ADAPTATION ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED  
For the six infrastructure categories with adaptation alternatives, we present the reactive adaptation 
damages as the primary “status quo” scenario. We also present a “proactive adaptation” scenario, where 
adaptation investments are forward-looking, considering anticipated climate change.  More details on the 
definitions of these adaptation scenarios with regards to coastal properties, inland flooding, roads, rail, 
permafrost, and electrical grid categories are presented in Table 2-2.  A “no adaptation” option is also 
presented for reference for some categories, although this is not considered in the analysis. 
 
TABLE 2-2. ADAPTATION OPTIONS CONSIDERED  
 
REACTIVE ADAPTATION 
PROACTIVE ADAPTATION  
COASTAL PROPERTY 
Costs Include 
• The property values of abandoned properties 
(due to inundation or when the expected 
value of damage exceeds the property 
value), structure damage from flooding, and 
costs of elevating structures. 
• The property values of abandoned properties, the 
costs of coastal flood protection where it is 
warranted, and residual damage from flooding.  
Costs Do Not 
Include 
• Direct measure of damage to public 
infrastructure. 
• Indirect costs associated with flooding (i.e. 
delay costs or secondary impacts of loss of 
critical infrastructure).  
• Direct measure of damage to public infrastructure. 
• Indirect costs associated with flooding (i.e. delay 
costs or secondary impacts of loss of critical 
infrastructure).  
 
 
  
 
4 
 
 
REACTIVE ADAPTATION 
PROACTIVE ADAPTATION  
Avoided Costs 
Include 
• N/A 
• Structural damage avoided by coastal flood 
protection 
INLAND FLOODING 
Costs Include 
• Structure and content damage from pluvial 
and fluvial flooding. 
• Structure damage from pluvial and fluvial flooding. 
Costs Do Not 
Include 
• Damages outside the structure such as 
vehicles or agricultural land. 
• Damages outside the structure such as vehicles or 
agricultural land. 
Avoided Costs 
Include 
• N/A 
• One tenth of the damage in the most vulnerable 
census subdivisions through relocation: moving out 
of the floodplain. 
ROADS 
Costs Include 
 
 
• Repair costs 
• Costs of delays due to repairs 
 
  
• Upfront capital costs of proactive strengthening 
• Repair costs  
• Costs of delays due to proactive strengthening and 
repairs.  
Costs Do Not 
Include 
• Routine (non-climate driven) maintenance 
costs 
• Routine (non-climate driven) maintenance costs 
Avoided Costs 
Include 
• N/A 
• Reduced repair, capital, and delay costs due to 
proactive strengthening and repairs 
RAIL 
Costs Include 
• Costs of replacing track to repair lateral 
alignment defects in the buckling zone and 
costs of re-aligning rail in adjoining zones 
• Costs of delays that occur due to track 
buckling and repair, as well as delays 
associated with blanket speed reductions  
• Costs of purchasing, installing, and maintaining the 
track temperature sensors, and related software 
infrastructure 
• Costs of delays associated with risk-based speed 
reductions  
 
Costs Do Not 
Include 
• Costs of derailment that may result from 
track buckling 
• Costs of developing and implementing the 
speed orders 
• Costs of routine (non-climate driven) track 
maintenance 
• Costs of routine (non-climate driven) track 
maintenance 
 
Avoided Costs 
Include 
• N/A 
• Delay costs related to track buckling and repair 
PERMAFROST THAW 
Costs Include 
 
 
• Repairing building foundations and repairing 
cracks in paved roads and runways 
• Regraveling and regrading gravel roads 
• Rehabilitating roads 
• Rebuilding/reconstructing buildings and 
roads 
• Relocating 
• Repairing building foundations and repairing cracks 
in paved roads and runways 
• Regraveling and regrading gravel roads 
• Thermosiphon installation for buildings 
• Base upgrades for roads 
• Rebuilding/reconstructing roads and runways with 
air-cooled embankments 
 
 
  
 
5 
 
 
REACTIVE ADAPTATION 
PROACTIVE ADAPTATION  
Costs Do Not 
Include 
• Routine (non-climate driven) maintenance 
costs 
• Routine (non-climate driven) maintenance costs 
Avoided Costs 
Include 
• N/A 
• Structural damages avoided by thermosiphon and 
air-cooled embankment installation  
• Reduced operations and maintenance costs from 
base upgrades 
ELECRICAL GRID 
Costs Include 
 
 
• Building replacement transformers and 
transmission ampacity upgrades based on 
recent climate. 
• Steel reinforcement of wood poles, as 
needed, based on recent climate. 
• Increasing operations and maintenance costs 
for vegetation management. 
• Building replacement transformers and transmission 
ampacity upgrades based on projected climate. 
• Steel reinforcement of wood poles, as needed, 
based on projected climate. 
• Increasing operations and maintenance costs for 
vegetation management. 
Costs Do Not 
Include 
• Routine (non-climate driven) maintenance 
costs 
• Routine (non-climate driven) maintenance costs 
Avoided Costs 
Include 
• N/A 
• Expenditures on transformers, transmission lines, 
and wood poles 
 
 
2.2 
DESCRIPTIONS OF DAMAGE CATEGORIES  
This analysis covers damages to the Canadian economy across eight infrastructure categories.  In 
addition, delay cost effects are estimated for roads and rail disruption.  In the following paragraphs, we 
describe the main modeling characteristics of each category. Damage estimates for infrastructure 
primarily represent the increased costs of protection, repair, or replacement of infrastructure under a 
changing climate. Damage models for these categories are developed using damage estimates scaled by 
the regional infrastructure network inventory (i.e., road miles, vulnerable bridges, rail miles, coastal 
property value, or urban area). Certain categories also include additional costs in damage estimates — 
roads and rail include the costs of increased travel time associated with service outages. By contrast, the 
Grid Infrastructure category considers the interaction of electrical grid infrastructure and climate from the 
opposite angle — damages for this category are the costs associated with repair and replacement of grid 
infrastructure damaged by increasingly frequent and severe extreme weather, or necessitating replacement 
due to reduced capacity in higher air temperatures. As both of these categories are directly dependent on 
demand for electricity, reduced form models are developed based on damages scaled by regional 
population.    
For each category of damages, we apply current data on the size and, where applicable, condition of the 
infrastructure stock. Although the stock of infrastructure may change over time, the extent of such change 
is uncertain and, in some cases, will depend on policy changes implemented at different levels of 
government. Rather than introduce further uncertainty into the analysis in the form of forecasted changes 
in the infrastructure stock, we use data on current infrastructure to ensure transparency and provide clarity 
regarding analytic limitations. 
 
 
  
 
6 
 
In using the current infrastructure stock, we do not attempt to capture how technological change and 
innovation will affect the vulnerability (and resilience) of infrastructure to climate change over time. As 
design practices and materials evolve and new technologies are developed, some types of infrastructure 
may be less (or more) vulnerable to changing climatic conditions. While this may somewhat complicate 
how policymakers use this analysis to inform strategic or operational decisions, the conclusions drawn 
from this analysis regarding the cost-reducing impacts of proactive adaptation will still provide important 
insights into potential opportunities to reduce climate change costs through proactive action. As new 
technologies come to market and existing technologies evolve, infrastructure managers can assess 
whether such technologies are likely to diminish (or enhance) these opportunities and prioritize their 
adaptation actions accordingly.  
2.2.1 
HOMES, BUILDINGS, AND REAL ESTATE  
The coastal properties study estimates the potential future property value damages as a result of sea-
level rise combined with storm surge attributed to climate change. Damages are estimated for properties 
(land and structure) in coastal regions. Storm surge damage is modeled based on changes in a historical 
flood frequency and severity profile, based on local tide gauge data, increased vertically by the extent of 
relative SLR at that point in the simulation. Structural damage from storm surge is based on depth-
damage functions and storm surge heights. The analysis is completed for each of two adaptation 
scenarios: proactive adaptation and reactive adaptation. The proactive scenario implements cost-effective 
adaptation across a broad suite of adaptation options, including beach nourishment, hard structures (back 
bay or open ocean), and structure elevation, or in cases where adaptation is not cost-effective, 
abandonment of threatened property. The reactive scenario implements only the elevation and beach 
nourishment options.  
The inland flooding study estimates the potential increase in flooding damages as a result of more 
frequent and severe high river flow events associated with climate change. Damages are estimated using a 
series of connected simulation models for streamflow estimation, including the process of rainfall 
concentrating in river valleys to produce high flow events; simplified hydraulic models to translate high 
flow into an area and depth of flood event around river channels; depth damage functions to forecast 
damages associated with high flow events; and simplified techniques to forecast the future value of 
residential and commercial properties. 
2.2.2 
TRANSPORTATION 
The roads study estimates the cost of road repair, road construction, and road delays due to degrading 
road surface quality as a result of climate change. Damages are based the cost of repairs and or delay 
costs associated with either road shutdowns to complete repairs or deteriorated road surfaces. This 
analysis considers two adaptation scenarios: reactive adaptation and proactive adaptation. Under the 
reactive adaptation scenario, repair budgets are increased to repair all damages in a given year, and in the 
proactive scenario, roads are pre-emptively strengthened to prevent damage. Note that the proactive 
adaptation results generally reflect a much lower damage estimate overall than reactive costs, but in some 
scenarios the timing of those costs may be accelerated (and actually be triggered by relatively modest 
levels of warming) because of optimization of the capital cost of resilience investments and the high 
payoff to these investments in terms of avoiding future repairs and delays. In these cases damages might 
be higher in the 2050s than they are later in the century. 
 
 
  
 
7 
 
The rail study estimates repair, equipment, and delay costs due to rail track buckling or the threat/risk of 
buckling associated with elevated temperatures. The analysis is completed for two adaptation scenarios: 
proactive adaptation and reactive adaptation. The proactive scenario includes attempts to adopt new 
technologies to prevent damages (and therefore prevent delays associated with their unexpected need for 
repair). The reactive scenario considers reduced train speeds at higher temperatures to reduce likelihood 
of track buckling.  
2.2.3 
NORTHERN CANADA 
Permafrost thaw represents an important climate stressor for Northern Canada that will impose costs on 
multiple types of infrastructure, including roads, buildings, and runways.  The focus of this component is 
not to develop permafrost projections for site-specific adaptation recommendations, but rather to 
understand the possible regional and national-level effects of permafrost shifts.  We build on the approach 
developed in Melvin et al. (2017), who develop damage thresholds based on thaw levels, to identify 
where critical foundation damage is likely to occur.  For buildings, roads, and runways located in areas 
where the critical thresholds are met, we estimate climate change costs under both the status quo and 
proactive scenarios. 
The winter roads analysis applies the approach used by IEc in our 2010 analysis for the National Round 
Table for the Environment and the Economy (NRTEE) (Industrial Economics 2010).  Under this 
approach, we estimate climate change costs for winter roads under the assumption that a winter road is 
impassable during a given month if the monthly average temperature exceeds -5° C.  This reflects the 
threshold recommended by the Treasury Board of Canada for assessing the stability of winter roads.  This 
approach is applied under both the status quo scenario and the proactive adaptation scenario.   
2.2.4 
ELECTRICITY AND ENERGY 
The electric transmission and distribution study estimates damages to the electric transmission and 
distribution infrastructure, which makes up the electric “grid,” due to climate change. This multi-
dimensional analysis considers several climate stressors, including extreme temperature, extreme rain, 
vegetation growth, and coastal flooding.  Impact receptors include transmission and distribution lines, 
poles, and transformers. Monetized damages for this category are the costs of repair or replacement of 
damaged infrastructure. While certain climate stressors do cause power outages which have associated 
economic costs, these costs are not included in damage estimates. This analysis considers three adaptation 
scenarios: proactive adaptation, reactive adaptation, and no-adaptation. Repair or replacement choices 
vary by adaptation scenario — the no-adaptation scenario models repair and replacement that continues in 
a business-as-usual fashion, without consideration for a changing climate, reactive adaptation bases 
decisions on the climate in the moment of repair or replacement, and proactive adaptation plans for 
projected climates. Repair costs are allocated based on the activity being performed. These activities 
include: transmission line capacity, tree trimming, wood pole decay, transmission transformer lifespan, 
and distribution transformer lifespan. 
The hydropower analysis provides a high level, initial estimate of the potential effects of climate change 
on hydropower generation. The work follows the general approach of Boehlert et al. (2016), who 
analyzed the impacts of climate change on U.S. hydropower generation through 2100, using a water 
systems model with over 2000 river basins and a fairly detailed accounting of the U.S. hydropower 
system.  However, this work involved a significant amount of data and modeling to capture effects at a 
facility level that were not possible to replicate given the scope of this analysis. Instead, we develop 
 
 
  
 
8 
 
unitless multipliers of annual hydropower generation relative to historical generation for 184 basins 
across Canada where we have rainfall runoff parameters calibrated from earlier work for NRTEE 
(Industrial Economics 2010).  These relative changes in generation over time are converted to absolute 
hydropower generation (GWh) by applying the shocks to observed historical generation.  Within each 
basin, all hydropower generation and installed capacity information is lumped into a single representative 
facility.  
 
 
 
  
 
9 
 
CHAPTER 3  |  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS: METHODS AND RESULTS 
This chapter presents the methods and results of the screening level and process-based analysis of the cost 
of climate change to Canada’s infrastructure.  Sections 3.1 to 3.4 of this chapter focus on process-based 
modeling approaches; and Section 3.5 quantifies delay costs. For the infrastructure categories where 
multiple adaptation scenarios are available, we present a comparison of results by category across 
adaptation scenarios.  For the screening analysis, tables of average damages by era, category, and region 
are available in Appendix A.   
 
3.1 
HOMES, BUILDINGS, AND REAL ESTATE  
This section summarizes the methods and results of the coastal property and inland flooding analyses.   
Our division of climate risks into coastal and inland components relates to the influence of different 
climate stressors (sea-level risk and storm surge for coastal, extreme precipitation induced floods for 
inland).  While the two can overlap geographically in coastal areas, we have found that proper estimation 
of joint risks in these areas can only be accomplished with much more temporally and geographically 
detailed analysis that is beyond the scope of the current study.   
3.1.1 
COASTAL PROPERTY  
Although much of the development in Canada is concentrated in areas away from the coast (e.g., around 
Toronto, ON), certain key high-value areas, particular around Vancouver, BC, are at risk to coastal 
flooding ranging from permanent inundation from sea level rise to less frequent but high impact storm 
surge events. Stanton et al. (2010) estimates that annual costs range from $2.6 to $5.4 billion by the 
2020s, and $7.3 to $48.1 billion by the 2080s for a “no adaptation” scenario.  This work reflects careful 
and highly spatially resolved modeling of permanent property inundation from sea-level rise, but 
unfortunately for periodic storm surge damage, relies on an approach which assumes surge of any height 
would result in total loss/damage of coastal properties (including agriculture and forest lands) as 
frequently as once per year.5  The Stanton et al. (2010) approach is inconsistent with contemporary 
 
5 See text on page 46 of Stanton et al. (2010): “Unlike with sea-level rise damages, which are the annual increase to 
damaged property, storm-surge damages are the full value of dwellings inundated in each year – as if homes were 
rebuilt after each flood. In model calculations, storm-surge damage frequency is capped at one per year, based on 
the assumption that rebuilding of homes could happen no more than once per year. Agricultural and forested lands 
storm-surge damages follow the same logic – as if the owners of this land paid reclamation costs equal to the value 
of the land after each flooding (where flooding can occur no more than once each year).”  A table follows this text, 
showing input values for storm surge severity and frequency of up to about 1.2 meters, occurring as frequently as 
once per year, in some locations.  The aggregate economic damage results from Stanton et al. (2010) (page 72 of 
the report) therefore show storm surge damage two orders of magnitude (approximately a factor of 100 times) in 
excess of the sea-level rise inundation results, which is inconsistent with other literature and probably not realistic.   
 
 
 
  
 
10 
 
analyses of storm surge damage (see JBA Risk (2019) and Neumann et al. (2014), for example), which 
assess structure damage using depth-damage functions rather than assuming total loss from all floods, and 
which also provide a mechanism to model abandonment in situations of frequent repeat-loss. 
Methods 
The objective of this analysis is to provide an estimate of property damage from sea level rise and storm 
surge risks in the coastal areas of Canada. Absent a detailed inundation model for Canada, we use damage 
ratio curves, which indicate how damage progresses with sea level rise, from the U.S. National Coastal 
Properties Model (NCPM).6 The analysis follows five steps, which are described briefly here. More detail 
follows. 
1. Pair coastal regions in Canada with U.S. regions: First we group the coastal areas in Canada 
into five targeted (smaller) areas and three regions. Each of these are paired to representative U.S. 
areas that have some similarities in location (and therefore, rate of SLR as well as storm surge 
exceedance curve) and coastal development and settlement patterns. 
2. Identify sea level rise scenarios and storm surge: Develop sea level rise estimates for all 
coastal areas in Canada at the dissemination area level, from NRCan estimates, and assign storm 
surge heights to our targeted Canadian locations based on the literature. 
3. Estimate an elevation-property value curve: Estimate the property value at incremental 
elevation contours for both the U.S. locations and for all dissemination areas in Canada. This is 
used to develop elevation damage ratio curves (#4) for the U.S. locations and apply those curves 
to coastal areas in Canada (#5). 
4. Compile damage Ratio Curves for U.S. areas: Separately for sea level rise and storm surge, 
calculate the annual damage ratio by sea level, for all U.S. study areas, from the detailed results 
from Neumann et al. (2014) and recent updates (e.g., USEPA 2017, Lorie et al. 2020). These 
represent the portion of the annual vulnerable property value that is periodically damaged (from 
storm surge) or permanently lost (inundation from sea level rise).  
5. Estimate Damages: Use sea level rise and storm surge from #1, the Damage Ratios by sea level 
from #4 for the US study areas, and elevation property value curves from #3 to estimate damages. 
 
Pairing coastal areas in Canada with U.S. areas 
Impacts to coastal properties from sea level rise and storm surge are particularly site-specific. Local 
characteristics such as elevation and proximity to tidally influenced waterbodies can greatly affect 
 
Note also that Withey et al. (2015) adopts the Stanton et al. results; no new damage modeling is conducted in 
Withey, only processing of direct costs through a general equilibrium framework. 
6 It is reasonable to ask whether the JBA Risk Management estimates of the extent of storm surge for various storms 
(e.g., 100-year, 10-year, etc.) could be useful for this analysis. While these would likely provide some insight into 
the baseline storm surge damage estimates, they are static in time. The NCPM uses a dynamic and deterministic 
approach as sea levels rise each year (and, as a result, the storm surge floods reach properties at higher elevations), 
as well as an approach for estimating costs with cost-effective adaptation. 
 
 
  
 
11 
 
damage assessments and, in particular, adaptation decisions and effectiveness. It is often the case that 
damages from coastal flooding vary on small spatial scales. For this reason, deterministic models of the 
impacts of coastal flooding on properties simulate impacts at near site-level spatial scales like the U.S. 
NCPM (Neumann et al. 2014). Since building a coastal properties impact model like the NCPM is outside 
the scope of this project, we rely on results from the U.S. NCPM to provide patterns of damage ratios 
(damage over vulnerable property) by sea level. These ratios are used alongside value-elevation curves of 
Canadian coastal properties to estimate costs. To do so, we need to pair Canadian study areas with US 
areas that are comparable in terms of coastal topography, flooding mechanisms and settlement patterns. 
The NCPM is a well-established model, developed over multiple iterations over two decades, that was 
designed for national-scale analysis of coastal flooding in the Contiguous U.S. (Neumann et al 2014; 
Lorie et al. 2020). The model determines inundated areas at the 150m grid resolution for each coastal 
county along a sea level rise trajectory for two types of coastal flood hazards—permanent inundation 
from sea level rise and storm surge—and estimates property losses and expected damage. Inundation is 
modeled using a modified bathtub approach that ensures a hydraulic connection as sea levels rise. The 
model assumes complete loss of structure value once the mean high or higher water level reaches the 
property, and loss of land value equivalent to a representative inland parcel, thereby implicitly assuming 
inland transfer of the amenity value of proximity to the coast over time. Storm surge damage is modeled 
across a portfolio of storm surge heights from the 2- to 500-year event. Damage from surge inundation is 
determined using a variety of depth-damage curves that depend on structure type. Rather than modeling 
actual storm surge events, the NCPM uses the probabilities of each event and estimates an average annual 
expected damage.  
To pair coastal areas in Canada with U.S. analogues, we first identify important cities along the coast of 
Canada that are geographically diverse and where we expect high impacts from sea level rise and storm 
surge. These are listed in Table 3-1. In general, we pair cities with similar population size, development 
patterns, and coastal hydrologic characteristics. The rest of coastal Canada is split into three larger 
geographic regions (see Table 3-2). There are five targeted areas and three regions. The Census Division 
where each city in Table 3-1 resides for the targeted areas are paired with U.S. counties, while the regions 
in Table 3-2 are paired with groups of counties in the U.S.  
In the Pacific, most of the vulnerable property value is in and around Vancouver, BC. We also include the 
Province Capital, Victoria, BC. Vancouver and Victoria are paired with nearby U.S. cities on the other 
side of the Salish sea that have relatively similar populations, property values, and development patterns.  
For the Atlantic, we selected Halifax in Nova Scotia, Charlottetown on Prince Edward Island, and Quebec 
City, at the mouth of the St. Lawrence River. Halifax and Charlottetown are paired with cities with 
similar characteristics in Maine. Since Quebec City is located on the tidally influenced St. Lawrence 
River, further inland from the open ocean compared to the other sites, we pair it with Albany, NY, which 
is located further inland on the tidally influenced Hudson River, and is relatively similar in size and 
development. 
For the rest of coastal Canada, we use three broad regions for the pairing. For the Pacific Region, we use 
the remaining counties in the state of Washington. Coastal areas in Quebec along the tidally influenced St. 
Lawrence River are separated from the rest of the Atlantic Coast and paired with U.S. counties along the 
Hudson River, which is also tidally influenced. The Maritime Provinces are grouped with coastal areas in 
 
 
  
 
12 
 
Quebec east of Quebec City to form the Atlantic Region, which is paired with U.S. Counties in Maine and 
New Hampshire.  Note that other areas of Canada are not modeled, either because relative sea level is 
expected to fall in those locations; the value of coastal property in those locations, as estimated in Stanton 
et al. (2010) is relatively low; or both. The modeled areas in Tables 3-1 and 3-2 account for more than 95 
percent of the national permanent inundation damages reported in Stanton et al. (2010).7 
TABLE 3-1.  TARGETED STUDY AREAS AND U.S. CITY ANALOGUE 
Targeted Study Area 
U.S. City Analogue (County listed) 
Vancouver, BC  
Seattle, WA (King County) 
Victoria, BC 
Port Angeles, WA (Clallam County) 
Halifax, NS 
Portland, ME (Cumberland County) 
Charlottetown, PEI 
Bar Harbor, ME (Hancock County) 
Quebec City 
Albany, NY (Albany County) 
 
 
TABLE 3-2.  REGION STUDY AREAS AND U.S. REGION ANALOGUE  
Region 
Provinces Included 
U.S. Region Analogue 
Pacific 
British Columbia 
Washington State 
Atlantic 
Maritime Provinces, Quebec 
(east of Quebec City)  
Maine and New Hampshire 
St. Lawrence River 
Quebec (west of Quebec City) 
Counties in New York State along 
the Hudson River 
 
Sea level rise scenarios and storm surge 
Gridded sea level rise projections from 2006 to 2100 were provided by NRCan at a tenth of a degree for 
all coastal areas in Canada. The projections start in 2006 with sea levels provided for each decade (2010, 
2020, etc.) up to 2100 and are relative to a 1995 mean sea level. These were spatially aggregated to 
dissemination areas in Canada, where property value information is available. Projections include two 
greenhouse gas mitigation scenarios—RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5—and three uncertainty levels—lower, 
median, and upper. 
Historical storm surge heights were gathered from literature sources. Xhai et al. (2015) provides estimates 
of the 50-year return period storm surge by analyzing 22 tide gauge measurements along the Atlantic 
Coast of Canada. Similarly, Abeysirigunawardena et al. (2011) developed estimates of storm surge 
heights for a variety of return periods along the Pacific Coast. Table 3-3 provides a summary of these 
 
7 As indicated in the introduction to this chapter, we rely solely on the more reliable permanent inundation 
components of Stanton et al. (2010).  We omit consideration of the periodic storm surge results from that work, 
because they are inconsistent with contemporary storm surge damage estimation methods. 
 
 
  
 
13 
 
surge heights for a representative 50-year event for the targeted areas and regions. For the targeted areas, 
we take the average surge height for all gauges in the area and for the regions, we take the average of all 
gauges in the region. Surge heights in the Atlantic Region are further disaggregated by Province. 
Generally, 50-year event surge heights are lowest in the Pacific Region, varying from 0.84 to 0.95 meters; 
highest in the St. Lawrence Region, up to 4.5m; and intermediate in the Atlantic Region, varying from 1.9 
to 2.9 meters.  
TABLE 3-3.  STORM SURGE HEIGHTS FOR THE 50 -YEAR EVENT 
Target / Region 
50-year (m) 
Vancouver, BC 
0.95 
Victoria, BC 
0.82 
Halifax, NS 
1.74 
Charlottetown, PEI 
2.12 
Pacific Region 
0.91 
Quebec City and St. Lawrence Region 
4.45 
Atlantic Region 
      Prince Edward Island 
2.12 
      Nova Scotia 
1.89 
      New Brunswick 
2.94 
      Quebec - Atlantic 
2.66 
 
 
Elevation-Property Value Curve 
The goal of this step is to represent how property values change by elevation and is used to determine the 
property value vulnerable to sea level inundation or storm surge damage at a variety of elevations. To do 
this, we combine areas below select elevations with a property value dataset for each Census 
dissemination area. For the topography, we use the CoastalDEM30 product by Climate Central instead of 
DEMs available from the Government of Canada, which would require patchwork of LiDAR DEMs of 
varying resolutions that may not provide a full coastal coverage. CoastalDEM30 is a 1 arcsecond (~30 
meter) horizontal resolution digital elevation model that uses satellite radar and machine learning 
techniques to correct for inaccuracies in the original uncalibrated satellite measurements that significantly 
reduces biases and errors when comparing with LiDAR measurements (Kulp and Strauss, 2018). This 
provides a consistent resolution and approach for all coastal areas in Canada with a sufficient vertical 
resolution for inundation modeling. The DEM is used to calculate the portion of building area in 0.1 m 
contours of elevation above sea level for all dissemination areas using spatial analysis tools. For building 
footprints, we use the Canadian Building Footprints dataset developed by Microsoft in collaboration with 
StatCan.8  
It is important to note that the NCPM includes an initiation period that effectively determines existing 
protection. In order to compare across various adaptation scenarios, it is important for the model to start 
 
8 https://github.com/Microsoft/CanadianBuildingFootprints 
 
 
  
 
14 
 
from a common and stable state. Effectively, this means that the NCPM must use a potentially aggressive, 
economically optimal adaptation build simulation for existing protection, a likely overestimate of existing 
protection for all simulations, even one without adaptation. As a result, estimates from the NCPM are 
likely an underestimate of costs. For this baseline adaptation simulation, we assume no property value 
should be present at elevations below 0.5m above the mean higher high water level, which is the typical 
NOAA minor flood (or “nuisance” flood) level for U.S. coastal areas (Sweet et al. 2018). Minor flood 
events typically impact traffic on roadways or underground infrastructure and rarely damage valuable 
property, at least at current sea levels. 
The 2016 Census provides the average of the self-reported residential dwelling value for each 
dissemination area as well as the number of dwellings. These values include both property and structure. 
While sea level rise impacts include the loss of structure and land value, storm surge only affects 
structures in the NCPM (damage to land from episodic flooding is not considered). Structure values are 
decoupled from land value using the representative ratios of building value to total value, estimated from 
the data available. For urban areas, we apply estimates of decoupled assessed values from Vancouver and 
Kamloops (~36 percent attributed to structure by averaging portion from the two cities) and for rural areas 
we use the average ratio from a USEPA analysis of coastal flood risks (USEPA 2017)  (~50 percent 
attributed to structure).  
Similarly, non-residential value is estimated using the ratio of residential value to total value of all 
property uses (including, e.g., commercial, institutional, and industrial value). Urban areas are assigned 
the average ratios from four cities in Canada with detailed value assessments (56 percent residential)—
namely, Vancouver, Calgary, Regina, and Kamloops—and rural areas are assigned the average ratio from 
the U.S. used in USEPA 2017 (69 percent residential). Content damages are assumed to be valued at an 
additional 50 percent of the structure damage for residential structures and 100 percent of the structure 
damage for commercial structures. This assumption is used in the FEMA HAZUS Flood Technical 
Manual.9 Also, we use a housing price index from Statistics Canada (Table: 18-10-0205-01) to convert 
from 2016 CAD to 2015 CAD. 
Property values below each 0.1 m elevation contour are estimated by calculating the proportion of total 
dissemination area building area below each contour. The total property value in the dissemination area is 
then scaled by that proportion to give the property value below the contour. Table 3-4 shows the total 
property value in each province in the model, as well as values below 1 and 2 meters using the methods 
described above. Note that because this assessment depends on U.S. estimates of damage, we restrict the 
model to the area within 400km of the U.S. border as areas further north cannot be assumed to have 
coastal geographies and settlement patterns that are analogous to those in the U.S. 
 
 
 
 
9 Available online at www.fema.gov/plan/prevent/hazus – see Table 14.6. 
 
 
  
 
15 
 
TABLE 3-4.  PROPERTY VALUES (BILLIONS OF 2015 CAD)  
Province  
Total Property 
Value  
Value below 
1m 
Value below 
2m 
British Columbia 
$1,226 
$20.06 
$73.44 
New Brunswick 
$53 
$0.28 
$1.37 
Nova Scotia 
$74 
$0.27 
$1.35 
Prince Edward Island 
$11 
$0.05 
$0.33 
Quebec 
$847 
$0.07 
$0.63 
 
In the following assessment, we follow the convention used in the NCPM by assuming permanent 
inundation from sea level rise results in complete loss of both structure and land value while flooding 
from storm surge only damages the structure. 
Damage Ratios Curves for U.S. areas 
Damage ratios curves provide a mapping between incremental sea level changes and damage as a portion 
of vulnerable property. The general equation for the Damage Ratio (DR) is simply 
𝐷𝑅= (𝐷𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒)/(𝑉𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑦) 
 
where DR is the damage ratio at specified relative sea level changes, Damage is the damage from changes 
in sea level from either permanent inundation or storm surge, and Vulnerable Property is the sum of all 
property value that is estimated differently for permanent inundation than for storm surge flooding.  
For permanent inundation the Damage is the sum of all abandoned property loss and the Vulnerable 
Property is the sum of value below the current sea level for each year of sea level rise. For storm surge, 
the Damage is the annual flood damage from storm surge. Since storm surge primarily impacts properties 
between the sea mean sea level and the height of the surge, we calculate Vulnerable Property using the 
value between the sea level and the surge height of the 50-year event, which matches what is available for 
across Canada.  
As an example, Figure-3-1 shows damage ratios from permanent sea level rise and annual storm surge 
damage for the three regions. With a simple bathtub approach and without consideration of existing 
protection, damage ratios from sea level rise would be 1. Since the NCPM uses the modified bathtub 
approach and an estimate of existing protection, ratios are less than one. Ratios are generally higher as sea 
levels increase as existing protection becomes less viable. The storm surge damage ratios are more 
complex because damages in the NCPM are based on depth-damage functions across a range of surge 
events and associated likelihood.  
 
 
  
 
16 
 
FIGURE 3-1. DAMAGE RATIOS FOR PERMANENT INUNDATION FROM SEA LEVEL RISE (LEFT) AND 
ANNUAL STORM SURGE DAMAGE (RIGHT) FOR THE THREE REGIONS  
 
 
 
Estimate Damages 
The damage for Coastal areas in Canada with this approach is estimated by solving for the Damage in the 
DR equation above, using the product of the Damage Ratio Curve from the U.S. analogue areas and the 
Property Elevation Curve from each Census Subdivision in Canada. The same definitions for the property 
that is vulnerable to either permanent inundation or surge flooding also apply here.  
Results 
The following section shows the results from the analysis starting with the sea level rise scenarios for 
target areas followed by costs across the scenarios, eras, and impact types (sea level rise and storm surge). 
 
Sea level rise scenarios 
Figure 3-2 shows the relative sea level rise scenarios (which incorporate the net effect of both land 
subsidence/uplift, and local sea level changes) for five target areas. For all target areas, differences 
between RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 by 2050 are less than 5cm, which is typical of sea level rise scenarios, 
where the mitigating benefits of GHG emissions reductions are more pronounced later in the century. 
Most scenarios are well below 1 meter of rise although the Upper scenario of RCP8.5 does rise above 1 
meter by the 2090s for Halifax and Charlottetown, which have the highest projections. The median 
projections for Halifax and Charlottetown reach above 50cm by the end of the century for RCP4.5 and 
above 75cm for RCP8.5, while the range of the upper and lower projections are about 60cm for RCP4.5 
and slightly higher for RCP8.5 at about 70cm. While the median projections for Quebec City are lower 
than the Atlantic sites, reaching about 26cm in RCP4.5 and 48cm in RCP8.5, the range across the upper 
and lower scenarios is comparable at 56cm for RCP4.5 and 80cm for RCP8.5. The Pacific sites have 
smaller differences between RCPs, with the median reaching 43cm for RCP4.5 and 57cm for RCP8.5. 
The upper and lower scenarios range from 23cm to 65cm for RCP4.5 and 41cm to 85cm for RCP8.5.  
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0
1
2
3
Damage Ratio
Sea Level (m)
Sea Level Rise Damage Ratios
Atlantic
St. Lawrence
Pacific
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0
1
2
3
Damage Ratio
Sea Level (m)
Storm Surge Damage Ratios
 
 
  
 
17 
 
FIGURE 3-2. SEA LEVEL RISE SCENARIOS FOR THE FIVE TARGET AREAS. SOLID LINES SHOW THE 
MEDIAN AND THE DOTTED LINES SHOW THE LOWER AND UPPER SCENARIOS. 
 
 
Costs from sea level rise and storm surge 
Figure 3-3 shows the national annual costs of permanent inundation from sea level rise, plus total costs 
(including baseline) for episodic storm surge damage. Baseline costs (i.e., before sea level rise starts) 
from storm surge are roughly 57 million CAD / year, which are included in the costs shown. In the 2050s 
era, median costs are $131 and $146 million/year, which is about $73 and $88 million/year above the 
baseline for RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, respectively. Annual costs range from $86 to $203 million across the 
upper and lower bound for RCP4.5 and are slightly larger for RCP8.5 ranging from $97 to $280 million. 
While the lower and median costs only increase marginally from the 2050s to the 2080s for RCP4.5, the 
upper scenario reaches $700 million /year. RCP8.5 2080s median annual costs are roughly triple the 
2050s cost at $450 million and range from $210 million to $1.1 billion across the lower and upper 
 
 
  
 
18 
 
scenarios indicating a signficant greenhouse gas mitigation benefit in both the costs and as a reduction in 
the uncertanty of damage in the later half of the century.  
 
FIGURE 3-3. NATIONAL ANNUAL COSTS ($MIL 2015 CAD) WHERE THE BLACK DOTS SHOW THE 
MEDIAN SCENARIO COSTS AND THE BOXES SHOW THE RANGE OF THE UPPER AND LOWER 
SCENARIOS 
  
 
 
Figure 3-4 shows the annual property loss from permanent inundation (top) and annual storm surge 
damage (bottom) for RCP 8.5. Sea level rise is a small portion of the total costs in all scenarios until 
around 2060. After that, sea level rise costs rise rapidly for the upper sceanario, rising above $100 million 
/ year in the 2080s. The median starts to rise quickly around 2075 reaching $57 million/year by the end of 
the century. The lower scenario never rises above $9 million/year. Storm surge accounts for over 90% of 
the total costs for all scenarios and years, with 2050 costs ranging between $97 and $226 million / year 
and end of century costs ranging from $160 million/year to $1.1 billion/year and a median of $750 
million /year.  
 
 
  
 
19 
 
FIGURE 3-4. NATIONAL ANNUAL COSTS ($MIL 2015 CAD) FROM PERMANENT INUNDATION (TOP) 
AND STORM SURGE DAMAGE (BOTTOM) SHOWING THE MEDIAN (SOLID LINE) AND UPPER AND 
LOWER SCENARIOS (DOTTED LINES) FOR RCP 8.5  
 
 
 
 
Table 3-5 shows the total annual costs per era for each province. The values inside the parentheses show 
the lower and upper scenarios, respectively. As British Columbia accounts for about 95 percent of the 
total value below 2 meters, it is not surprising that British Columbia has the highest costs in all scenarios 
and eras, including the baseline. However, due in part to lower sea level rise projections and storm surge 
heights for British Columbia, damages only make up about 30 to 47 percent of total annual costs for 2050 
across all scenarios. By the 2080s, annual costs span across a large range from $38 to $766 million. For 
the upper scenario, RCP 8.5 British Columbia accounts for 70 percent of the national costs suggesting 
significant uncertainty in the later half of the century.10 The areas along the Atlantic Coast have higher 
 
10 For their most extreme scenario (corresponding to the older A2 SRES GHG scenario) Stanton et al. (2010) 
estimate that British Columbia accounts for about 55 percent of permanent inundation damage, and 95 percent of 
total damage from SLR and storm surge. 
 -
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
2020
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
2090
2100
Property Loss ($mil/year)
Loss of Property (Permanent Inundation)
 -
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1,000
 1,200
 1,400
2020
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
2090
2100
Property Damage ($mil/year)
Storm Surge Damage
 
 
  
 
20 
 
costs relative to vulnerable property (value below 2 meters) because of higher sea level rise scenarios and 
storm surge heights. New Brunswick, which only accounts for 1.8 percent of the total property below 2 
meters accounts for about 19 to 27 percent of the national costs for all eras and scenarios except the three 
highest in the 2080s. Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island are similar. Nova Scotia, with about 1.8 
percent of the value below 2 meters, represents 16 to 24 percent of national annual costs for the majority 
of scenarios and eras; and PEI accounts for 0.4 percent of the value below 2 meters but represents 5 to 6 
percent of the national annual costs in most scenarios. Vulnerable property value in Quebec represents 
about 0.8 percent of the total and accounts for 5 to 17 percent of national costs across all scenarios and 
eras. Most of the costs in Quebec are from storm surge damages in areas along the St. Lawrence, which 
have the highest surge heights.  
 
TABLE 3-5.  ANNUAL COSTS (MILL 2015 CAD) BY PROVINCE FOR THE BASELINE AND FUTURE ERAS  
(TOP VALUES ARE THE GCM MEAN AND VALUES IN THE PARENTHESES ARE THE RANGE ACROSS 
GCMS) 
Province 
Baseline  
2050s 
2080s 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
British 
Columbia 
$26 
$39 
 ($33 - $77) 
$43 
 ($34 - $132) 
$115 
 ($38 - $479) 
$276 
 ($43 - $766) 
New Brunswick 
$13 
$33 
 ($23 - $45) 
$37 
 ($24 - $52) 
$46 
 ($27 - $80) 
$63 
 ($34 - $121) 
Nova Scotia 
$11 
$29 
 ($20 - $39) 
$32 
 ($22 - $45) 
$41 
 ($25 - $74) 
$59 
 ($32 - $105) 
Prince Edward 
Island 
$3 
$8 
 ($5 - $10) 
$9 
 ($5 - $13) 
$11 
 ($6 - $19) 
$16 
 ($8 - $31) 
Quebec 
$4 
$22 
 ($5 - $32) 
$25 
 ($12 - $38) 
$27 
 ($5 - $48) 
$39 
 ($15 - $79) 
National 
$57 
$131 
 ($86 - $203) 
$146 
 ($97 - $280) 
$240 
 ($101 - $700) 
$453 
 ($132 - $1,102) 
 
Table 3-6 shows the number households impacted and the annual costs per household across eras and 
RCPs for the median sea level rise scenario. Note that the household counts include the households in 
dissemination areas at elevations below the 50-year storm surge height, adjusted by the sea level rise of 
each year and scenario. Nationally, the number of households impacted increases from 95 thousand in the 
baseline to 164 and 174 thousand by the 2080s for RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, respectively. Costs per 
household are $604 in the baseline but increase by more than 4-fold by the 2080s under RCP8.5. British 
Columbia has the highest number of households impacted in all scenarios. Quebec has the second lowest 
number of households impacted in the baseline but the second highest in all future eras and scenarios. 
While sea level rise projections are some of the lowest along the St. Lawrence River in Quebec, storm 
surge from extreme events are the highest. While higher-valued properties near the St. Lawrence River 
 
 
  
 
21 
 
are relatively safe in the baseline period, increases in storm surge height, driven by even small increases 
in sea level, start to damage these properties as early as the 2040s.11  
In the baseline, impacts per household are highest in Nova Scotia and Quebec. While the costs in Quebec 
per household decline from the increases in the number of households impacted, the costs per household 
in Nova Scotia remain the highest of all provinces except for RCP8.5 in the 2080s era. While total costs 
are highest in British Columbia, those costs are spread over a larger number of households than in other 
provinces resulting in a lower cost per household in the 2050s era. In the 2080s era, costs rise higher for 
British Columbia than the number of households with costs per household reaching almost $4,000 / year 
for RCP8.5.   
 
TABLE 3-6.  ANNUAL NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS (“HH s” IN TABLE) IMPACTED AND COSTS (2015 
CAD) PER DWELLING (“$/HH” IN TABLE) FOR THE MEDIAN SEA LEV EL RISE SCENARIOS 
Province  
Baseline 
RCP4.5 - 2050 
RCP8.5 - 2050 
RCP4.5 - 2080 
RCP8.5 - 2080 
HHs 
$/HH 
HHs  
$/HH 
HHs  
$/HH 
HHs  
$/HH 
HHs  
$/HH 
British Columbia 
45,891 
$577 
57,780 
$676 
59,151 
$732 
65,628 
$1,757 
69,738 
$3,957 
New Brunswick 
25,332 
$531 
27,698 
$1,201 
28,048 
$1,316 
29,016 
$1,587 
30,186 
$2,094 
Nova Scotia 
12,406 
$857 
14,609 
$1,984 
14,894 
$2,179 
15,583 
$2,622 
16,387 
$3,615 
Prince Ed. Is. 
5,068 
$569 
6,235 
$1,216 
6,420 
$1,335 
6,903 
$1,579 
7,482 
$2,073 
Quebec 
6,489 
$624 
46,004 
$472 
46,836 
$528 
47,510 
$575 
50,255 
$776 
NATIONAL 
95,186 
$604 
152,327 
$857 
155,348 
$940 
164,641 
$1,460 
174,047 
$2,602 
 
Table 3-7 shows the annual costs for the target areas, which are Census Divisions that include the city 
listed. Greater Vancouver includes 93 percent of the total value below 2 meters in Canada and has the 
highest overall costs of all Census Divisions across all scenarios and eras. On the lower end, costs are just 
above $30 million / year and on the higher end they reach almost $760 million / year. Quebec City and 
Victoria both have low costs overall at about $1 million / year. The ranges across the upper and lower 
scenarios for these two target areas are relatively small compared to other target areas because of low sea 
level rise projections and relatively flat elevation-value curves. Charlottetown, which lies in the Census 
Division with the lowest total property value of the five target areas, has the third highest costs of the 
target areas and fourth highest of all Census Divisions suggesting a significant burden to the area. Halifax 
is the Census Division with the third highest costs overall (Gloucester, NB is the second) where costs 
tripple from the baseline in the 2050s era and are 4 to 6 times higher in the 2080s era. 
 
11 This may also be an artifact of the NCPM’s approach to estimating the effectiveness of existing protection 
discussed previously. Meaning that, it may be the case that existing protection, which will have the most impact to 
the baseline period, causes an underestimate of baseline storm surge damage. 
 
 
  
 
22 
 
 
TABLE 3-7.  ANNUAL COSTS (MILL 2015 CAD) FOR THE TARGET AREAS FOR THE BASELINE AND 
FUTURE ERAS (TOP VALUES ARE THE GCM MEAN AND VALUES IN THE PARENTHESES ARE THE 
RANGE ACROSS THE UPPER AND LOWER SCENARIOS) 
Target Area 
Baseline 
2050s 
2080s 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
Charlottetown 
$1.5 
$4.6 
 ($3.1 - $6.4) 
$5.2 
 ($3.3 - $7.6) 
$6.7 
 ($3.8 - $12.4) 
$9.8 
 ($4.9 - $19.5) 
Halifax 
$4.0 
$11.4 
 ($8.0 - $15.1) 
$12.7 
 ($8.7 - $17.9) 
$16.2 
 ($9.9 - $30.3) 
$24.1 
 ($12.7 - $40.8) 
Quebec City 
$0.0 
$1.3 
 ($0.0 - $1.3) 
$1.3 
 ($1.3 - $1.3) 
$1.3 
 ($0.0 - $1.3) 
$1.3 
 ($1.3 - $1.3) 
Vancouver 
$24.8 
$37.2 
 ($31.0 - $75.1) 
$41.3 
 ($31.9 - $129.5) 
$113.2 
 ($35.8 - $475.4) 
$273.4 
 ($41.4 - $760.5) 
Victoria 
$0.9 
$0.9 
 ($0.9 - $0.9) 
$0.9 
 ($0.9 - $1.0) 
$0.9 
 ($0.9 - $0.9) 
$0.9 
 ($0.9 - $0.9) 
 
Adaptation 
We apply the same approach described above using results from a simulation of least-cost decisions based 
on a benefit cost test performed for each grid cell on an annual basis for sea level rise and on a decadal 
basis for storm surge. The cost-benefit test in the NCPM compares an estimate of discounted avoided 
damages over the next 30 years with the cost of each adaptation option. The decision rule is based on an 
estimate of expected annual damages and expected annual benefits of adaptation, and assumes a 3% 
annual discount rate, consistent with estimates of the real social rate of time preference for individuals 
who might be in the position to make a decision to protect or abandon a property. The costs of adaptation 
include initial capital costs as well as annual maintenance costs. The benefits of adaptation include the 
avoided damages that would likely occur without protection. Note that discounting of expected benefits of 
protection, and expected costs of protection, is used in the decision rule to allow the model to select the 
lowest-cost adaptation option, where the expected annual benefit exceeds the cost of that option. This 
represents a traditional cost-benefit test for optimal risk-reduction investment at an individual property 
level. The model results, however, represent the outcome of implementing that decision – the model 
results themselves are presented as undiscounted. 
Grid cells with higher benefits than costs are protected and protection costs, including annual 
maintenance costs are tallied for the remainder of the simulation. Properties can be protected by hard 
structures like sea walls, which protects from sea level inundation and storm surge up to the 100-year 
surge height, elevation of structures, which protects from storm surge only, and beach nourishment, which 
is similar to hard structures but is only effective up to a certain height. Hard structures and nourishment 
protect not only the properties but are also built to protect properties further inland. The costs of 
protection are estimated by site-specific characteristics like if the property is in the back bay or ocean 
facing, which requires additional costs for sea walls to protect from wave action, or the building density, 
which affects the cost of elevating those buildings. The model chooses the protection type that is the 
cheapest for that grid cell.  
 
 
  
 
23 
 
A detailed model like the NCPM is not available for Canada, so we apply a similar model transfer for 
protection costs and adaptation effectiveness used in the preceding analysis, but using the proactive 
adaptation results from NCPM application.in U.S. cities. This involves using cost-elevation curves to 
estimate the protection costs, similar to those for loss and damages shown in Figure 3-1, and the study site 
pairings discussed above.  
Table 3-8 shows annual costs (in millions) for each province with adaptation. Nationally, adaption 
reduces annual costs between 45 percent for lower sea level rise scenarios and 88 percent for higher sea 
level rise scenarios. Costs are roughly reduced by half by the 2050s era for most provinces except British 
Columbia where adaptation reduces costs by about 20 percent for the lower and median scenarios but by 
50 percent and 70 percent for the upper scenario under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, respectively. The relative 
benefits of adaptation become more apparent in the 2080s era, reducing costs by 60-80 percent in most 
cases. Note that these results are more dependent on the U.S analogue sites because the process of 
estimating these costs are more complex and depend on more site-specific characteristics. 
 
TABLE 3-8.  ANNUAL COSTS (MILL 2015 CAD) FOR THE ADAPTATION SCENARIO FOR THE FUTURE 
ERAS (GCM MEAN, VALUES IN PARENTHESES ARE THE RANGE ACROSS GCMS ) 
Province 
2050s 
2080s 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
British Columbia 
$32 
 ($25 - $38) 
$33 
 ($26 - $40) 
$40 
 ($30 - $49) 
$45 
 ($34 - $58) 
New Brunswick 
$14 
 ($9 - $18) 
$15 
 ($9 - $19) 
$11 
 ($11 - $20) 
$19 
 ($14 - $22) 
Nova Scotia 
$12 
 ($8 - $15) 
$14 
 ($9 - $17) 
$10 
 ($10 - $17) 
$17 
 ($14 - $20) 
Prince Edward Island 
$4 
 ($2 - $5) 
$4 
 ($3 - $5) 
$3 
 ($3 - $6) 
$6 
 ($4 - $7) 
Quebec 
$10 
 ($2 - $14) 
$11 
 ($6 - $17) 
$2 
 ($2 - $19) 
$17 
 ($7 - $23) 
National 
$71 
 ($47 - $90) 
$78 
 ($53 - $97) 
$56 
 ($56 - $111) 
$104 
 ($72 - $130) 
 
Main takeaways  
The main takeaways from this analysis are: 
• 
Results indicate that costs are relatively low compared to other damage categories considered in 
this study by the 2050s but rise significantly under the upper scenario by the 2080s. This suggest 
that costs are sensitive to higher sea levels, including those in the mid-century period that are less 
likely but still within the uncertainty bounds. 
• 
Costs are concentrated in specific local coastal communities such as those in the Maritime 
Provinces where costs are high relative to average costs in other less vulnerable locations. Sea 
 
 
  
 
24 
 
level rise projections are especially high in these areas along with a high number of low-lying 
properties that are at risk. 
• 
Permanent inundation to property from sea level rise is not a major threat nationally until later in 
the century and primarily under higher end sea-level rise scenarios. Storm surge, however, is a 
significant threat currently and will likely worsen without investments in property protection or 
well-planned managed retreat.  
• 
Although sea level rise projections and storm surge heights are lower on the Pacific Coast, 
Greater Vancouver contains 94 percent of the total property value potentially vulnerable to 
coastal damage. It is likely that most of the higher value buildings and property could be 
protected but some communities may need to be relocated.  
• 
Adaptation is extremely effective in reducing costs for most provinces, especially those in the 
East where costs are about 5 to 7 times lower based on cost-effectiveness in similar analog 
locations in the Eastern U.S.  In British Columbia, adaptation may be less effective for most 
scenarios but does reduce costs significantly for the high-end scenarios indicating a significant 
reduction in uncertainty.  
Limitations and Caveats  
The major caveats and limitations to this approach are noted below.    
• 
As mentioned, developing a detailed inundation model is outside the scope of this analysis so we 
use analogue US areas to fill in the relationship between damage and vulnerable property for each 
incremental increase in sea level. While we attempt to model the effect of local features using a 
damage ratio, built into the costs from the U.S. sites are site-level attributes such as existing 
protection, local topography and settlement/development patterns that are not necessarily 
representative of the Canadian coast and property development.  
• 
The 2016 Census provided average residential home value estimates provided by the census 
participants. From that we derive non-residential value and decouple structure value from the 
total value using ratios from four cities in western Canada as well as ratios derived from the U.S. 
While these two property value adjustments provide required data to estimate comprehensive 
effects, and to recognize intermittent flooding impacts on structures alone exclusive of land, 
actual ratios of structure value to total value throughout the full Canadian spatial domain likely 
differ in an unknown manner. 
• 
The building footprint database provides important information for distributing property value for 
the elevation-value curves, yielding a more accurate estimate of property potentially vulnerable to 
flooding or inundation. We find that in coastal areas, buildings are typically concentrated in areas 
that are outside zones regularly flooded under current or historic climatic and sea-level 
conditions. With sea level rise, however, these areas that have proven to be safer historically can 
experience high levels of damage in the latter half of the century without aggressive protection 
plans.  We have also found that estimates generated with simplifying assumptions that do not take 
into account building footprint location data, such as uniform allocation of property value across 
dissemination areas, result in biased estimates, including overestimation of damage in nearshore 
areas historically flooded, and underestimation of damage in higher elevation areas where 
building data indicate clustering of property value. 
 
 
  
 
25 
 
• 
The U.S. NCPM estimates the locations of existing protection by simulating a least-cost build 
strategy. While this provides a necessary starting point for comparisons across protection strategy 
scenarios, it is likely an overestimate of existing protection, which results in a conservative 
estimate of damages throughout the century. The conservative nature of the NCPM likely 
propagates to this estimate for Canada, especially without adaptation.  
• 
Simulating adaptation effectiveness ideally requires a detailed coastal inundation model, built to 
be reliable at the project scale. We include an estimate of the effects of adaptation, which relies 
heavily on U.S. site analogues, but there is more uncertainty in this estimate than the estimate 
without adaptation due largely to the complexity of the adaptation process which is both path-
dependent and includes a least-cost adaptation decision tree to simulate the potential cost-
effectiveness of adaptation projects.    
 
3.1.2 
INLAND FLOODING 
Flood events pose the highest risk to properties than any other weather-related disaster in Canada (Burn 
and Whitfield 2015) and water-related losses have surpassed fire and theft as the principal source of 
property insurance claims (Public Safety Canada 2015). Land use change and climate change threaten to 
worsen this risk in the future. The Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) reports 
substantial increases in liabilities from 2009 to 2015 with an annual average of $2.4 billion in damages 
from non-hurricane flood events, which is about half the total costs that also include hurricanes, winter 
storms, and convective storms (PBO 2016). No comprehensive analysis of increased inland flooding risk 
from climate change has been conducted at the national scale, but regional and local analyses suggest that 
risks will increase. Roy et al. (2001) evaluate changes in seasonal floods in the Châteauguay River Basin 
in southern Quebec for 24-hour events run through a hydrology-hydraulics model. They find significant 
increases in extreme flows between 2 and 3 times historical flows for the 20- and 100-year events, which 
result in a 250 percent increase in flood depths. Thistlethwaite et al. (2018) use the G-CAT flood model 
(Guy Carpenter 2015) to evaluate flood risks in Halifax, Nova Scotia. They find that damage from a 100-
year flood would increase from $7 million CAD to $67 million in a world with 4 °C of warming globally 
by 2100 and that average annual losses increase to three times the baseline costs. 
Methods 
The objective of the analysis is to estimate changes in future flood damages from climate change across 
Canada given the available data and resources. The analysis follows four overall steps, which are 
described briefly here. More detail follows. 
1. Calculate baseline period damages: Estimating baseline damage is the backbone of the analysis 
as the projected damages are meant to provide a nudge or shift from the baseline. This step is data 
driven and relies primarily on three datasets: detailed map of Annual Damage Ratios (ADRs) 
from flood catastrophe models obtained from JBA Risk Management; a geolocated building 
footprint database; and self-reported home value data collected for the 2016 Census and 
aggregated to dissemination areas. 
2. Estimate distributions of extreme precipitation events: Future projected damages from climate 
change are scaled using shifts in the statistical properties of extreme-value precipitation. This step 
 
 
  
 
26 
 
estimates those shifts in statistical properties by fitting an extreme value distribution to maximum 
annual 24-hour precipitation for both the baseline and future eras.     
3. Calibrate damage curves to fit baseline ADRs: Relying on the baseline ADRs from JBA, this 
step calibrates four precipitation-driven damage functions, address both residential and 
commercial as well as both fluvial and pluvial flood events. 
4. Estimate future damages: Projected ADRs are estimated by multiplying the damage curve from 
step 3 and the distributions of extreme precipitation from Step 2, which provides estimates of 
annual damage ratios for each projection and the two future eras. Damages are then calculated by 
multiplying structure and content value by the projected ADRs.  
Pluvial flood (from rainfall, usually locally) and fluvial floods (from rivers) are evaluated differently 
using spatial scales that better represent the contributing area. Fluvial flooding is evaluated across 184 
basins in Canada and pluvial flooding is evaluated with a half-degree grid. While flood events are likely 
to occur on smaller spatial scales, the GCMs that provide the drivers of change in precipitation patterns 
and statistics run at larger spatial scales. As such, river basins and half degree grids provide a comfortable 
balance between the scale of the impact and the scale of the projection. Figure 3-5 shows the basins and 
dissemination areas across Canada and Figure 3-6 shows the same for Southern Ontario with the half-
degree grids overlaid, including a map of an area in Toronto with ADRs (in blue) and the building 
footprints. 
FIGURE 3-5. BASINS AND DISSEMINATION AREAS IN CANADA 
 
 
 
 
  
 
27 
 
FIGURE 3-6. BASINS, DISSEMINATION AREAS, AND HALF DEGREE GRIDS (GREY LINES) IN 
SOUTHERN ONTARIO, AND AN AREA IN TORONTO (RIGHT) WITH ADRS AND THE BUILDING 
FOOTPRINT DATA 
 
 
Calculating baseline period damages 
This analysis relies on a dataset of flood risk developed by JBA Risk Management, who developed 
detailed flood risk and damage maps across Canada. These risk maps are developed using a proprietary 
2D hydrodynamic flood model often used to assist in pricing premiums for individual properties (JBA 
Risk Management 2018). The model incorporates federal government data on streamflows and water 
levels (Hunter et al.2007; Lamb et al. 2009; Faulkner et al. 2016).  
The specific product used here is the historical Annual Damage Ratio (ADR) map, which provides ratios 
of expected damage as a fraction of structure and content value and serves as the baseline of this analysis. 
The ADR was estimated with a gridded hydrologic/hydraulic flood model combined with a generic depth-
damage relationship for a standard structure type from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The hydrologic 
flood model uses a Variable Resolution Grid (see Figure 3-7) and represents the average damage from a 
10,000 year simulation. The ADR is informed by insurance claims data from past flood events. The latest 
version of the dataset (2015) used in this study incorporates claims data from the Alberta and Toronto 
2013 flood events. While the ADRs do include the effect of existing protection where data is available, 
the product does not include the effects of storm drainage systems. The bias this introduces is not clear as 
storm drainage systems are designed to protect local infrastructure by moving stormwaters away quickly, 
which has the potential to flood infrastructure downhill or downstream. For this analysis, we use the 
 
 
  
 
28 
 
ADRs that include both structure and content damage. These ADRs reflect the risk mitigation effects 
from most major existing flood protection infrastructure. 
FIGURE 3-7. JBA VARIABLE RESOLUTION GRID OVER CANADA (SOURCE: JBA RISK – CANADA VRG 
ADR INFORMATION – LEGEND SHOWS GRID DIMENSION)  
  
Baseline expected annual damage is the product of the ADRs and the sum of structure value and content 
value. ADRs are only evaluated in areas with within a building footprint. These building specific ADRs 
are averaged for each dissemination area, weighted by building area. In effect, this assumes each square 
meter of ground-floor building area has the same value within each dissemination area. For building 
footprints, we use the Canadian Building Footprints dataset developed by Microsoft in collaboration with 
StatCan.12 Property values are constructed using the same data and approach described in Section 3.1.1 for 
coastal properties. We use the decoupled structure-only values, assuming land value is not affected, for 
both residential and commercial assets, which use different depth-damage functions in the ADR 
estimates. Content damages are assumed to be valued at an additional 50 percent of the structure damage 
for residential structures and 100 percent of the structure damage for commercial structures. This 
assumption is used in the FEMA HAZUS Flood Technical Manual.
13  
 
12 https://github.com/Microsoft/CanadianBuildingFootprints 
13 Available online at www.fema.gov/plan/prevent/hazus – see Table 14.6. 
 
 
  
 
29 
 
Estimate distributions of extreme precipitation events 
Using the baseline daily precipitation (1986-2005) and the projected daily precipitation for the two eras 
(2050s: for the era 2041-2070 and 2080s: for the era 2071-2100), we fit an extreme value distribution to 
characterize the statistical properties of maximum annual precipitation over these time periods. The 
Gumbel distribution, also known as the Generalized Extreme Value Distribution Type-I, is commonly 
used for extreme precipitation (Wilks 1993; Wotling et al. 2000; Ehmele and Kunz 2019), and is used 
here as well.  
One of the limitations of our approach is that without a hydrologic flood model of Canada, we cannot 
estimate future flood depths – instead we need to develop damage curves based on precipitation as a 
proxy for flood depth. As an attempt to partially correct for the non-linear relationship between? 
precipitation and flood depth, before fitting these distributions, we use a transformation on precipitation to 
produce what we are calling “equivalent depth,” which is the square root of precipitation. This 
relationship is derived from general hydraulic geometry theory, which indicates that flood depth is related 
to the square root of runoff (see Leopold and Maddock (1953) for the formulation of the theory and Singh 
(2003) for a review and updates based on experimental data as well as Allen et al. (1994) for a direct 
application of this specific approach). Note that this transformation only accounts for the relationship 
between flood depth and runoff. We do not attempt to account for differences from precipitation and 
runoff since these are more nuanced and site-specific and would require a detailed hydrologic flood 
model, which is outside the scope of this national-scale analysis. The effect of this depends on antecedent 
moisture conditions in soils. In dry conditions, rain is often absorbed in the soil or lost directly through 
evapotranspiration and there is little to no runoff generated but in wet conditions, such as flood events, the 
ratio of runoff to precipitation is much higher, especially when the ground is fully inundated. While it is 
not clear exactly how this omission will impact the analysis, it is more likely the damage estimates would 
be higher if these effects were considered, but given the scale of the analysis and other sources of 
uncertainty it is still appropriate given the objectives of the analysis. 
Calibrate damage curves to fit baseline Damage Ratios  
While depth-damage functions are commonly applied in flood damage assessments, including the JBA 
Risk Management flood assessment used to characterize baseline risks in this analysis, due to the data and 
resource limitations, we develop equivalent-depth damage functions that provide damage ratios for 
various equivalent depth levels at a given location. Generally, depth-damage curves follow an S-curve 
such that at certain depths damage is zero (e.g., lower than the baseline floor or crawl space). Then as 
depth increases beyond the zero-damage threshold, damages accelerate with depth, then decelerate to a 
plateau at a theoretical maximum damage level. Due to regulations and some common sense, most 
valuable structures such as a home or business are not built in areas that are damaged often (e.g., every 
year) so it is the tail of the distribution of maximum annual events (e.g., above the 50-year event) where 
most flood damage is incurred. Using this general knowledge and the shape of the various depth-damage 
functions developed by the U.S. Army Corps and others (CITE), we use a logistic function to represent 
the equivalent-depth damage curves. This function has the following form: 
𝐷𝑅= 𝑐/(1 + 𝑎𝑒−𝑏∗𝐸𝑄) 
where DR is the damage ratio of the event, EQ is the equivalent depth, and a, b, and c, are parameters. 
Calibrating the ADRs to all three parameters would result in many possible solutions, many of which 
 
 
  
 
30 
 
would violate the general logic of depth-damage curves, so it is necessary to hold some parameters 
constant. For b, we use a value of 2, which maintains the general shape of existing depth-damage 
functions, and we relate the parameter, c, to ADR such that c = 10*ADR. As a result, we calibrate the 
parameter, a, such that the sum of the product of the equivalent depth distribution and the damage 
function is equal to the ADR of the grid or basin. As an example, Figure 3-8 shows the distribution of 
equivalent depth for the baseline and the solved damage curve for residential pluvial flooding in the basin 
that includes Toronto city center. Note that the damage curve uses the right vertical axis and the flood 
density functions use the left vertical axis. Damages are effectively the area under the intersection of the 
damage curve and Probability Density Function (PDF). In this example, the extension of the tail of the 
distribution from the future scenarios in the 2080s era compared to the baseline increases damages 
substantially by increasing that intersected area. As shown in the results section, this pattern is prominent 
throughout Canada, especially in areas with high building and contents value. 
 
FIGURE 3-8. EXAMPLE OF THE DAMAGE CURVE AND EQUIVALENT DEPTH DISTRIBUTIONS 
(BASELINE AND FOR THE RCP8.5 2080S ERA) FOR RESIDENTIAL PLUVIAL FLOODING IN TORONTO   
 
 
Estimate future damages 
Similar to baseline damage, projections of future damage for the two eras are the sum of the product of 
the damage function and equivalent depth distributions. Since the damage curve is the same for the 
projections and the baseline, changes in damage are driven by shifts in the distribution of equivalent 
depth, especially changes in the upper tail. The adjustments to damage ratios are re-aggregated from half 
degree or river basins to the dissemination areas using a spatial weighting. Annual expected damages are 
then the product of the revised damage ratio and the structure and content values developed in Step 1.  
Results 
The sections below summarize the baseline flooding damages, how precipitation extremes are projected 
to be affected under climate change, and the resulting projected flooding damages. 
 
 
  
 
31 
 
Baseline Damages 
Figure 3-9 shows the total baseline damage by province or territory for the four damage types. Total 
expected annual damage is roughly $1.2 billion CAD for the baseline. About 56 percent of the damage is 
from fluvial flooding in residential buildings, 25 percent from fluvial flooding in commercial buildings, 
and the other ~19 percent from pluvial flooding. 86 percent of the flood damage occurs in four provinces: 
Ontario (41 percent), British Columbia (21 percent), Quebec (13 percent), and Alberta (11 percent). Table 
3-9 shows the number of households and value in the floodplain of JBA’s 10,000-year flood model 
simulation, which are estimated using the portion of building area in the floodplain multiplied by the total 
number of households for each dissemination area. New Brunswick and Newfoundland and Labrador are 
the provinces with the highest annual damage ratios at $3.34, and $2.98 per thousand CAD of total asset 
value.   
 
FIGURE 3-9.  TOTAL BASELINE FLOOD DAMAGE BY PROVINCE OR TERRITORY  
 
$0
$100
$200
$300
$400
$500
$600AlbertaBritish ColumbiaManitobaNew BrunswickNewfoundland and LabradorNorthwest TerritoriesNova ScotiaNunavutOntarioPrince Edward IslandQuebecSaskatchewanYukon
ANNUAL DAMAGE (MILL CAD/YEAR)
Commercial Fluvial
Commercial Pluvial
Residential Fluvial
Residential Pluvial
 
 
  
 
32 
 
TABLE 3-9.  BASELINE HOUSEHOLDS AND VALUE IN THE FLOODPLAIN BY PROVINCE / TERRITORY  
Province / Territory 
Households in 
Floodplain 
(thousands) 
Building Value 
in Floodplain 
($millions) 
Alberta 
383 
$68,054 
British Columbia 
374 
$92,683 
Manitoba 
330 
$39,147 
New Brunswick 
100 
$8,136 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
48 
$5,606 
Northwest Territories 
3 
$314 
Nova Scotia 
115 
$12,121 
Nunavut 
2 
$96 
Ontario 
1,095 
$205,876 
Prince Edward Island 
15 
$1,424 
Quebec 
767 
$78,997 
Saskatchewan 
80 
$10,111 
Yukon 
4 
$626 
National 
3,316 
$523,191 
 
 
Changes in Extreme Precipitation  
Figure 3-10 shows the change in the value-weighted empirical 10-year event. These are estimated by 
taking the third highest annual maximum rainfall from the 30-year era and weighting those by property 
value in each half-degree grid. The advantage of this graphic is that it avoids the errors that may be 
introduced from fitting a distribution and relies only on the half-degree precipitation. The figure shows 
that all projections indicate an increase in the 10-year empirical event except for a couple of scenarios in 
Novia Scotia, RCP4.5. The increases are generally higher for RCP8.5 than RCP4.5 and intensify in the 
2080s era compared to the 2050 era. While there is an agreement in the sign of change, nationally the 
magnitude varies from 11 to 24 percent in the 2050 era and 26 to 68 percent in the 2080s era. Similarly, 
Figure 3-11 shows the change in intensity for the 100-year event, weighted by property value.   
 
 
 
  
 
33 
 
FIGURE 3-10.  VALUE-WEIGHTED CHANGE IN THE 10-YEAR PRECIPITATION EVENT BY PROJECTION 
AND ERA COMPARED TO THE BASELINE 
 
 
FIGURE 3-11.  VALUE-WEIGHTED CHANGE IN 100-YEAR PRECIPITATION EVENT BY PROJECTION 
AND ERA COMPARED TO THE BASELINE  
 
 
Table 3-10 shows the change in frequency of the historical 100-year event in the 2080s era for fluvial 
flooding in select cities with high asset value and high baseline damages. Fluvial flooding accounts for 
 
 
  
 
34 
 
about 90 percent of the baseline damages so these frequencies are important. As shown, under RCP8.5, 
the 100-year event is likely to occur between 3 and almost 7 times more often given the median 
projection. Under RCP8.5 conditions worsen to 9 times more often for Toronto and 14 times more often 
for both Edmonton and Calgary. 
 
TABLE 3-10.  FREQUENCY OF THE HISTORICAL 100 -YEAR EVENT (IN YEARS) FOR THE MEDIAN 
GCM AND BOTH MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM FOR BOTH RCPS IN THE 2080 s ERA FOR FLUVIAL 
FLOODING IN SELECT CITIES  
RCP4.5 
RCP8.5 
City Name 
Median 
Min 
Max 
Median 
Min 
Max 
Toronto 
29 
14 
59 
11 
6 
22 
Edmonton 
15 
7 
36 
7 
5 
43 
Calgary 
21 
6 
31 
7 
6 
16 
Vancouver 
22 
12 
59 
17 
9 
21 
 
Future Damages 
Figure 3-12 shows the total national damages for the future eras organized by RCP. Note that these are 
damages in absolute terms are not relative to the baseline, which is roughly $1.2 billion / year. Flood 
damages are about four times higher than the baseline for both 2050s and 2080s eras under RCP4.5. 
Under RCP 8.5, damages are 5 times higher than the baseline in the 2050s era and 7 times higher in the 
2080s era. While the range across GCMs vary by about +/- 20 to 60 percent of the mean, even the lowest 
projection from RCP4.5 in the 2050s era is about 2 times higher than the baseline.  
 
FIGURE 3-12.  TOTAL NATIONAL DAMAGES FOR TWO FUTURE ERAS. BOXES SHOW THE RANGE OF 
GCM OUTPUTS AND DOTS SHOW THE MEAN. BASELINE IS ROUGHLY $3 BIL CAD / YEAR.  
 
Table 3-11 and Table 3-12 show damage and ratios of the change in damage from the baseline, 
respectively. Ontario has the highest future damage in all scenarios, followed by British Columbia. 
 
 
  
 
35 
 
However, the provinces with the highest change in damage are Ontario, New Brunswick, Newfoundland 
and Labrador, and Nova Scotia, where all RCPs and eras indicate a GCM mean increase in damage 
around 5 times the baseline or higher. Table 3-13 shows the 10 census subdivisions with the highest 
damages in the 2080s for RCP 8.5. In total, these represent about a third of the damages for RCP8.5 in the 
2080s. Note that many of these are near each other. For example, both Georgina and Mississauga are near 
Toronto.  
TABLE 3-11.  FLOOD DAMAGE IN MILLIONS OF 2015 CAD / YEAR BY PROVINCE FOR THE BASELINE 
AND FUTURE ERAS. TOP VALUES ARE THE GCM MEAN AND VALUES IN THE PARENTHESES ARE THE 
RANGE ACROSS GCMS 
Province / 
Territory 
Baseline RCP4.5 - 2050 
RCP8.5 - 2050 
RCP4.5 - 2080 
RCP8.5 - 2080 
Alberta 
$134 
$609 
 ($390 - $1,068) 
$783 
 ($557 - $1,312) 
$594 
 ($268 - $977) 
$968 
 ($299 - $1,389) 
British Columbia 
$250 
$696 
 ($413 - $1,087) 
$785 
 ($463 - $1,050) 
$822 
 ($599 - $1,252) 
$1,209 
 ($940 - $1,669) 
Manitoba 
$78 
$354 
 ($120 - $537) 
$293 
 ($87 - $407) 
$394 
 ($88 - $693) 
$592 
 ($97 - $1,471) 
New Brunswick 
$27 
$147 
 ($98 - $250) 
$143 
 ($71 - $252) 
$126 
 ($71 - $210) 
$156 
 ($115 - $228) 
Newfoundland and 
Labrador 
$17 
$83 
 ($49 - $134) 
$93 
 ($35 - $208) 
$83 
 ($38 - $137) 
$135 
 ($80 - $247) 
Northwest 
Territories 
$1 
$3 
 ($2 - $6) 
$4 
 ($2 - $8) 
$4 
 ($2 - $7) 
$5 
 ($2 - $10) 
Nova Scotia 
$29 
$170 
 ($70 - $243) 
$190 
 ($96 - $279) 
$152 
 ($52 - $281) 
$209 
 ($110 - $283) 
Nunavut 
$0 
$1 
 ($0 - $1) 
$1 
 ($1 - $1) 
$1 
 ($0 - $2) 
$1 
 ($1 - $2) 
Ontario 
$491 
$2,690 
 ($1,118 - $4,380) 
$3,092 
 ($1,938 - $4,703) 
$2,281 
 ($1,401 - $3,334) 
$4,111 
 ($1,899 - $6,554) 
Prince Edward 
Island 
$2 
$7 
 ($1 - $13) 
$5 
 ($2 - $11) 
$4 
 ($1 - $11) 
$7 
 ($3 - $14) 
Quebec 
$152 
$426 
 ($247 - $674) 
$500 
 ($256 - $726) 
$481 
 ($236 - $922) 
$780 
 ($374 - $1,240) 
Saskatchewan 
$13 
$76 
 ($52 - $109) 
$64 
 ($24 - $90) 
$63 
 ($23 - $91) 
$103 
 ($27 - $211) 
Yukon 
$2 
$7 
 ($3 - $12) 
$8 
 ($3 - $17) 
$7 
 ($4 - $14) 
$12 
 ($4 - $28) 
National 
$1,196 
$5,269 
 ($2,561 - $8,515) 
$5,961 
 ($3,535 - $9,064) 
$5,011 
 ($2,783 - $7,931) 
$8,289 
 ($3,951 - $13,346) 
 
 
 
  
 
36 
 
TABLE 3-12.  CHANGE IN FLOOD DAMAGE (RATIOS WHERE VALUES ABOVE 1 ARE INCREASES IN 
DAMAGE FROM THE BASELINE) BY PROVINCE FOR THE BASELINE AND FUTURE ERAS. TOP VALUES 
ARE THE GCM MEAN AND VALUES IN THE PARENTHESES ARE THE RANGE ACROSS GCMS  
Province / 
Territory 
Baseline 
RCP4.5 - 2050 
RCP8.5 - 2050 
RCP4.5 - 2080 
RCP8.5 - 2080 
Alberta 
$134 
4.5 
(2.9 - 8.0) 
5.9 
(4.2 - 9.8) 
4.4 
(2.0 - 7.3) 
7.2 
(2.2 - 10.4) 
British Columbia 
$250 
2.8 
(1.7 - 4.4) 
3.1 
(1.9 - 4.2) 
3.3 
(2.4 - 5.0) 
4.8 
(3.8 - 6.7) 
Manitoba 
$78 
4.6 
(1.5 - 6.9) 
3.8 
(1.1 - 5.2) 
5.1 
(1.1 - 8.9) 
7.6 
(1.3 - 18.9) 
New Brunswick 
$27 
5.4 
(3.6 - 9.2) 
5.3 
(2.6 - 9.3) 
4.6 
(2.6 - 7.7) 
5.8 
(4.2 - 8.4) 
Newfoundland 
and Labrador 
$17 
5.0 
(2.9 - 8.0) 
5.6 
(2.1 - 12.5) 
5.0 
(2.3 - 8.2) 
8.1 
(4.8 - 14.8) 
Northwest 
Territories 
$1 
2.1 
(1.3 - 4.2) 
2.6 
(1.5 - 5.2) 
2.4 
(1.2 - 4.7) 
3.5 
(1.5 - 6.9) 
Nova Scotia 
$29 
5.8 
(2.4 - 8.2) 
6.4 
(3.2 - 9.4) 
5.1 
(1.8 - 9.5) 
7.1 
(3.7 - 9.6) 
Nunavut 
$0 
2.3 
(1.3 - 3.4) 
2.9 
(2.3 - 4.0) 
2.6 
(1.5 - 5.3) 
3.9 
(2.2 - 6.5) 
Ontario 
$491 
5.5 
(2.3 - 8.9) 
6.3 
(3.9 - 9.6) 
4.6 
(2.9 - 6.8) 
8.4 
(3.9 - 13.3) 
Prince Edward 
Island 
$2 
3.1 
(0.6 - 6.1) 
2.2 
(0.8 - 5.1) 
1.8 
(0.5 - 5.1) 
3.4 
(1.3 - 6.6) 
Quebec 
$152 
2.8 
(1.6 - 4.4) 
3.3 
(1.7 - 4.8) 
3.2 
(1.6 - 6.1) 
5.1 
(2.5 - 8.2) 
Saskatchewan 
$13 
5.9 
(4.0 - 8.4) 
5.0 
(1.8 - 7.0) 
4.8 
(1.8 - 7.1) 
7.9 
(2.1 - 16.3) 
Yukon 
$2 
3.6 
(1.8 - 6.5) 
4.4 
(1.8 - 8.8) 
3.8 
(1.9 - 7.7) 
6.5 
(2.2 - 14.7) 
National 
$1,196 
4.4 
(3.1 - 5.9) 
5.0 
(3.8 - 6.3) 
4.2 
(3.0 - 5.4) 
6.9 
(3.5 - 9.7) 
 
 
TABLE 3-13.  CENSUS SUBDIVISIONS WITH HIGHEST DAMAGES IN RCP8.5, 2080S SHOWING THE 
BASELINE AND FUTURE ERAS, MEAN OVER GCMS  
CSD Name 
Province 
Households 
in 
Floodplain 
Flood Damages ($mill/year) 
Baseline 
RCP4.5 
2050 
RCP8.5 
2050 
RCP4.5 
2080 
RCP8.5 
2080 
Toronto 
Ontario 
        146,798  
$97 
$547 
$581 
$538 
$556 
Winnipeg 
Manitoba 
        250,918  
$53 
$280 
$235 
$254 
$319 
Calgary 
Alberta 
        105,441  
$36 
$189 
$191 
$189 
$230 
Mississauga 
Ontario 
          38,341  
$24 
$159 
$163 
$154 
$162 
Edmonton 
Alberta 
        108,171  
$34 
$129 
$106 
$127 
$141 
 
 
  
 
37 
 
CSD Name 
Province 
Households 
in 
Floodplain 
Flood Damages ($mill/year) 
Baseline 
RCP4.5 
2050 
RCP8.5 
2050 
RCP4.5 
2080 
RCP8.5 
2080 
Georgina 
Ontario 
            4,846  
$16 
$120 
$106 
$115 
$129 
Ottawa 
Ontario 
          75,514  
$43 
$112 
$90 
$107 
$112 
Chatham-Kent 
Ontario 
          32,076  
$11 
$106 
$94 
$91 
$105 
Haldimand County 
Ontario 
            9,015  
$10 
$100 
$89 
$86 
$99 
Innisfil 
Ontario 
            4,612  
$10 
$79 
$71 
$75 
$85 
 
Table 3-14 shows the annual damage per household for the baseline and the GCM-mean across eras and 
RCPs. Note that the number of households in the floodplain is estimated by multiplying the portion of 
building area with a non-zero ADR by the number of households in each dissemination area. In the 
baseline, costs per household are highest in British Columbia, Northwest Territories, Yukon, and Ontario 
but likely for different reasons—high in Northwest Territories and Yukon because of lower household 
counts and high in British Columbia and Ontario because values per dwelling are high in the areas most 
impacted. The highest changes in impact in the 2080s compared to the baseline cost are for Ontario, 
Newfoundland and Labrador, and Saskatchewan where costs are almost eight times higher in the 2080s 
under RCP8.5. The lowest changes in costs per dwelling are in the Northwest Territories and Prince 
Edward Island with 3.5 and 3.4 times higher costs, respectively, for RCP8.5 in the 2080s era. 
TABLE 3-14.  DAMAGES PER HOUSEHOLD  
Province / Territory 
Households in 
Floodplain 
(thousands) 
Baseline 
2050s 
2080s 
RCP4.5 
RCP8.5 
RCP4.5 
RCP8.5 
Alberta 
                 383  
$350 
$1,591 
$2,046 
$1,552 
$2,529 
British Columbia 
                 374  
$667 
$1,860 
$2,098 
$2,196 
$3,228 
Manitoba 
                 331  
$234 
$1,070 
$883 
$1,189 
$1,788 
New Brunswick 
                 100  
$272 
$1,467 
$1,430 
$1,260 
$1,563 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
                   48  
$347 
$1,724 
$1,926 
$1,729 
$2,800 
Northwest Territories 
                      3  
$546 
$1,172 
$1,395 
$1,313 
$1,928 
Nova Scotia 
                 115  
$257 
$1,478 
$1,647 
$1,315 
$1,819 
Nunavut 
                      2  
$96 
$322 
$398 
$362 
$543 
Ontario 
             1,087  
$448 
$2,456 
$2,824 
$2,083 
$3,754 
Prince Edward Island 
                   15  
$141 
$440 
$317 
$255 
$482 
Quebec 
                 767  
$198 
$556 
$652 
$627 
$1,017 
Saskatchewan 
                   80  
$161 
$952 
$803 
$782 
$1,279 
Yukon 
                      4  
$493 
$1,760 
$2,153 
$1,854 
$3,225 
National 
             3,308  
$362 
$1,593 
$1,802 
$1,515 
$2,506 
 
Adaptation 
Adapting to an increase in flood damage may take many forms from hard structures such as engineered 
storm drainage systems, retention ponds, or so called “green solutions” like wetlands designed to slow 
and hold water long enough to seep into deeper groundwater reserves. The streamlined approach used 
 
 
  
 
38 
 
here does not lend itself to a simulation of these effects, which are complex and better for project-level 
analyses. Instead we apply an example that is meant to inform the efficacy of an adaptation response that 
targets the properties that are most vulnerable. The exact response is not prescribed per se, but it may be 
easiest to think in these terms: the most vulnerable property in the most vulnerable locations are 
abandoned or relocated to flood-free areas. To get a sense of how a strategy like this will impact total 
damage, we first identify the dissemination areas with the highest potential damage by ranking each using 
the ADR from the projection that yielded the highest damage in the 2080s era. We use the 90th percentile, 
which is an ADR of about 1.6 percent, and any dissemination areas with an ADR higher than that we flag 
as “most vulnerable.” We then assume these dissemination areas are able to completely protect 10 percent 
of the asset value from flood damage. Since the dissemination areas with ADRs above the 90th percentile 
contain roughly 10 percent of the total asset value, this strategy protects about 1 percent of the total asset 
value nationally (not just the asset value in the floodplain). Table 3-15 shows the asset value in the most 
vulnerable locations by province or territory that is completely protected (i.e., 10 percent of the total value 
in the most vulnerable locations). As shown, the asset value is not evenly distributed. In Manitoba and 
New Brunswick, almost 2 percent of the asset value is protected but that is the case for only 0.2 percent of 
the value in Prince Edward Island. 
Table 3-15 also shows the reduction in damage, in percent, using the average across the projections in the 
2080s era. Nationally, damages are reduced on average 6.5 percent for both RCP4.5 and RCP8.5. Not 
surprisingly, provinces or territories with a higher portion of protected asset value are also the ones with 
the highest damage reduction. Damages are reduced 9 percent in Manitoba but only 1.2-1.3 percent in 
Prince Edward Island.  
 
 
  
 
39 
 
 
TABLE 3-15. VALUE PROTECTED AND DAMAGE REDUCTIONS FROM TARGETED ADAPTATION 
Province / Territory 
Value Protected 
($mill) 
Value protected 
(% of total asset 
value, $2.4 
trillion) 
Damage 
Reduction from 
Adaptation 
(2080s) 
RCP4.5 RCP8.5 
Alberta 
$1,885 
0.6% 
-6.0% 
-6.0% 
British Columbia 
$2,996 
0.6% 
-6.2% 
-6.2% 
Manitoba 
$1,019 
1.9% 
-9.2% 
-9.1% 
New Brunswick 
$493 
1.9% 
-6.5% 
-6.4% 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
$434 
1.7% 
-6.9% 
-6.8% 
Northwest Territories 
$10 
0.6% 
-7.7% 
-7.8% 
Nova Scotia 
$567 
1.4% 
-4.7% 
-4.7% 
Nunavut 
$2 
0.5% 
-2.9% 
-3.4% 
Ontario 
$11,094 
1.1% 
-6.7% 
-6.6% 
Prince Edward Island 
$8 
0.2% 
-1.3% 
-1.2% 
Quebec 
$2,049 
0.6% 
-5.4% 
-5.6% 
Saskatchewan 
$330 
0.6% 
-6.8% 
-6.7% 
Yukon 
$52 
2.3% 
-7.6% 
-7.5% 
National 
$20,939 
0.9% 
-6.5% 
-6.5% 
Main Takeaways 
The from the analysis are: 
• 
While there is uncertainty in estimating flood damages (discussed in the Limitations and Caveats 
section below), there is high confidence that flood intensities will get worse in the future based 
on these projections since almost all GCMs and RCPs indicate an increase in intensities where 
property values are highest in the Provinces and Territories. This is true for both more frequent, 
less intense storms (10-year) as well as less frequent, more intense storms (100-year).  
• 
The baseline damage estimate and other literature suggest that flooding is a major category of 
weather-related costs. Our results indicate that flood damage is likely to be about 4-5 times larger 
than it is currently by 2050 and 4 to 7 times larger by 2100.  
• 
Damages are driven by areas near major cities like Toronto, Vancouver, Calgary, and Edmonton, 
where asset value is high as well as both baseline and projected damages. For example, the 
results show that the historical 100-year event could occur as often as every 7 and 22 years for 
these areas for RCP8.5. Flood protection strategies targeted to these areas could offset damages.  
Limitations and Caveats  
The major caveats and limitations to this approach are noted below.    
Data and resource limitations 
 
 
  
 
40 
 
• 
We use equivalent depth (square root of precipitation) as a proxy for flood depth in this analysis 
because of data and resource constraints. While we develop unique damage curves that relate 
equivalent depth to damage to account for this disconnect, there are many site-specific 
characteristics (e.g., ground slope, ground cover, perviousness of surface and soil column, etc.) 
that influence the relationship between flood depth and precipitation that are not accounted for 
here. 
• 
The damage functions are representations of the expected relationship between flooding and 
equivalent depth based on a review of damage curves as well as expert judgement. The method 
for developing and calibrating these damage curves was a necessary step to bridge a major data 
gap but the assumptions used here does influence the results and as such is not intended for 
project-scale analysis. 
• 
Reduced snowpack and drier antecedent conditions have both been noted as potential factors that 
may reduce the risk of flood relative to extreme precipitation increases. For example, Cunderlik 
and Ourda (2009) find a reduction in snowmelt floods in southern Canada by analyzing 
streamflow records three decades prior to the study. However, Gaur et al. (2018) find that parts 
of Quebec and Ontario will only see a shift in snowmelt floods in the future rather than a 
decrease. Our analysis does not account for snowmelt or antecedent soil moisture. 
• 
The flood model (developed by JBA) is designed to assist in pricing premiums for individual 
properties damage for insurance companies and uses a consistent framework nation-wide. The 
approach uses a generic depth-damage function. Not all buildings are damaged the same way and 
detailed information on building characteristics would be required to take these effects into 
account. Also, other assets such as vehicles are not included in these damage estimates. While 
we expect the future estimates of flood damage would scale more or less linearly with the 
baseline. 
• 
Similar to coastal properties, we rely on the available home value estimates from the 2016 census 
and ratios from four cities in western Canada as well as ratios derived from the U.S to derive 
non-residential value and decouple structure value from the total value. While these two property 
value adjustments provide required data to estimate comprehensive effects, and to recognize 
intermittent flooding impacts on structures alone exclusive of land, actual ratios of structure 
value to total value throughout the full Canadian spatial domain likely differ in an unknown 
manner. 
• 
The building footprint database provides important information for estimating ADRs by 
building, yielding a more accurate estimate of property potentially vulnerable to flooding. We 
find that in many urban areas buildings are built outside frequently flooded areas, likely because 
of building regulations in place. We have also found that estimates generated with simplifying 
assumptions that do not take into account building footprint location data, such as uniform 
allocation of property value across dissemination areas, result in biased estimates, including 
overestimation of damage by at least a factor of two. 
Uncertainties of future change 
• 
While future changes in flooding are abstracted to larger spatial extents (half degree or river 
basin) the analysis does rely heavily on the JBA ADRs that anchor the baseline flood damage. 
 
 
  
 
41 
 
As such, the floodplain and the households in the floodplain, are static in time and we make no 
attempt to project changes in the flooded areas. However, it is not likely the floodplain will 
change drastically without changes in topographic, bathymetric features, soils, or ground cover, 
all of which could be driven by climatic changes but are not usually simulated in hydrologic 
flood models alone. 
• 
The analysis presented here does not account for changes in property value related to economic 
or population changes to the end of century. 
• 
Certain building characteristics such as the existence of a basement or the number of floors 
change the relationship of flood depth to damage. These were not accounted for in this analysis 
where a generic damage function is applied to all buildings in the region.  These factors are, 
however, reflected in the baseline flood damages in the JBA Risk Management model – whether 
damages to buildings associated with these characteristics scales with our precipitation scalar is 
currently unknown.  
• 
This analysis focuses on changes in climate and does not account for changes in floods caused by 
land-use change or general basin degradation and health. In addition to human-induced change, 
natural changes in basin hydrology and topography are also common and in many cases are 
caused by extreme flood events. These changes are not accounted for here. 
Issues of scale 
• 
We are limited to evaluating the 24-hour flood event as that is the finest temporal resolution 
available. Flood events occur on various times scales from minutes to weeks that are dependent 
on hydrologic and climatological tendencies of the place or region. Flash floods over small 
watersheds, for example, that occur in hours may not be well-represented in this analysis.  
• 
GCMs generally have better performance over aggregated space and/or time. Since flood events 
usually occur on smaller timescales, we rely on short temporal scales for the analysis. While the 
BCSD method for bias-correcting GCM results likely improves these issues of scale in the 
GCMs, there is still uncertainty in the underlying drivers of change from the GCMs at these 
shorter time scales.   
• 
At this scale, storm drainage systems are not accurately represented in either the JBA ADRs or 
for the projections of change, which may reduce the damages shown here but could also have the 
opposite effect, as discussed earlier. Also, complex processes of urban flooding such as sanitary 
sewer backup in combined sewer systems, which do cause additional flood damage in Canada, 
are not resolved in the analysis.  
   
 
 
  
 
42 
 
3.2 
TRANSPORTATION 
Our process-based modeling of climate change costs for transportation infrastructure focuses on impacts 
to Canada’s roads and its rail network.  For both roads and rail, we apply methods consistent with those 
used for the USEPA’s Climate Change Impacts and Risk Analysis (CIRA) project (U.S. EPA, 2017).  We 
limit the application of process-based methods to these two types of transportation infrastructure because 
(1) sufficient Canada-specific data are available to apply an existing process-based approach to these 
categories and (2) existing process-based approaches may be applied within the project resource 
constraints for these two types of transportation infrastructure but not others.  While the climate change 
impacts literature includes process-based modeling approaches for bridges, the application of these 
methods is both time- and resource-intensive and 
therefore not feasible within the resource and time 
constraints of this study.  We instead rely upon the 
reduced-form approach described above to assess 
climate change costs for bridges. 
To apply the process-based approaches described in this 
section, we will use the Infrastructure Planning Support 
System (IPSS), which members of our project team 
have previously applied for several peer-reviewed 
studies (e.g., Chinowsky et al. 2019, Melvin et al. 2017, 
Neumann et al. 2015, Chinowsky et al. 2013) and for 
the U.S. EPA’s CIRA Project.  Using IPSS, our analysis 
of climate change costs to roads and rail will capture 
costs under both the status quo (reactive adaptation) 
scenario and a proactive adaptation scenario.   
3.2.1 
ROADS 
Changes in temperature and precipitation patterns over the coming decades will increase the stress on 
Canada’s road network, increasing the cost of ensuring that Canada’s roads provide the same level of 
service as they provide at present day.  This section presents our analysis of these costs for Canada’s 
network of paved and unpaved roads for the two 30-year eras described above (2050s: 2041-2070 and 
2080s: 2071-2100).  The analysis examines the cost implications of three climate stressors with 
documented impacts on roads: (1) changes in temperature, specifically extreme heat; (2) changes in 
precipitation; and (3) changes in freeze-thaw cycles.
14  Consistent with the other analyses presented in this 
report, we examine the cost of these stressors under a status quo scenario that reflects a reactive response 
to changes in climate and a proactive scenario under which Canada’s transportation agencies make road 
design and maintenance decisions based on expected changes in climate. As described in Chapter 2, our 
specification of these two scenarios is intended to provide infrastructure managers with insights into 
which climate-related risks are most significant to Canada’s roads and the degree to which proactive 
 
14 This analysis does not consider climate change costs related to winter roads or thawing permafrost.  These are 
included in the Canada’s North section below. Also, roads that are located on permafrost are excluded from the 
analysis presented in this section to avoid potential double counting of impacts for the roads examined in the 
permafrost impact analysis below.  
Infrastructure Planning Support System  
IPSS is a first-of-its-kind system developed by 
Resilient Analytics that performs engineering 
analysis within a broader resiliency perspective. 
IPSS models infrastructure vulnerability to future 
climate and weather conditions, considers 
specific adaptation scenarios, and provides a 
cost- benefit based risk analysis. IPSS draws its 
data from a range of climate science projections, 
engineering and materials studies, and 
environmental research to provide users with 
decision support that is based in real-world risk 
scenarios.  
 
 
  
 
43 
 
adaptation might reduce those risks. While technological change and innovation may affect the magnitude 
of climate-related costs under the reactive and/or proactive scenarios, the insights gained from this 
analysis still provide infrastructure managers with a starting point for understanding and evaluating 
climate-related risks and prioritizing adaptive actions.  
Methods 
Our analysis of climate change costs for Canada’s road network relies on a detailed inventory of Canada’s 
roads and engineering-based methods for translating changes in climate stress to changes in costs for 
Canada’s road network.  We describe each of these components of our analysis below. 
Road Inventory 
This analysis relies upon an inventory of Canadian roads obtained from DMTI, a commercial provider of 
geographic data specializing in Canadian spatial data.  The DMTI data disaggregate the Canadian road 
network across multiple dimensions, including (1) paved versus unpaved, (2) road type (e.g., highways, 
local streets), (3) surface type (e.g., asphalt versus concrete for paved roads and gravel versus dirt for 
unpaved roads), and (4) number of lanes.  To spatially align the DMTI road data with the climate data 
used for this analysis, we translated the line layer from DMTI to a half degree by half degree grid.  The 
resulting dataset specifies the kilometers of road in each grid cell defined according to the characteristics 
listed above.  We note, however, that DMTI includes incomplete information for some variables and 
locations. To fill these data gaps, we made a limited number of simplifying assumptions: 
• 
Gravel vs Dirt Surface for Unpaved Roads: For unpaved roads, the DMTI dataset includes 
limited information on the distribution between gravel roads and dirt roads.  Specifically, this 
information is in the DMTI data for less than 1 percent of unpaved road km in Canada. In cases 
where such information is missing from the data, we assume that half of the unpaved road length 
in a given grid cell is gravel and the other half is dirt.
15   
• 
Paved vs Unpaved Roads for Saskatchewan: For a large portion of the road segments in 
Saskatchewan, the DMTI data do not indicate whether the segment in question is paved or 
unpaved. To address this limitation of the data, we allocated the uncharacterized segments in a 
given grid cell between paved and unpaved based on the distribution between paved and unpaved 
road km for that same grid cell as specified in an alternative road inventory published by Natural 
Resources Canada.
16 
• 
Age of Road Stock: For paved roads, we evenly distribute roads in terms of age to provide a basis 
for estimating the replacement date of the road looking forward. Overall, this will average newer 
and older roads, but may skew the results if many roads are newer in age. 
In addition to the above, we also assume that Canada’s road network is static over the full timeframe of 
the analysis, in terms of both the lane-kilometers of roads and the composition of the network.  To assess 
 
15 To assess the sensitivity of our analysis to this assumption, we performed test analyses where we treated these 
roads as gravel and a second where we treated such roads as dirt roads. For the scenarios analyzed, the results 
showed minimal sensitivity to this assumption.  
16 See Natural Resources Canada National Road Network – NRN- GeoBase Series, available at 
https://open.canada.ca/data/en/dataset/3d282116-e556-400c-9306-ca1a3cada77f. 
 
 
  
 
44 
 
the reasonableness of the assumption of a static road network, we reviewed historical road network data 
published by Statistics Canada, which showed that Canada’s road network in 2013 was slightly smaller 
than it was in 1998 (1.3 million km in 2013 versus 1.4 million km in 1998) despite the fact that Canada’s 
population and economy grew during that time.
17 While some changes to the road network will 
undoubtedly occur over the next several decades, these historical data suggest that such changes are not 
easily linked to changes in Canada’s population and economy.  Factors such as changes in land use 
patterns (e.g., increased development in high-density areas) and prioritization of investments in other 
forms of transportation infrastructure may affect growth of the road network over time as well.  Because 
many of these factors are driven by policy decisions, we do not attempt to account for them in our 
analysis.  
Table 3-16 summarizes the lane kilometers of roads in Canada by province and surface type. As shown in 
the table, paved roads make up only 33 percent of Canada’s road network.  This reflects reliance on 
unpaved roads in more sparsely populated areas across much of Canada. Quebec and Ontario, which are 
home to some of the largest metropolitan areas in Canada, account for nearly half of the paved road 
network, while also possessing significant unpaved road networks as well.   
TABLE 3-16.  TOTAL LENGTH OF ROAD BY ROAD TYPE AND PROVINCE (LANE -KM) 
PROVINCE/TERRITORY 
PAVED ROADS 
UNPAVED ROADS 
TOTAL 
Alberta 
136,460 
392,008 
528,468 
British Columbia 
111,732 
203,054 
314,786 
Manitoba 
46,912 
179,583 
226,494 
New Brunswick 
39,230 
40,238 
79,468 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
22,514 
17,997 
40,511 
Northwest Territories 
5,898 
17,224 
23,123 
Nova Scotia 
36,555 
44,524 
81,079 
Nunavut 
7 
2,091 
2,098 
Ontario 
250,794 
269,921 
520,716 
Prince Edward Island 
9,644 
5,487 
15,131 
Quebec 
196,445 
336,200 
532,645 
Saskatchewan 
49,624 
334,733 
384,357 
Yukon 
17,465 
14,931 
32,396 
Total 
923,279 
1,857,993 
2,781,272 
 
Methods Description 
As noted above, the roads analysis captures the effects of changes in temperature, precipitation patterns, 
and freeze-thaw cycles on paved roads and unpaved roads. The methods used for capturing the climate 
change costs associated with these stressors are consistent with and/or build upon those detailed in 
 
17 Statistics Canada, Transportation Data and Information Hub, Table 11-1: System Extent and Facilities 
(Kilometers), available at https://www144.statcan.gc.ca/nats-stna/tables-tableaux/tbl11-1/tbl11-1-CAN-eng.htm, 
accessed July 11, 2020. 
 
 
  
 
45 
 
Chinowsky et al. (2013) and Neumann et al. (2015), as applied in the USEPA CIRA project.
18  Under the 
status quo/reactive adaptation scenario, we estimate the costs of climate change for roads as the increase 
in maintenance and repair costs required to ensure current levels of service for Canada’s road network.  
For the proactive adaptation scenario, we (when possible) estimate the costs to protect roads against the 
effects of climate change by planning for long-term climate change in road design/specification.   
Table 3-17 describes the specific damages to road infrastructure associated with each climate stressor, the 
types of costs incurred under the status quo scenario, and the types of costs associated with the proactive 
adaptation scenario.  For both the reactive and proactive scenarios, our approach focuses only on the 
physical effects of climate change on the road network and the associated costs.  We do not examine 
potential changes in transportation demand (e.g., vehicle km traveled (VKT) per household) that might 
result from a changing climate and the implications of such changes on the costs of building and 
maintaining Canada’s roads.  The direction and magnitude of such changes in demand will depend on a 
variety of factors beyond the scope of this analysis.  However, to the extent that climate change increases 
demand for road transportation (e.g., increases VKT), we are likely to underestimate the costs of climate 
change to Canada’s roads, as increased use of roads will accelerate maintenance cycles.  Conversely, a 
reduction in VKT would suggest that our analysis may overestimate climate change costs for Canada’s 
road network. 
 
TABLE 3-17. SUMMARY OF CLIMATE CHANGE DAMAGES AND COSTS FOR ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE  
INFRASTRUCTURE 
TYPE 
STRESSOR 
DAMAGE SOURCES 
STATUS QUO 
REACTIVE 
SCENARIO 
PROACTIVE ADAPTATION 
SCENARIO 
Paved Roads 
Temperature 
Surface degradation & 
increased roughness due to 
thermal cracking & rutting. 
Increased repair 
costs due to 
climate-related 
damage. 
Alter asphalt mix to 
include binder with 
appropriate 
temperature 
performance. 
Precipitation 
Erosion of base and sub-
base due to infiltration; 
increased cracking. 
Increased repair 
costs due to 
climate-related 
damage. 
Modify binder/sealant 
and increase base layer 
depth. 
Freeze-Thaw 
Base layer degradation due 
to soil heaving, and 
increased surface damage 
from settling & movement.  
Increased repair 
costs due to 
climate-related 
damage. 
Modify design to 
increase surface density 
and reduce infiltration. 
Unpaved Roads 
Temperature 
No methods for assessing 
damage. 
N/A 
N/A 
Precipitation 
Surface erosion and rutting. 
Increased repair 
costs due to 
climate-related 
damage. 
Increase the base of the 
unpaved road to allow 
for greater strength and 
drainage.  
Freeze-Thaw 
No methods for assessing 
damage. 
N/A 
N/A 
 
 
18 See USEPA (2017). 
 
 
  
 
46 
 
To analyze the damages and adaptation approaches summarized in Table 3-4, we applied the 
Infrastructure Planning Support System (IPSS) developed by researchers at the University of Colorado 
Boulder. A quantitative, engineering-based analysis tool, IPSS is designed to help users isolate the 
potential maintenance costs due to climate change on transportation, building, and energy infrastructure. 
IPSS broadens the criterion and methods of traditional infrastructure resiliency analysis by including both 
the analysis of climate change impacts and potential adaptation opportunities and associated investment 
costs. IPSS diverges from traditional efforts that analyze climate impacts via a top-down approach by 
taking a bottom-up approach to climate analysis. In this method, the impact of each climate stressor is 
determined at a 0.5 degree spatial scale for two 30-year eras (2040 to 2069 and 2070 to 2099) and 
translated to associated repair and replacement costs. For the current study, the impacts and adaptation 
summarized above were included to provide detailed stressor level analysis for each segment of the road 
network. Additional details on the approach for analyzing road category costs are presented below by 
stressor. 
Temperature.  Our analysis of temperature-related climate change costs for (paved) roads draws upon 
available information on the minimum and maximum temperature limits for which pavements are 
designed.  As shown in Table 3-18, the binders used in asphalt pavement are chosen based on the 
expected pavement temperature where the road is located.  When the temperature exceeds the design 
threshold for the binder used, the pavement surface may be damaged.  For the purposes of this analysis, 
we assume that such damage would occur based on seven-day, rolling average maximum temperatures, 
consistent with the approach used in U.S. EPA (2017).  While the choice of binder may also affect 
pavement cracking at extreme low temperatures, Dave et al. (2016) indicate that no criterion has been 
required for determining the low-temperature cracking potential of asphalt mixtures. Superpave 
specifications attempt to minimize thermal cracking by specifying low temperature grades for asphalt 
binders, but these low temperature grades do not account for the many other variables in an asphalt 
mixture that affect cracking under extreme cold conditions (e.g., aggregate types, use of recycled asphalt 
materials). 
To identify the baseline binder mix without climate change, we assume that existing roads were designed 
according to historical climate data for the 1986-2005 period. Under the status quo scenario, we estimate 
climate change costs as the expenditures necessary to repair temperature-related damage and maintain the 
road’s level of service.  For the proactive adaptation scenario, we estimate climate change costs as the 
cost of modifying the asphalt mix to include binders appropriate for the temperature expected with 
climate change when roads are repaved according to their maintenance cycle.  
 
TABLE 3-18.  ASPHALT BINDER GRADES 
PERFORMANCE GRADE 
7-DAY MAXIMUM PAVEMENT 
TEMPERATURE (ºC) 
PG-46 
46 
PG-52 
52 
PG-58 
58 
PG-64 
64 
PG-70 
70 
PG-76 
76 
PG-82 
82 
 
 
  
 
47 
 
Notes: These are commonly referenced binder grades.  For example, 
see https://pavementinteractive.org/reference-
desk/materials/asphalt/superpave-performance-grading/  
 
Precipitation. For precipitation effects, our approach reflects the different effects of precipitation on 
paved roads versus unpaved roads.  On paved roads, increased precipitation may cause rutting, which 
reduces the time until road resurfacing is required. On unpaved roads, increased precipitation can lead to 
increased erosion, making them more difficult to travel or impassable altogether.  For both paved and 
unpaved roads, increased degradation will occur when projected maximum monthly precipitation 
increases by 10 cm relative to the historical baseline, with incremental increases in damages applied for 
each subsequent 10-cm increase (Chinowsky and Arndt, 2012 and Melvin et al., 2017).  For the status quo 
scenario, we estimate climate change costs for both paved and unpaved roads as the increased repair costs 
to maintain roads’ level of service.  Under the proactive adaptation scenario, climate change costs for 
paved roads include costs to change road sealants and binders so that roads can better withstand projected 
increases in precipitation, as well as modifying the road base to improve drainage below the pavement 
surface. For unpaved roads, the proactive scenario emphasizes strengthening the base of the road when 
roads are rehabilitated according per their life cycle to allow for greater drainage and reduce the strength 
loss when the road experiences heavy precipitation.
19   
We note that the 10-cm precipitation threshold referenced above for the realization of precipitation effects 
may, on a site-specific basis, be an over-simplification of the physical effects of precipitation on roads. 
For a broad-based nationwide analysis, however, this threshold serves as a reasonable literature-based 
indicator of the point at which changes in precipitation are likely to lead to significant degradation of 
roads. 
Freeze-thaw. To assess costs related to changes in freeze-thaw (for paved roads only), we examine 
changes in freeze-thaw cycles for each half degree grid cell, based on its annual precipitation and its 
Freezing Degree Index (FDI) value for each season, the latter of which is calculated as follows: 
(1) 
𝐹𝐷𝐼=
∑(0 −𝑇𝑎𝑣𝑒)
𝑥=𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠
𝑥=1
 
where  
Tave = average daily temperature (degrees Celsius) 
days = number of days in each month 
When (0-Tave) is less than 0 when applying Equation 1, (0-Tave) will be set to 0. 
Based on Equation 1 and the annual precipitation for each area, we assign each area to one of five 
environmental zones:
20 
 
19 See U.S. Department of Transportation (2015) and Berkshire Regional Planning Commission (2001). 
20 Note that the zones listed here do not include a no freeze-dry zone.  With no freeze and dry conditions, there are 
no freeze-thaw-related damages. 
 
 
  
 
48 
 
• 
Deep-freeze wet: > 500 mm in annual precipitation and FDI > 400 
• 
Deep-freeze dry: < 500 mm in annual precipitation and FDI > 400 
• 
Moderate-freeze wet: > 500 mm in annual precipitation and FDI of 50-400 
• 
Moderate-freeze dry: < 500 mm in annual precipitation and FDI of 50-400 
• 
No-freeze wet: > 500 mm in annual precipitation and FDI < 50 
Each of these zones represents a different level of freeze-thaw activity and correspondingly different rate 
of road degradation.  Thus, if an area transitions from one zone to another due to climate change, its level 
of freeze-thaw activity and corresponding rate of freeze-thaw-related road degradation is also assumed to 
change.  Rather than explicitly estimating the change in the number of freeze-thaw cycles, this approach 
relies on the FDI as an indicator of the damage caused by freeze-thaw activity, as moderate freeze areas 
experience more freeze-thaw cycles than deep freeze areas.  For example, U.S. DOT (2006) shows that 
ruts forming on the road surface are 0.5 mm higher in moderate freeze areas than high freeze areas.   
For areas with no change in environmental zone due to climate change, we use Equation 2 below to 
estimate the proportional change in freeze-thaw cycles and the proportional change in road degradation 
(Melvin et al. 2017), assuming that a freeze-thaw cycle occurs when there are seven consecutive days of 
freezing temperatures followed by a seven-day period with 30 or more thaw degree days, where the Thaw 
Degree Index (TDI) is greater than or equal to 30: 
(2) 
𝑇𝐷𝐼=
∑(0 −𝑇𝑎𝑣𝑒)(−1)
𝑥=𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠
𝑥=1
 
where Tave and days are as defined above and where (0-Tave) is set equal to 0 when it calculates to greater 
than 0. 
For the status quo scenario, we estimate climate change costs as the increased expenditures required to 
maintain current levels of service.  For the proactive scenario, we estimate climate change costs as the 
expenditures associated with modifying the design of roads when they are resurfaced per their life cycle 
to increase surface density and reduce infiltration that occurs due to freeze-thaw. 
Similar to our approach for precipitation effects, the approach for freeze-thaw effects presented here may 
not be sufficiently detailed to assess climate effects on a site-specific basis, as it does not account for 
factors such as frost front or soil moisture content. For an analysis that is national in scale, however, this 
approach, which is based on U.S. DOT studies of rutting in different environmental zones, provides a 
reasonable basis for gauging the magnitude of costs (or cost savings) associated with changes in freeze-
thaw. As the literature in this area continues to develop, we would expect that future studies of road-
related climate change costs will account for at least some of these other factors.  
Results 
Overall, the Canadian road system will experience effects from projected climate change due to both 
temperature and precipitation effects. However, the system will also experience some cost savings due to 
reductions in freeze-thaw cycles throughout the country. Under the status quo scenario, annual costs for 
the roads sector are approximately $2.2 billion during the 2040-2069 era based on the RCP 4.5 
projections and $3.1 billion for RCP 8.5.  For the 2070-2099 era, these values grow by 46 percent (to $3.3 
billion) and 132 percent (to $7.2 billion), respectively. These cost values represent averages across 
 
 
  
 
49 
 
GCMs.  As shown in the last line of Figure 3-13, the range of estimates across GCMs is fairly wide 
relative to each average. As context for these results, road construction expenses across all levels of 
government (federal, provincial, and local) were approximately $17.1 billion in 2020.
21  The highest of 
the average values shown in Figure 3-13 below represents slightly less than one quarter of these costs. 
When adaptation options are considered across the country, the opportunity exists to significantly reduce 
these costs through proactive adaptation. For RCP 4.5, this reduces the average annual cost to $532 
million for the 2040-2069 time period and $591 million for the 2070-2099 period (for RCP 4.5). 
Similarly, for RCP 8.5, average annual costs under the proactive adaptation scenario are reduced to $295 
million for the first era and $118 million for the second era.  The latter estimate represents a reduction of 
98 percent relative to the status quo scenario.   
When viewed from the perspective of the individual climate stressors, there is a significant difference in 
terms of level of impact that each stressor has on the overall impact total. As shown in Figure 3-13 below, 
temperature is the primary source of costs for the Canadian road network. Specifically, increases in 
temperatures are projected to cause damages including increased cracking and surface weakening that 
will result in increased need for repairs and more frequent road rehabilitation. Based on the average 
across GCMs for each RCP/era combination, temperature accounts for 78 to 95 percent of costs under the 
status quo.   
Precipitation is projected to result in significantly less damage to the road system than temperature change 
on a national basis under the status quo assumptions. As illustrated in Figure 3-13, we estimate that 
precipitation-related costs are just 26 to 40 percent of temperature-related costs under RCP 4.5 
(depending on era) and 16 to 26 percent under RCP 8.5.  These damages will primarily result from 
increased erosion as well as surface degradation occurring for both paved and unpaved roads. 
The final stressor, freeze-thaw cycles, presents a small cost savings for Canada as warming temperatures 
will reduce the number of freeze-thaw cycles experienced in some parts of the country. As illustrated in 
Figure 3-13, these savings represent a small fraction of the costs associated with temperature change and 
precipitation under status quo conditions.  
For both the precipitation and temperature stressors, the opportunity exists to implement proactive 
adaptation approaches that will result in reduced costs. We estimate that temperature effects can be 
reduced by slightly less than a full order of magnitude under RCP 4.5 and more than an order of 
magnitude under RCP 8.5.  Similarly, annual precipitation effects can be reduced by approximately 30 
percent under RCP 4.5 and 50 percent under RCP 8.5.  As these changes illustrate, when proactive steps 
are taken to reduce road-related costs, the reduction in temperature-related costs is so significant that costs 
related to precipitation exceed costs related to temperature, unlike under the status quo scenario in which 
temperature-related costs dominate. 
 
21 Statistics Canada, “Infrastructure Economic Accounts, investment and net stock by asset, industry, and asset 
function”, available at https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3610060801; last modified 1 June 
2021.  Value reported as $18.5 billion for 2020; we adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index.  
 
 
  
 
50 
 
FIGURE 3-13. ANNUAL ROAD COSTS BY STRESSOR ($2015 CAD, BILLIONS)  
 
STRESSOR 
Status Quo 
 
Proactive 
2040-2069 
2070-2099 
 
2040-2069 
2070-2099 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
Temperature 
$1,752  
$2,760  
$2,818  
$6,857   
$262  
$264  
$340  
$318  
Precipitation 
$697  
$658  
$733  
$1,143   
$479  
$334  
$535  
$570  
Freeze-thaw 
($207) 
($301) 
($281) 
($771) 
 
($209) 
($303) 
($284) 
($771) 
Total 
(GCM average) 
$2,242  
$3,117  
$3,270  
$7,229   
$532  
$295  
$591  
$118  
Range 
$563 to 
$3,791 
$837 to 
$5,049 
$1076 to 
$4,859 
$1,958 to 
$11,745 
 
$287 to 
$949 
$19 to 
$558 
$277 to 
$1013 
($363) to 
$944 
 
The estimated costs for the roads category also vary significantly both spatially and temporally. As 
indicated in Table 3-19 below, costs are projected to be highest for Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec, the 
three provinces with the most extensive road networks. The high costs for Alberta also reflect significant 
precipitation-related effects.  While temperature-related costs for Alberta are comparable to the 
corresponding costs in Ontario and Quebec, precipitation-related costs for Alberta are approximately 
double those projected for either Ontario or Quebec. Table 3-19 also shows that status quo costs increase 
between the two eras, particularly for RCP 8.5 under which annual costs more than double between eras. 
Most of this increase is due to temperature effects on paved roads (see top panel of Figure 3-14 below).   
 
 
 
  
 
51 
 
TABLE 3-19. AVERAGE ANNUAL UNDISCOUNTED CLIMATE CHANGE COSTS FOR ROADS BY 
PROVINCE/TERRITORY AND ERA (MILLIONS OF 2015 CAD$)  
 
Under the proactive scenario, however, we project that costs actually decline between the two eras. This 
reflects the combined effect of temperature and precipitation effects remaining fairly flat or slightly 
declining between the two eras because of the mitigating effect of proactive adaptation, while cost savings 
related to freeze thaw increase dramatically. Figure 3-14 shows these changes for RCP 8.5 for both the 
status quo and proactive scenarios. The green bars in the bottom panel of the figure show the significant 
growth in cost savings related to freeze thaw between the 2055 era and the 2085 era, while the blue and 
red bars, representing temperature and precipitation costs respectively, change minimally between the two 
eras. These increases in cost savings lead to the decline in annual costs under the proactive case between 
the two eras. In contrast, the temperature-related increases between the two eras under the status quo are 
much more significant than the cost savings from freeze-thaw. 
 
 
  
 
52 
 
FIGURE 3-14. UNDISCOUNTED COSTS BY ERA, PROVINCE, AND STRESSOR: RCP 8.5 
 
 
Note: Due to differences in the magnitude of costs between the status quo and proactive scenarios, the two graphs 
above use different ranges on their vertical axes. 
 
As suggested by the results above, the majority of climate change costs for roads are associated with 
paved roads under the status quo. Cumulatively, the status quo costs for paved roads are $32 billion 
(average across GCMs) for RCP 4.5 and $61 billion for RCP 8.5. These figures represent more than 80 
percent of estimated costs under the status quo.  Under the proactive scenario, however, paved roads 
account for less than 15 percent of costs for RCP 4.5 and experience a cost savings under RCP 8.5. This 
 
 
  
 
53 
 
reflects the focus of proactive adaption strategies on paved roads. For example, the introduction of 
proactive adaptation strategies is projected to reduce paved road costs by 97 percent for RCP 4.5 but 
reduce costs for unpaved roads by less than 15 percent. 
For additional insights on road-related costs at the provincial level, Figure 3-15 presents the undiscounted 
costs per lane km by province/territory for the first era (2040-2069) for each combination of RCP and 
scenario (status quo versus proactive).  As the figure indicates, the costs per lane km of road are fairly 
consistent across Canada. For Prince Edward Island, however, costs per km are markedly high under the 
status quo scenario but are similar for Alberta, British Columbia Manitoba New Brunswick, Ontario, and 
Quebec. The high costs per km for Prince Edward Island reflect the relatively high costs for temperature-
related effects, which are exclusive to paved roads, coupled with paved roads’ comparatively large share 
of the Prince Edward Island road network (64 percent paved on Prince Edward Island versus 33 percent 
for all of Canada).  In other words, the denominator for the cost per km in other provinces and territories 
mostly reflects unpaved roads, which drives down the cost per km in those areas, given that temperature-
related costs for paved roads is the dominant cost.  For Prince Edward Island, unpaved roads make up a 
smaller share of the denominator and therefore do not drive down the cost per km as much as for other 
provinces and territories. Figure 3-15 also shows that costs per lane km are much lower under the 
proactive scenario than under the status quo across all provinces, but costs per lane km in the territories 
are roughly the same under the two scenarios. This reflects the relatively low cost per lane km under the 
status quo in the territories.  In addition, the results presented for the territories do not reflect roads 
located on permafrost, which are captured in the analysis of Northern Canada presented below. 
FIGURE 3-15. AVERAGE UNDISCOUNTED COSTS PER ROAD LANE KM FOR THE 2040 -2069 ERA 
($2015 CAD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
54 
 
While the results presented above reflect the best available information on the effects of climate change 
on the road network, the exact changes in climate reflected in these estimates are uncertain. For insight 
into this uncertainty, Figure 3-16 presents the range of undiscounted annual cost values across the seven 
GCMs used for this analysis for each combination of RCP and scenario. The average values across GCMs 
are represented by the red dots in the figure, and the blue bars represent the range between the minimum 
and maximum undiscounted cost estimates derived from individual GCM projections. As shown in the 
figure, the ranges around the average values are wider under the status quo than under the proactive 
scenario. This is due to the greater uncertainty in road repair costs under the status quo than in the costs of 
designing and building roads to be more resilient to a changing climate under the proactive scenario.  
 
FIGURE 3-16. RANGE OF AVERAGE ANNUAL ROAD COSTS BY ERA, UNDISCOUNTED 
 
 
Overall, the main takeaways from the analysis of road-related costs are: 
• 
A proactive approach to adaptation can significantly reduce the costs of maintaining the current 
level of service provided by Canada’s road network.  
 
 
  
 
55 
 
• 
Of the climate stressors examined, increased temperature contributes most significantly to 
increased costs under the status quo. When climate is proactively incorporated into road design 
and construction decisions, however, temperature accounts for a smaller portion of costs than 
precipitation and a similar portion of costs (in absolute terms) as freeze-thaw. 
• 
While the overall effect of climate change is to increase the costs of maintaining and building 
roads in Canada, changes in freeze-thaw associated with climate change are projected to lead to a 
cost savings, partially offsetting the effects of higher temperatures and changes in precipitation 
patterns.  
Limitations and Caveats  
The major caveats and limitations to this approach are noted below.    
• 
The stressor-response relationships applied in our analysis represent average relationships 
between climate and the physical conditions of roads. These relationships may vary 
geographically due to a number of location-specific factors not represented in our analysis such as 
the load on the road network in a given area and the age of the road network in different 
locations.  
• 
As described above, the available information on the road network was somewhat incomplete, 
with road characteristic data missing for about 27 percent of road segments. While our approach 
for allocating these road segments to different road categories is reasonable, the incompleteness 
of the data represents a source of uncertainty in our analysis, though this uncertainty does not 
systematically bias our results in a particular direction.   
• 
Our analysis assumes that the use of roads remains constant as the climate changes.  To the extent 
that climate change itself or GHG mitigation policies reduce the use of roads, our analysis likely 
overestimates costs. Conversely, if climate change or carbon transitions lead to increased vehicle 
traffic, we may underestimate road-related costs. 
 
3.2.2 
RAIL 
Climate change, in particular an increased frequency of extreme heat events, will impose costs on 
Canada’s rail network. This section presents our analysis of these costs for the two 30-year eras described 
above (2050s: 2041-2070 and 2080s: 2071-2100).  We estimate these costs under both a status quo 
scenario that reflects a reactive response to climate stress on the Canadian rail network and a proactive 
scenario in which rail owners/operators make forward-looking investments to minimize climate-related 
costs. 
Methods 
Similar to the roads analysis presented above, our assessment of the costs of climate change for Canada’s 
rail network is based upon a detailed inventory of the Canadian rail network and stressor-response 
relationships that characterize how a changing climate can compromise the physical integrity of rail lines.   
We also draw on different engineering-based approaches for responding to such reductions in rail 
integrity.  We describe each of these components of our analysis below. 
 
 
  
 
56 
 
Rail Inventory 
As an initial step in our analysis, we developed a detailed inventory of the Canadian rail network based on 
data obtained from Natural Resources Canada (NRCan).  The NRCan data split the rail network to 
multiple types of rail defined according to their current status and track class.  Consistent with the road 
inventory described above, we distributed the NRCan rail inventory to a half degree by half degree grid 
and, for the purposes of this analysis, assumed that the rail inventory remains static over time.  While the 
future size of the rail network is uncertain, the historical trend shows that the network shrunk by 
approximately 28 percent between 1990 and 2014.
22  If this trend were to continue into the future, our 
analysis would overestimate climate change costs for rail, all else equal. In addition, for the purposes of 
this analysis, we limited our assessment of climate change costs to rail lines characterized as main lines in 
the NRCan inventory.  We excluded sidings, yard lines, spurs, and others because the traffic on these 
lines is typically low-speed and therefore less likely to buckle during days of extreme heat. Main lines 
represent approximately 72 percent of the rail-km in the NRCan inventory. 
Table 3-20 shows the distribution of the rail network by province.  As shown in the table, Ontario’s rail 
network is the most extensive, followed by Saskatchewan, British Columbia, Alberta, and Quebec. The 
rail networks in the Maritimes and territories are much more limited.  
TABLE 3-20. MAIN LINE RAIL LENGTH BY PROVINCE (KM) 
PROVINCE 
RAIL LENGTH (KM) 
Alberta 
6,646 
British Columbia 
7,181 
Manitoba 
4,829 
New Brunswick 
1,126 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
367 
Northwest Territories 
122 
Nova Scotia 
650 
Nunavut 
0 
Ontario 
11,102 
Prince Edward Island 
0 
Quebec 
6,172 
Saskatchewan 
8,202 
Yukon 
25 
Total 
46,422 
 
 
Methods Overview 
Our assessment of climate change costs for Canada’s rail network draws on the methods described in 
Chinowsky et al. (2019), adapted for the Canadian context.  These methods account for the effects of 
 
22 Statistics Canada, Transportation Data and Information Hub, Table 11-1: System Extent and Facilities 
(Kilometers), available at https://www144.statcan.gc.ca/nats-stna/tables-tableaux/tbl11-1/tbl11-1-CAN-eng.htm, 
accessed July 11, 2020. 
 
 
  
 
57 
 
track expansion and buckling during extreme heat events.  During these events, tracks under heavy loads 
(i.e., tracks with heavy trains traveling at high speed) are subject to increased buckling risk.  As described 
further in the limitations section below, because extreme cold may also pose risks for the rail network, 
rising temperatures may reduce such risk. To our knowledge however, the existing literature has not 
quantified the relationship between changes in cold-related climate stress and changes in rail repair, 
maintenance, or investment costs.  
For the status quo scenario, our analysis reflects rail operators implementing temporary speed orders that 
result in blanket speed reductions in areas where the expected daily high exceeds a temperature that is 
deemed unsafe, based on current operator policies.  The specific effects that we estimate at the grid cell 
level for the status quo scenario include the repair costs associated with track buckling and the total hours 
of train delays (by year).
23  With respect to the former, although blanket speed orders reduce the 
probability of track buckling, they do not reduce the probability to zero.  Thus, consistent with 
Chinowsky et al. (2019), we estimate the probability of track buckling using the functional relationship 
established by Kish and Samavedam (2013).  Under this approach, the probability of track buckling is 
based on the relationship between (1) the change in temperature relative to the track neutral temperature 
(ΔT) and (2) buckling energy (the energy required to buckle the track).  At the upper critical temperature 
(Tb,max), a track will buckle with no external energy acting upon it and the probability of buckling is 100 
percent (Pb=1).  At the lower critical temperature (Tb,min), the risk of buckling is zero.  Between Tb,min and 
Tb, max, we assume that the probability of buckling increases exponentially as shown in Figure 3-17, based 
on work by the Volpe Center, Foster-Miller, Inc. (FMI), and the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) 
that expanded upon Kish and Samavedam (2013). 
 
FIGURE 3-17.  RELATIONSHIP OF BUCKLING PROBABILITY TO AIR TEMPERATURE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 These delays are monetized according to the methods described in the delay cost section later in this document. 
Pb = 6E-10e0.4291T
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Buckling Probability (Pb)
Temperature (oC)
 
 
  
 
58 
 
Using the relationship shown in Figure 3-11, it is possible to estimate the number of buckling events per 
year (per grid cell) using the following equation: 
(3) 
𝑒𝑏= (𝑃𝑏× 𝑃𝑇× 𝑛𝑡× 365 × 𝐿)
𝐿𝑡
 
Where 
eb = Expected number of buckling events 
Pb = Probability of buckling at rail temperature 
PT = Annual rail temperature frequency 
nt = Number of trains per day 
L = Total length of track 
Lt = Length of train 
For each buckling, we apply a repair cost of $26,601 CAD based on Gordian (2017), adjusted to Canadian 
dollars based on the purchasing power parity-adjusted exchange rate.  
For the proactive adaptation scenario, we assume that train operators install track temperature sensor 
technology that allow them to implement a risk-based approach to speed orders, as described in 
Chinowsky et al. (2019).  This risk-based approach allows train operators to target speed orders to 
specific lines based on the temperature and the traffic expected on that line during extreme heat events.  
In contrast, a blanket speed order is less targeted and applies to all rail lines in a region, resulting in more 
significant delays.  Our analysis for this proactive scenario estimates the costs of purchasing, installing, 
and maintaining these sensors and the associated software systems. In addition, we estimate the hours of 
delay per grid cell using the same approach as applied for the status quo scenario.   
Results 
Overall, the Canadian rail network will experience effects from projected climate change due to increases 
in temperature. As the temperature increases over historic levels, the potential for rails to fail due to 
buckling increases.  To offset this possibility, slowdown orders must be put in place across an entire 
section of the network to reduce the pressure on weaker rails. Table 3-21 presents the annual rail repair 
and investment costs under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 for both the status quo and proactive adaptation 
scenarios.
24 As the results in the table show, estimated climate change costs related to the rail network are 
significantly higher under the status quo scenario than under the proactive scenario. For RCP 4.5, costs 
under the status quo are more than five times greater than the costs of proactive adaptation. For RCP 8.5, 
the costs under status quo operations are greater than the costs of proactive action by a factor of 25.  
As noted above, costs under the status quo scenario are the repair costs associated with buckling events, 
while costs under the proactive scenario are the costs of obtaining and using track temperature sensors to 
prevent buckling events in a more targeted manner.  Based on the results in Table 3-21 alone, the cost of 
 
24 As noted above, the monetized value of time delays are presented in the section below on delay costs. 
 
 
  
 
59 
 
investing in sensors under the proactive scenario yield significantly greater repair cost savings (i.e., costs 
under the status quo).  For each RCP, the results in the table represent annual undiscounted costs averaged 
across GCMs. On an average annual basis, the costs associated with buckling are fairly flat under RCP 
4.5 and the status quo at approximately $6 to $7 million per year. Under RCP 8.5, status quo costs are not 
only higher but also increase by more than a factor of three between eras, from $18.2 million during the 
2050s era to $60.8 million under the 2080s era. The sensor-based proactive adaptation strategy, under 
which sensors can pinpoint more precisely where speed reductions need to be put in place, significantly 
reduces costs under both RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5. Under both RCPs, we estimate that this strategy reduces 
costs by more than 80 percent during both eras.  
For context on the results shown in Table 3-21, the combined operating expenses of Canadian Pacific and 
Canadian National, the country’s two biggest rail operators, were approximately $14 billion in 2019.25  
The costs shown in Table 3-21 are less than 0.5 percent of this value. As highlighted in Section 3.5, 
however, the delay cost impacts associated with rail are much more significant than the operating cost 
impacts shown in Table 3-21. 
TABLE 3-21. AVERAGE ANNUAL RAIL SYSTEM UNDISCOUNTED COSTS BY ERA (MILLIONS OF $2015 
CAD) 
RCP 
SCENARIO 
2040-2069 
2070-2099 
RCP 4.5 
Status Quo 
$6.7  
$6.3  
Proactive 
$1.2  
$1.3  
RCP 8.5 
Status Quo 
$18.2  
$60.8  
Proactive 
$1.2  
$1.3  
 
To provide insight into the uncertainty around each of the values shown in Table 3-21, Figure 3-18 shows 
the range of undiscounted average annual values across GCMs for each combination of RCP and 
scenario. The average values across GCMs are shown with the red dots in the figure. As indicated in the 
figure, the ranges around the average values are much wider in both proportional and absolute terms 
under the status quo scenario than under the proactive scenario. This reflects the greater uncertainty in 
repair costs under the status quo than in the costs of applying sensors under the proactive scenario.  
 
25 The $14 billion reflects $4.7 billion in operating expenses for Canadian Pacific and $9.3 billion in operating 
expenses for Canadian National.  Both values are from the companies’ respective annual reports for 2019. 
 
 
  
 
60 
 
FIGURE 3-18. RANGE OF AVERAGE ANNUAL RAIL SYSTEM UNDISCOUNTED COSTS BY ERA 
 
 
Expanding upon the national results shown above, Table 3-22 presents the estimated costs to the rail 
system by province/territory and era. Overall, costs under the status quo are greatest for Ontario. This 
result is consistent with the size of Ontario’s rail network relative to other provinces and territories. Under 
the proactive scenario, the distribution of costs across provinces and territories differs somewhat from the 
status quo, but costs are still concentrated in the provinces with the most extensive rail networks. Table 3-
18 also shows that the proactive approach is effective in reducing the costs of climate change across all of 
Canada, with such savings approaching a full order of magnitude in most provinces/territories. For 
example, average annual rail-related costs in Ontario under RCP8.5 decline from $15.4 million under the 
status quo in the 2080s to $0.2 million when proactive action is taken.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
61 
 
TABLE 3-22. AVERAGE ANNUAL UNDISCOUNTED RAIL SYSTEM COSTS BY PROVINCE AND ERA 
($2015 CAD, MILLIONS) 
  
For additional perspective on these estimates at both the provincial and national level, Figure 3-19 
presents the undiscounted costs per rail km by province/territory for the first era (2040-2069) for each 
combination of RCP and scenario (status quo versus proactive).  As the figure indicates, the costs per km 
of rail vary across Canada and, under the status quo, are highest in Saskatchewan. In addition, per-km rail 
costs are significantly lower in most areas when proactive action is taken to adapt the operation of the rail 
network to a changing climate. The one exception is Nova Scotia, where rail repair costs per km under the 
status quo are projected to be quite low relative to the rest of Canada.  
FIGURE 3-19. AVERAGE UNDISCOUNTED COSTS PER RAIL KM FOR 2040 -2069 ($2015 CAD) 
 
 
 
  
 
62 
 
Overall, the main takeaways from this analysis are: 
• 
The costs of the status quo far outweigh costs under the proactive adaptation scenario, even 
without considering the monetized impact of time delays, which are addressed in the delay cost 
section below. This strongly suggests that the proactive approach to adaptation considered here—
the use of track temperature sensors as part of a risk-based approach for managing speed orders—
represents a more cost-effective approach for managing climate change risk than the status quo 
repair-based approach. 
• 
The repair and investment costs presented here are fairly small compared costs for the other 
categories of infrastructure presented in this report.  However, as described below, the delay cost 
impacts associated with heat stress on the rail network are much more significant than rail-related 
repair and investment costs.  
• 
Climate change costs for rail are largely concentrated in those provinces with the most extensive 
rail networks, 
Limitations and Caveats  
The major caveats and limitations to this approach are noted below.    
• 
We note that one potentially important limitation of our approach for the proactive scenario is 
that some transit agencies may already have rail sensors capable of monitoring rail temperatures 
that would enable changes in the issuance of speed orders.  Anecdotally, we understand that some 
rail operators such as Metrolinx in the Toronto area may have begun limited use such sensors, 
though we are uncertain about the degree to which sensors have been installed by other rail 
operators.
26  Similarly, it is unclear whether any rail operators already possess the software 
necessary to use sensors in a manner that would allow them to reduce the frequency of speed 
orders.  Due to these uncertainties, our analysis assumes that all rail operators would need to 
purchase both sensors and the associated software systems under the proactive scenarios.  To the 
degree that such systems are fully or partially in place already, we may overestimate the costs 
under the reactive scenario as well as the costs of proactive adaptation incremental to current 
practice. 
• 
In addition to the sensor-based approach that we examine here, rail operators could potentially 
implement other technologies or approaches to adapt proactively.  Potential options include 
longitudinal stress monitoring or a combination of neutral ambient temperature and rail 
temperature difference thresholds. The degree to which the cost of these approaches would differ 
from the sensor-based approach examined in this analysis is uncertain but we expect that they 
would be roughly equivalent. 
• 
Relevant to both the proactive and reactive scenarios, another limitation of our approach is that it 
does not account for the extent to which climate change may reduce cold-related speed orders 
during the winter months.  Under extreme cold conditions, switches on the rail system 
occasionally freeze up and cease to function properly, necessitating the issuance of speed orders.  
 
26 Personal communication with Quentin Chiotti, Senior Advisor Sustainability & SME Climate Resiliency, 
Metrolinx; June 10, 2020. 
 
 
  
 
63 
 
In addition, as documented in Zhang et al. (2018), extreme cold can cause rail breaks by reducing 
the tensile strength of steel rails.  Increased temperatures could lead to reduced frequency of these 
events, resulting in a cost savings.  To our knowledge, no studies in the literature have quantified 
the relationship between temperature and the frequency of cold-related speed orders. 
 
3.3 
NORTHERN CANADA 
Our analysis of climate change costs in Northern Canada focus on damages to roads, runways, and 
buildings and the corresponding adaptation costs where applicable.  To assess these effects, we integrate 
the methods applied in Melvin et al. (2017) with those applied by IEc in our analysis of winter road 
impacts for Canada’s NRTEE (Industrial Economics 2010).  Consistent with our analysis of climate 
change costs for transportation infrastructure (see above), we will perform this analysis using IPSS.   
Table 3-23 identifies the specific types of infrastructure that will be captured in our analysis of Northern 
Canada, the climate stressors and related damage sources affecting each infrastructure type, and the 
responses available under either a status quo scenario or proactive adaptation scenario.   
TABLE 3-23.  SUMMARY OF CLIMATE CHANGE DAMAGES AND SCENARIO ASSUMPTIONS FOR 
NORTHERN CANADA 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
TYPE 
STRESSOR 
DAMAGE SOURCE(S) 
RESPONSES 
Roads (excluding 
winter roads) 
Permafrost 
thaw 
Cracking, subsidence 
Base layer modification, air-cooled 
embankments, thermosyphon installation 
Airport 
Runways 
Temperature 
Surface degradation & 
increased roughness due 
to thermal cracking & 
rutting. 
Increased repair costs due to climate-
related damage.  
Permafrost 
thaw 
Cracking, subsidence 
Base layer modification, air-cooled 
embankments, thermosyphon installation 
Winter roads 
Temperature 
Melting ice 
Construct all-weather road 
Buildings 
Permafrost 
thaw 
Cracking, subsidence 
Additional maintenance, thermosyphon 
installation, Rebuilding of the structure 
 
3.3.1 
PERMAFROST THAW 
Permafrost thaw represents an important climate stressor for Northern Canada that will impose costs on 
multiple types of infrastructure, including roads, buildings, and runways (see Melvin et al. 2017, Hjort et 
al. 2018).  This analysis is a high-level assessment of the potential costs of permafrost thaw on these three 
infrastructure categories and covers Northern Canada, including the three territories and the northern tiers 
of the majority of the provinces. The official permafrost map of Canada is presented in Figure 3-20 
below.  Absent an existing model for Canada capable of projecting permafrost thaw (discussed further 
 
 
  
 
64 
 
below), we first develop a reduced-form permafrost damage index, and then project this index for each 
decade at a 1/12° spatial resolution through the end of the 21st century, under the 14 GCM/RCP 
projections.  Shifts in the index over time then drive infrastructure impacts and responses under three 
adaptation scenarios.   
FIGURE 3-20.  CURRENT PERMAFROST CONDITIONS ACROSS CANADA  
 
Source: Heginbottom et al. (1995). Downloaded from: 
http://ftp.geogratis.gc.ca/pub/nrcan_rncan/raster/atlas_5_ed/eng/environment/land/mcr4177.pdf  
Methods 
The objective of this analysis is to provide an estimate of infrastructure damage from permafrost thaw in 
Northern Canada.  The analysis follows four steps, which are described briefly here. More detail follows. 
1. Build infrastructure inventory. Develop an inventory including roads, buildings, and runways. 
2. Develop and project permafrost damage index that scales based on excess ground ice content 
(GIC) in the uppermost 5 m of the permafrost and changes in ground surface temperature. Spatial 
GIC data were resolved to an appropriate spatial resolution, and ground surface temperature 
projections were developed based on projected changes in thawing and freezing degree days 
under each GCM and RCP. 
3. Structure adaptation scenarios and response costs.  Create a set of three adaptation scenarios 
that are triggered at specified damage index thresholds, and associated response costs. 
4. Estimate damages to infrastructure inventory, under the three adaptation scenarios.  
 
 
 
  
 
65 
 
Step 1. Build Infrastructure Inventory 
Only infrastructure in permafrost zones is considered in this analysis, which has the following effect: (a) 
the majority of included infrastructure is in Yukon and the Northwest Territories, with much smaller but 
still substantial amounts in Manitoba and Nunavut; (b) minimal infrastructure in Quebec, Ontario, 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, British Columbia, and Newfoundland and Labrador is included; and (c) 
infrastructure on Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick is excluded entirely.  
Analytically, we only include infrastructure that spatially overlaps with the non-zero GIC levels (see the 
GIC map below).   
The three categories of infrastructure considered in this analysis include: 
• 
Roads. The roads inventory is described in depth in the Transportation section above, but in brief, 
the inventory is from DMTI for the provinces and CanVec (Government of Canada 2020) for 
territories, and includes (1) paved versus unpaved, (2) road type (e.g., highways, local streets), (3) 
surface type (e.g., asphalt versus concrete for paved roads and gravel versus dirt for unpaved 
roads), and (4) number of lanes.  Within these datasets, approximately 38,000 lane km of paved 
roads and 97,000 lane km of unpaved roads are located in permafrost zones (Table 3-24). 
TABLE 3-24.  LENGTH OF ROAD NETWORK ON PERMAFROST (LANE KM) 
Type 
Primary 
Secondary 
Tertiary 
Total 
Paved 
26,706 
3,298 
7,941 
37,946 
Gravel 
5,150 
5,525 
86,282 
96,957 
Source: DMTI and Government of Canada 
• 
Buildings. We rely on an open source dataset of roughly 12 million computer generated building 
footprints across provinces and territories (see Table 3-25), with additional data provided by the 
Government of Nunavut.  This dataset is translated into the amount of building area contained 
within each of the 1/12° gridcells we analyze.  After intersecting building area with non-
negligible GIC, total building area included in the study is 42.5 million square meters. 
TABLE 3-25.  NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ACROSS CANADIAN PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES  
Province/Territory 
Number of Buildings 
Alberta 
1,777,439 
British Columbia 
1,359,628 
Manitoba 
632,982 
New Brunswick 
350,989 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
255,568 
Northwest Territories 
13,161 
Nova Scotia 
402,358 
Nunavut 
11,085 
Ontario 
3,781,847 
Prince Edward Island 
76,590 
Quebec 
2,495,801 
 
 
  
 
66 
 
Province/Territory 
Number of Buildings 
Saskatchewan 
681,553 
Yukon 
11,395 
Sources: https ://cgs-pals.ca/downloads/gis/ for Nunavut, and 
https://github.com/Microsoft/CanadianBuildingFootprints for all other provinces and territories. 
• 
Airports.  290 airports are included in the analysis.  The list of airports in this analysis are below, 
and all are in either the Northwest Territories or Nunavut. Runway lengths vary from 400 to 
3,000 meters and widths vary from 10 to 90 meters, which are drawn from the Canadian Flight 
Supplement on runway length, material, and operational status.  There are private and 
unmaintained airstrips across Northern Canada, servicing mines, Department of Defense radar 
sites, and culturally significant sites and hunting grounds. Despite the importance of these air 
strips, we did not include unmaintained and private airstrips because we were not able to 
determine if and how long they would be operational.   
 
 
 
Step 2. Develop and Calculate Permafrost Damage Index 
To analyze costs of permafrost thaw, we must first estimate the degree to which climate change leads to 
thaw over the time period of our analysis.  There are several complexities that will drive costs, including 
site-specific ice content, drainage and disturbance conditions, delays between atmospheric changes and 
permafrost thaw, and that bearing capacity falls before complete thaw (Lewkowicz 2020).  The preferred 
approach to address these challenges would be to rely on existing projections or a detailed numerical 
model similar to that employed by Melvin et al. (2017) in Alaska; however, no such projections or model 
currently exist for Canada.  The Permafrost Partnership Network for Canada (PermafrostNet) – which is a 
project funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada – is currently 
developing projected permafrost conditions under a range of climate models, however these projections 
were not available in the timeline for this study.27   
Absent either a model or existing projections, we develop a permafrost damage index that relies on two 
variables: ground ice content (GIC) and modelled ground surface temperature (see Lewkowicz 2020).  
This draws on principles developed within the temperature at the top of the permafrost (TTOP) 
methodology employed by Obu et al. (2018), which allows us to relate air temperature to ground surface 
temperature.  Importantly, the aim of this effort is not to develop permafrost projections for site-specific 
adaptation recommendations, but rather to understand the possible territorial and national-level effects of 
permafrost thaw. 
The damage index was calculated according to the following steps: 
Step 2a. Predict mean surface temperature (Ts) for each grid cell for the highway or runway centerline, 
embankment toe, and building footprint for the baseline period (1986 to 2005) and for each future decade 
(2020 to 2090 with a one decade lag) under each climate scenario. This requires calculating the freezing 
and thawing degree days for air temperature (FDDa and TDDa; using an approach in Smith and 
Riseborough 2002) at each grid cell, and then multiplying these by n-factors to develop FDDs and TDDs 
for the ground surface.  These are then summed and divided by 365 to generate baseline and projected 
 
27 Based on written communication with Stephan Gruber of Carleton University, on February 24, 2020. 
 
 
  
 
67 
 
FDDa 
TDDa 
mean Ts values.28  Figure 3-21 shows the mean annual baseline TDDa and FDDa patterns, and Figure 3-
22 shows projected patterns across the 2050s and 2080s eras, the two RCPs, and GCMs with the least and 
most warming through the 2080s.  Note that TDDa tends to increase most in the southern latitudes, 
whereas FDDa tends to decline by far the most in northern regions.    
FIGURE 3-21.  MEAN ANNUAL TDD a (LEFT) AND FDD a (RIGHT) FOR 1986-2005 (°C DAYS) 
     
 
 
FIGURE 3-22.  MEAN PROJECTED CHANGES IN TDD a AND FDD a FOR TWO GCMs (°C DAYS) 
 
          
  
 
          
   
 
 
28 Note that for modelling purposes, we calculate FDDa and TDDa within calendar years.  In reality, the thawing 
index is for a single summer while the freezing index runs across two years (i.e. from the start of freezing in the fall 
through to the end of freezing the following spring).   
CCSM4 
MIROC-ESM-CHEM 
 
 
  
 
68 
 
 
Table 3-26 below presents the n-factors used for roads, runways, and buildings.   
 
TABLE 3-26. FREEZING AND THAWING N-FACTORS FOR HIGHWAY SURFACES  
Infrastructure 
nf 
nt 
Gravel roads and 
runways 
Centerline 
0.7 
1.1 
Embankment Toe 
0.35 
1.05 
Paved roads and 
runways 
Centerline 
0.8 
1.4 
Embankment Toe 
0.35 
1.05 
Beneath Buildings 
0.45 
0.7 
Sources: Written correspondence with Antoni Lewkowicz, who relied on Darrow (2011) for roads/runways, and 
Oswell and Nixon (2015) for buildings. Values for the embankment toes are the averages measured at two Alaskan 
sites. 
 
Step 2b. Take the difference between the baseline and projected Ts values for the centerline, embankment 
toe and building footprint for a given grid cell to predict the thaw intensity values for any given decade 
from Table 3-27.  Note that these values have an ‘upside down U’ shape, where thaw intensity increases 
until 0°C, and then fall as warming continues and all excess GIC has thawed.  However, there is no way 
to ‘leapfrog’ past this point on the curve – if full thawing is projected under climate change in a given grid 
cell, impacts can be delayed but not avoided.  Note that for runways and roads, thaw intensity will differ 
between the centerline and embankment, such that the damage levels will vary as well. 
TABLE 3-27. ASSUMED RELATIVE THAW INTENSITY VALUES (0 -5) IN RELATION TO BASELINE AND 
PROJECTED TS (°C) 
Baseline Ts 
Projected decadal Ts  
<-2.0 
-2.0 to 
-1.5 
-1.5 to -
1.0 
-1.0 to 
-0.5 
-0.5 to 
0.0 
0.0 to 
+0.5 
+0.5 to 
+1.0 
+1.0 to 
+2.0 
+2.0 to 
+3.0 
>+3.0 
<-2.0 
0 
1 
2 
2 
3 
5 
4 
3 
2 
0 
-2.0 to -1.5 
 
0 
2 
2 
3 
5 
4 
3 
2 
0 
-1.5 to -1.0 
 
 
0 
2 
3 
5 
4 
3 
2 
0 
-1.0 to -0.5 
 
 
 
0 
3 
5 
4 
3 
2 
0 
-0.5 to 0.0 
 
 
 
 
0 
5 
4 
3 
2 
0 
0.0 to +0.5 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
4 
3 
2 
0 
+0.5 to +1.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
3 
2 
0 
Note: If Ts values are greater than +1.0°C under baseline climate then it is assumed that any ongoing thaw is due to 
the disturbance associated with the highway and is unrelated to future climate change. Once Ts values exceed 3°C 
permafrost is assumed to have thawed out or if still present at depth, to be thawing so slowly and with a low enough 
excess ice content that it does not to affect infrastructure.  
Source: Lewkowicz 2020. 
 
 
  
 
69 
 
Step 2c. Extract the excess ice content for each grid cell from O’Neill et al. (2012). We rely on the latest 
GIC information across Canada from O’Neill et al. (2020; see Figure 3-23).  We apply the center point of 
each range in the damage index calculation, e.g., negligible is 2, low is 7, and so on.   
FIGURE 3-23.  EXCESS GROUND ICE CONTENT I N TOP 5M 
 
Source: O’Neill et al. 2020 (or in press) 
 
Step 2d. Calculate the damage index as thaw intensity from Step 2b multiplied by GIC from Step 2c.  
These are calculated for each climate scenario, decade, and across the centerline, embankment toe and 
building footprint.  The index varies in space and time between 0 and greater than 150 because the highest 
category of excess ice content in the ground ice map is greater than 30 percent.   
 
Step 3. Structure Adaptation Scenarios and Response Costs   
The damage index is then linked to specific adaptation responses, which are linked to costs.  Reactive and 
proactive measures are detailed in Table 3-28.  Reactive and proactive options differ where the text in the 
table is red – for instance, instead of foundation repair in response to moderate damages, a proactive 
response would install thermosyphons.  We apply the threshold approach from Melvin et al. (2017) to 
identify where critical foundation damage is likely to occur.  For buildings located in areas where the 
critical threshold is met, we estimate climate change costs under both the status quo and proactive 
scenarios as the cost of rebuilding the entire building, using cost data from RSMeans (2016; 
https://rsmeansonline.com/).  We assume the same costs for the status quo and proactive scenarios 
because the only foreseeable response is rebuilding (either in response to damage from thawed permafrost 
 
 
  
 
70 
 
or in advance of expected permafrost thaw).29  For roads and runways, we identify where thaw is likely to 
result in asset failure using the same approach specified in Melvin et al. (2017).  Similar to buildings, 
costs for roads and runways will be the same under the status quo and proactive adaptation scenarios, 
based on the cost of reinforcement of the road/runway base layer, reconstructing with Air Cooled 
Embankments (ACE) and installation of thermosyphons to maintain lower soil temperatures.30  
 
TABLE 3-28. REACTIVE ADAPTATIONS AT VARIOUS DAMAGE INDEX LEVELS 
Damage Category 
Buildings 
Paved Roads/Runways 
Gravel  Roads/Runways 
Reactive Adaptations 
Low (>0-20) 
Nothing 
Cracking repair cost 
Regravel/grade 
Moderate (>20-50) 
Foundation repair 
Rehabilitate 
Rehabilitate 
High (>50-100) 
Rebuild 
Reconstruct 
Reconstruct 
Extreme (>100-150) 
Relocate 
Relocate 
Relocate 
Proactive Adaptations 
Low (>0-20) 
Nothing 
Cracking repair cost 
Regravel/grade 
Moderate (>20-50) 
Thermosyphon 
Base upgrade 
Base upgrade 
High (>50-100) 
Thermosyphon 
Reconstruct w/ ACE 
Reconstruct w/ ACE 
Extreme (>100-150) 
Relocate 
Relocate 
Relocate 
 
Note that ACE (Calmels et al., 2016), and thermosyphon installation (O’Neill and Burn, 2017), are linked 
to Ts and damage index values. Under these two proactive adaptation strategies Ts is adjusted to account 
for the reduction in temperature.  The max Ts reduction is set to 1°C. For gravel roads it is assumed that 
only primary and secondary gravel roads utilize ACE.  It is unrealistic to assume the 65,000 km of gravel 
tertiary roads will be reconstructed with ACE. 
Two versions of the proactive method were analyzed.  The first implements ACE or thermosyphons in the 
decade where the damage index is high for roads and moderate or high for buildings.  The second ‘early 
action’ alternative looks forward and implements ACE or thermosyphons in 2020 if there is a damage 
index of high for roads and moderate or high for buildings in any decade included in the analysis. Under 
both methods the thermosyphons and ACE are only installed once, so a possible reinstall at the end of the 
life is not included in the costs.   
Cost sources vary by adaptation strategy and include RSMeans, engineering studies and cost guides.  All 
reactive and proactive road costs and airport costs except for ACE are consistent with the larger roads 
 
29 In areas with low ice content in the soil, we will explore the feasibility of modeling foundation repair instead of 
building replacement. 
30 We may also explore the feasibility of assessing status quo costs for roads that involve road base reinforcement 
only, without thermosyphons.  This would require assessment of how the upgrade of the road base alone (without 
thermosyphons) affects the frequency of road base reconstruction. 
 
 
  
 
71 
 
analysis and were derived from RS Means.  Table 3-29 provides costs and source information for four of 
the key adaptation options. 
TABLE 3-29. ADAPTATION UNIT COSTS 
Adaptation 
Cost 
Notes 
Air cooled 
embankments1 
$1.47 million 
per lane-km 
i.e., $2.94 million per km for a 2-lane road 
Thermosyphon2 
$2,800 per 
thermosyphon 
Number of thermosyphons will range by building size and shape.  Typical 
home assumed to have 9 syphons and commercial building with footprint 
area of 750 square meters assumed to have 18. This is an average cost of 
$166 per square meter of building footprint. 
Foundation 
repair3 
$78 per square 
meter 
Cost guide for typical foundation repair. This includes mud jacking the 
building due to settlement and repair of cracks associated with settlement. 
Rebuild and 
relocate 
buildings4 
$2,300 per 
square meter 
Average cost of wood framed residential home, industrial facility, school, 
medical facility, and civic building.  So little is known about the stock 
breakdown, so a simple average was taken. 
Sources: 
1. http://cem.uaf.edu/media/290338/ACE-Final-Report.pdf 
2. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid= 
DE0889C7E1CAB30E261608ACD607BDE8?doi=10.1.1.492.9448&rep=rep1&type=pdf 
3. https://www.inchcalculator.com/foundation-repair-cost-guide/ 
4. https://creston.ca/DocumentCenter/View/1957/Altus-2018-Construction-Cost-Guide-web-1 
 
Unit costs for construction vary widely across Northern Canada, depending on available delivery options 
(i.e., road, rail, sealift, air).  In order to appropriately capture the costs of permafrost thaw, it is important 
to capture these variations.  CCI provided unit cost multipliers for 63 communities across Northern 
Canada, where the base multiplier of 1 would be a city, town, or community with ready access to a major 
highway network.  Figure 3-24 presents the locations and magnitudes of these cost multipliers.  In order 
to apply these multipliers to all infrastructure in permafrost zones, we interpolated between the points 
using an inverse distance weighting algorithm.  The values of 1 in southern Canada are major cities, 
added to the 63 community values in order to allow for smooth interpolation.   
 
 
  
 
72 
 
FIGURE 3-24.  COST MULTIPLIER SURFACE 
 
Source: Written communication with CCI and Antoni Lewkowicz; IEc calculations 
 
Step 4. Estimate Damages to Infrastructure Inventory 
We then calculated the damage index (Step 2) for the infrastructure inventory (Step 1), and applied 
resulting costs based on resulting damage category (Step 3).  Damages are calculated across space, 
infrastructure type, climate scenario, and decade.   
 
Results 
The following section presents the results of the analysis by infrastructure type, and over time and space.  
Unlike other infrastructure categories, the permafrost analysis shows significant adaptation investments 
between 2020 and 2040 that influence investment decisions in following periods.  As a result, we add the 
2020 to 2040 period to the other two eras reported elsewhere (2050s and 2080s), and label it “2030” in the 
graphics.   
Also note that the ‘early action’ proactive adaptation option—in which ACE or thermosyphons are 
installed in 2020 if there is a damage index of high for roads and moderate or high for buildings in any 
future decade—provided minimal additional benefit relative to the standard proactive approach.  It is 
unrealistic to assume that a large-scale investment would occur immediately without an anticipated large-
scale return, so we do not present this alternative proactive approach in the results below.    
 
 
  
 
73 
 
Infrastructure Impacts Over Time and across GCMs 
Figure 3-25 shows the pattern of average annual effects each decade from the 2020s through 2090s.  In 
this figure and those that follow, baseline costs are subtracted from the future costs to isolate the impact 
of climate change.  Average costs range from approximately $130 million to $260 million annually across 
RCPs, decades, and adaptation strategies.  We observe that the peak costs under both adaptation strategies 
occur in the 2060s for RCP 8.5, whereas under RCP 4.5 the costs are more constant over time, with a 
peak in 2090.  This is because warming occurs more rapidly under RCP 8.5, triggering larger adaptation 
investments earlier, whereas under RCP 4.5 these occur later in the century.  Under the proactive strategy, 
RCP 4.5 costs are universally lower over time, whereas under RCP 8.5, early savings from proactive 
investment delay the need for reconstruction until later in the century, causing costs in the later decades to 
exceed reactive levels.   
 
FIGURE 3-25. AVERAGE TOTAL ANNUAL COSTS BY DECADE, RCP, AND ADAPTATION STRATEGY, 
AVERAGED ACROSS GCMs 
 
 
Figure 3-26 (and the accompanying table) shows the distribution of average annual nationwide permafrost 
thaw impacts across GCMs with a table that follows with averages across the GCMs and adaptation cost 
savings that result from adopting the proactive scenario.  Although proactive costs are generally lower 
than reactive costs, the highest single GCM cost occurs under the proactive scenario in the 2050s at 
approximately $330 million per year.  This GCM, GFDL-CM3, has temperature spikes in the middle 
century that triggers large investments in thermosiphons and ACE, which drive up the average costs this 
period.  Another notable observation is the low-end costs that occur under the 2020 to 2039 period in 
RCP 4.5, for both adaptation strategies.  These are from the MRI-CGCM3 GCM, and are approximately 
10 times lower than the next lowest GCM (i.e., $18 and $12 million versus $180 and $140 million under 
reactive and proactive).  Compared to other GCMs, the RCP 4.5 run of MRI-CGCM3 warms more slowly 
and has no significant temperature spikes in the territories with greatest impacts (Yukon and Northwest 
Territories), and thus does not trigger significant adaptation investment until later in the century.  
 
 
  
 
74 
 
When moving from a reactive to proactive adaptation strategy, adaptation costs fall approximately 15 to 
20 percent for RCP 4.5 across the three eras.  For RCP 8.5, costs fall approximately 18 percent in the 
2020 to 2039 period, remain roughly constant in the mid-century, and increase roughly 22 percent in the 
late century.  This pattern reflects the large initial savings and then net costs described in the figure above.  
Overall, the benefits of adopting a proactive strategy to permafrost thaw are not as profound as in other 
categories described in this report.  This is because proactive adaptation (e.g., thermosiphons, ACE) only 
delay, rather than prevent, the loss of bearing capacity and subsidence that occurs with sufficient 
warming.  Once certain warming thresholds have occurred, reconstruction and/or relocation will be 
required.   
FIGURE 3-26.  TOTAL NATIONAL ANNUAL COSTS OVER TIME  (MILLIONS OF 2015 CAD) 
 
RCP 
Reactive 
Proactive 
Savings from Proactive 
2030 
2050s 
2080s 
2030 
2050s 
2080s 
2030 
2050s 
2080s 
RCP 4.5 
168.3 
193.4 
205.8 
138.6 
151.8 
173.9 
29.7 
41.6 
31.9 
RCP 8.5 
178.6 
196.2 
172.4 
145.2 
199.7 
211.1 
33.4 
-3.4 
-38.8 
Note: In the figure, the red dot in each bar is the average across the seven GCMs, and the surrounding box shows the 
range.  Values in the table immediately above are average costs across the GCMs. 
 
 
Impacts by Infrastructure Type 
Figure 3-27 (and the accompanying table) shows the total average annual costs broken down by the four 
infrastructure types, using the mean of the seven GCMs.  In the mid-century, reactive and proactive 
gravel road costs account for between 45 and 66 percent of total costs, with the remainder weighted 
toward paved roads under RCP4.5 and split between buildings and paved roads under RCP8.5.  This is 
only a snapshot of costs, however; the temporal patterns in this figure reflect the location of infrastructure 
across Northern Canada.  Paved roads are concentrated in the southern regions, where permafrost thaw 
 
 
  
 
75 
 
and thus peak damages occur by the early century.  Gravel roads and airports are spread out more 
uniformly across the region, such that thaw peaks in the late century under RCP4.5 and mid-century under 
RCP8.5.  Because a large share of the buildings on permafrost are located in the far north, impacts are 
concentrated in the late century.   
We also find that proactive costs for gravel roads are higher than reactive costs across all three time 
periods, for two reasons.  First, in our model, ACE can be built into primary gravel roads as a proactive 
adaptation option, and the cost of ACE are higher than relocation or reconstruction costs.  If relocation 
costs are considerably more expensive than we estimate, it may make economic sense to construct ACE 
on critical gravel roads to extend their life. Second, reactive costs per kilometer for gravel roads are lower 
than for paved roads, so the shift to proactive ACE investments for gravel roads is more costly.     
FIGURE 3-27.  TOTAL NATIONAL ANNUAL COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE TO EACH INFRASTRUC TURE 
TYPE SHOWN, BY ADAPTATION AND RCP, USING THE GCM MEAN FOR THE RCP s 
 
RCP 
Infrastructure 
Reactive 
Proactive 
2030 
2050s 
2080s 
2030 
2050s 
2080s 
RCP 4.5 
Paved Roads 
$88.2  
$69.0  
$43.8  
$54.8  
$42.6  
$27.2  
Gravel Roads 
$60.9  
$85.3  
$89.0  
$62.5  
$86.5  
$113.9  
Buildings 
$13.4  
$30.9  
$64.1  
$15.6  
$14.7  
$24.4  
Runways 
$2.4  
$3.5  
$3.5  
$1.4  
$2.7  
$2.9  
RCP 8.5 
Paved Roads 
$96.3  
$51.6  
$15.8  
$60.0  
$31.9  
$9.8  
Gravel Roads 
$62.8  
$90.9  
$67.1  
$63.7  
$127.6  
$107.8  
Buildings 
$12.7  
$44.5  
$80.6  
$14.9  
$30.0  
$81.0  
Runways 
$3.2  
$3.8  
$3.0  
$1.9  
$3.7  
$3.2  
 
 
 
  
 
76 
 
Geographic Variability in Costs 
Table 3-30 shows the annual costs under the reactive scenario (the spatial pattern of proactive costs is 
very similar) for the three eras and two RCPs by province or territory, averaged across the GCMs.  Yukon 
and Northwest Territories have the largest share of infrastructure in permafrost zones and thus incur the 
largest impacts by a wide margin.  Over time, the impacts shift northward, as seen in costs to Nunavut, 
which show a large spike due to building and runway impacts in the 2080s.  
 
TABLE 3-30.  PROVINCE AND TERRITORY ANNUAL COSTS FOR THE REACTIVE SCENARIO, GCM 
MEAN (MILLIONS 2015 CAD) 
 
 
Figure 3-28 breaks down the results in the rightmost column of Table 3-30, showing the share of costs to 
each infrastructure type by the four provinces and territories with the majority of vulnerable 
infrastructure.  Yukon bears 80 percent of the paved road costs that period, and 60 percent of the gravel 
road costs, with the Northwest Territories bearing 25 percent.  On the other hand, Nunavut incurs over 
half of the costs in the building and runway categories, also shared with the Northwest Territories.  
RCP 4.5
RCP 8.5
RCP 4.5
RCP 8.5
RCP 4.5
RCP 8.5
Alberta
$0.9
$1.2
$0.6
$0.5
$0.4
$0.1
British Columbia
$9.6
$10.4
$6.4
$3.8
$3.8
$1.5
Manitoba
$26.6
$29.2
$21.2
$20.1
$16.6
$6.4
New Brunswick
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
Newfoundland and Labrador
$0.1
$0.1
$0.1
$0.1
$0.1
$0.0
Northwest Territories
$50.7
$54.3
$57.2
$69.5
$73.2
$53.8
Nova Scotia
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
Nunavut
$0.1
$0.0
$6.5
$6.2
$22.1
$54.2
Ontario
$1.7
$1.9
$1.4
$1.2
$0.9
$0.3
Prince Edward Island
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
Quebec
$2.8
$3.6
$3.6
$3.8
$3.3
$2.1
Saskatchewan
$1.3
$1.4
$1.0
$0.7
$0.6
$0.2
Yukon
$74.5
$76.5
$95.4
$90.4
$85.0
$53.8
TOTAL
$168.3
$178.6
$193.4
$196.2
$205.8
$172.4
Province/Territory
2020-2039
2040-2069
2070-2099
 
 
  
 
77 
 
 
FIGURE 3-28.  BREAKDOWN OF COSTS FOR EACH INFRASTRUCTURE TYPE ACROSS PRIMARY 
PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES, FOR THE 2080S AND RCP 8.5, REACTIVE ADAPTATION  
 
Main takeaways  
The main takeaways from this analysis are: 
• 
Average costs of permafrost thaw across eras and GCMs range from approximately $130 million 
to $260 million annually, depending on the RCP, era, or adaptation strategy considered.  The 
high-end cost for an individual GCM is $330 million.  Paved and gravel roads account for 
between 49 and 91 percent of this cost, depending on RCP, adaptation strategy, and era.  
Buildings impacts range between 7 and 48 percent of the total, and runways account for 2 percent 
or less.  Over time, impacts shift northward as temperature rises, as seen in costs to Nunavut, 
which shows a large spike in the 2080s under RCP 8.5, due primarily to building impacts.  
• 
Due to more rapid warming under RCP 8.5 that trigger larger adaptation actions earlier, peak 
costs occur in the 2060s, whereas under RCP 4.5 the costs increase steadily over time.  RCP 4.5 
costs are universally lower over time under a proactive strategy, whereas in RCP 8.5, savings 
from proactive investment delay reconstruction until later in the century, causing costs in the later 
decades to exceed reactive levels. 
• 
Overall, the benefits of adopting a proactive strategy to permafrost thaw are not as profound as in 
other categories described in this report.  This is because proactive adaptation (e.g., 
thermosiphons, ACE) only delay, rather than prevent, the loss of bearing capacity and subsidence 
that occurs with sufficient warming.  Once certain warming thresholds have been breached, more 
significant and costly actions (e.g., reconstruction and/or relocation) will be required.  
Limitations and Caveats  
The aim of this effort is not to develop permafrost projections for site-specific adaptation 
recommendations, but rather to understand the possible territorial and national-level effects of permafrost 
thaw.  The major caveats and limitations to this approach are noted below.    
• 
The permafrost damage index developed in this work is a highly stylized representation of the 
likely effects of permafrost on infrastructure, for several reasons: 
 
 
  
 
78 
 
o The thaw index, which is based solely on climate data and GIC, is a rough substitute for 
the much more detailed outputs from a numerically-based process model, such as that 
used by Melvin et al. (2017).  However, no such model is available for Canada.  Further, 
the index does not consider the myriad site-specific factors that drive permafrost impacts, 
such as soil drainage conditions, soil type and topography, 
o The values for the thaw component of the index are from professional judgment based on 
generalized behavior of thawing soils, rather than empirically derived estimates.  
Similarly, the damage index thresholds that define various levels of infrastructure damage 
and action are defined based on professional judgment and could be enhanced through 
empirical study.   
o The 10-year lag in thaw timing is an approximation and could be improved through 
further study.   
• 
The analysis assumes that all infrastructure located in grid cells that contain excess GIC is 
susceptible to permafrost thaw impacts, and that the level of susceptibility scales directly with the 
share of ice content.  It is unclear what effect this assumption will have on the analysis.   
• 
The unit cost data that drive the analysis are not location-specific, and as a result may over or 
underestimate the total costs estimated in this study.   
 
3.3.2 
WINTER ROADS 
Rising temperatures associated with climate change are likely to adversely affect winter roads across 
much of Northern Canada. Because the integrity of winter roads is dependent on persistent sub-freezing 
temperatures, a warming climate may render winter roads unusable for at least a portion of the winter. 
Methods 
This analysis examines climate change costs for winter roads based upon the magnitude of this usability 
effect.  This impact is unlikely to be uniform across the entire winter, as temperatures for much (though a 
shorter portion) of the winter will remain sufficiently low for winter roads to remain passable. That is, 
climate change will shorten but not necessarily eliminate the winter road season. This effect will vary 
geographically based on regionally-specific changes in temperature. The associated costs will also vary 
by location, based on what a given winter road is used for and the feasibility of individual adaptive 
responses at each location. For example, where winter roads serve industrial sites, adaptation might 
involve more intensive transportation of supplies during the shortened winter road season. Alternatively, 
if an industrial site is near an airfield or the terrain near the site is amenable to construction of an airfield, 
air transport of supplies may represent a viable adaptive response. In other cases, replacing winter roads 
with conventional roads may be the only viable option.   
To assess the extent to which climate change affects the usability of winter roads, we assume that a winter 
road is impassable during a given month if the monthly average temperature exceeds -5 degrees C.  This 
reflects the threshold recommended by the Treasury Board of Canada (undated) for assessing the stability 
of winter roads.  To implement this assumption in our analysis, we estimate climate change costs as the 
cost of replacing winter roads with two-lane paved roads in areas where climate change is projected to 
lead to a four-month reduction in the winter road season for three years in a five-year span.  Based on cost 
data from RSMeans, the assumed cost of constructing a paved road to replace a winter road is $653,000 
(CAD) per lane-km. The km of paved roads constructed is assumed to be the same as the length of winter 
road replaced. We apply this approach under both the status quo scenario and the proactive adaptation 
 
 
  
 
79 
 
scenario to the winter road network summarized in Table 3-31. While Table 3-31 presents the best data 
available on the length of winter roads in Canada, winter road length nationwide can vary over time given 
that many winter roads are built and maintained by mining companies whose need for winter roads varies 
with the intensity of their mining operations. In addition, because the permafrost modeling described 
elsewhere in this chapter is not integrated into the winter road analysis, we do not assess any additional 
costs that might arise from permafrost thaw when a winter road is converted to a paved road. 
TABLE 3-31.  CANADIAN WINTER ROAD NETWORK BY PROVINCE/TERRITORY  
PROVINCE/TERRITORY 
KM OF WINTER 
ROAD 
Alberta 
396 
British Columbia 
0 
Manitoba 
2,405 
New Brunswick 
0 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
0 
Northwest Territories 
2,084 
Nova Scotia 
0 
Nunavut 
117 
Ontario 
3,238 
Prince Edward Island 
0 
Quebec 
15 
Saskatchewan 
223 
Yukon 
<10 
Results 
Similar to the permafrost analysis, the winter road analysis shows significant investments in adaptation 
between 2020 and 2039. Because the assumed adaptation (i.e., construction of a paved road to replace a 
winter road) represents a one-time investment that affects costs for later periods, we include the 2020 to 
2039 period with the other two eras reported elsewhere (2050s and 2080s).  Also, as noted above the 
winter road costs presented here do not reflect the degree to which permafrost thaw may affect the costs 
of building and maintaining paved roads that might replace winter roads. 
Figure 3-29 presents the estimated climate change costs for winter roads by RCP and era. The range of 
costs across GCMs is represented by the blue bars shown in the graph; the red dots represent average 
costs across GCMs. As the figure shows, costs are similar between RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 in the first era 
but then are 80 to 210 percent higher for RCP 8.5 than RCP 4.5 in the second and third eras. In addition, 
for RCP 4.5, costs in the first era are much higher than costs during subsequent eras. This reflects the one-
time nature of the adaptive response in our analysis. Based on the projected changes in temperature under 
RCP 4.5, an adaptive response will be necessary for many winter roads during the first era. Assuming that 
paved roads are constructed as the adaptive response, adaptation costs for these winter roads are front-
loaded into the first era.  Once a paved road is constructed to replace a winter road, costs for that road are 
limited to regular maintenance.  Alternative adaptive responses (e.g., increased reliance on air or marine 
transport) might be more uniform over time.  This decline in average annual costs lags somewhat for RCP 
8.5, with costs declining between the second and third eras rather than between the first and second eras. 
 
 
  
 
80 
 
This reflects more growth in the geographic area affected by the shortened winter road season during the 
second era under RCP 8.5 than under RCP 4.5. 
FIGURE 3-29. RANGE OF MEAN ANNUAL CLIMATE CHANGE COSTS FOR WINTER ROADS BY RCP AND 
ERA (MILLIONS OF $2015 CAD)  
 
RCP 
2020 to 2039 
2040 to 2069 
2070 to 2099 
RCP 4.5 Average 
$99.7 
$37.8 
 $28.7 
RCP 8.5 Average 
$92.5 
$117.5 
 $51.2 
 
Table 3-32 shows the distribution of winter road costs across provinces and territories for each era and 
RCP. As shown in the table, costs are highest for Ontario followed by Manitoba, which together account 
for approximately two-thirds of Canada’s winter road network. Notably, costs for the Northwest 
Territories, which have a winter road network comparable in size to Manitoba, are just a small fraction of 
costs for Manitoba. This reflects the geographic advantage of the Northwest Territories relative to other 
areas in terms of winter road integrity.  Despite projected increases in temperature, much of the Northwest 
Territories are located far enough north such that absolute temperatures with climate change do not render 
many of the region’s winter roads unusable for four months of the year (for three years within a five-year 
span).  The shortened duration of the winter road season in the far north, however, could have other 
economic implications such as increased costs associated with goods that have a relatively short shelf life. 
 
 
  
 
81 
 
TABLE 3-32. WINTER ROAD COSTS BY PROVINCE (MILLIONS OF $2015 CAD)  
 
 
On a per-km basis, winter road costs are highest for Alberta under RCP 4.5 and Ontario under RCP 8.5, 
as shown in Figure 3-30 below, followed by Manitoba and Saskatchewan. Costs per km for the territories 
are significantly lower. As described above, although climate change will lead to increased temperatures 
in the territories, the resulting temperatures in these areas will still be sufficiently low to maintain the 
integrity of winter roads during the winter.  Costs per km for the maritime provinces are zero because our 
inventory data suggest that no winter roads are located in this region. 
 
 
 
  
 
82 
 
FIGURE 3-30.  WINTER ROAD COSTS PER KM BY PROVINCE/TERRITORY (STATUS QUO SCENARIO, 
2040-2069) 
 
As described above, our analysis of winter road costs is based on winter road replacement in areas where 
the winter road season shortens in duration by at least four months. However, the threshold at which 
aggressive adaptive action such as this is taken could vary. To test the sensitivity of our results to this 
threshold, we conducted an analysis in which winter roads are replaced with paved roads if the winter 
road season shortens by only half a month (for three years out of five, as in the primary analysis). This 
analysis found that costs during the first era more than triple for RCP 4.5 relative to our primary estimate 
and more than quadruple for RCP 8.5 (see Table 3-33). In contrast, costs for the third era are significantly 
lower than under the primary analysis, due to the more significant investment in replacements for winter 
roads in the first and (to a lesser extend) secord eras. 
TABLE 3-33. ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATES OF WINTER ROADS COSTS, BASED ON LOWER THRESHOLD 
FOR WINTER ROAD REPLACEMENT 
RCP 
2020 to 2039 
2040 to 2069 
2070 to 2099 
RCP 4.5 Average 
$369.4  
$85.4  
$18.6  
RCP 8.5 Average 
$401.6  
$93.1  
$4.1  
 
Overall, the main takeaways from our analysis of costs related to winter roads are as follows: 
• 
Winter road costs are projected to be heavily concentrated in Ontario and Manitoba.  Although 
the Northwest Territories have an extensive winter road network, the projected winter 
 
 
  
 
83 
 
temperatures with climate change in the Northwest Territories will be low enough to maintain the 
integrity of most winter roads there. 
• 
Adaptation strategies based on the replacement of winter roads with other infrastructure (e.g., 
paved roads) will be front-loaded in the first era of the analysis under RCP 4.5 and the first two 
eras under RCP 8.5. Based on the threshold established for this analysis (i.e., a four-month 
reduction in the winter road season), many of the winter roads projected to be unusable reach this 
condition within the first or second era (depending on the RCP).  
• 
Based on the sensitivity analysis presented above, the choice of threshold for investing in winter 
road replacement (e.g., four-month shortening of the winter road season versus half-month 
shortening) may significantly affect the estimated costs of climate change for winter roads. The 
threshold will likely be unique regionally as communities determine how long they can use 
substitute transportation methods or stockpile goods before freeze-up. 
Limitations and Caveats  
Our analysis of climate change costs for winter roads represents the best feasible assessment of these 
costs, but we note the following uncertainties/caveats: 
• 
The threshold at which adaptation will occur for winter roads is highly uncertain. As the winter 
road season shortens, the threshold for implementing adaptation strategies that involve substitute 
forms of transportation (e.g., constructing and using a paved road to replace a winter road or 
switching to air transport) will likely vary from road to road, even within the same region. When 
such decisions are driven by economic considerations only, the decision to transition to a 
substitute form of transportation will likely depend on the size of the communities and industries 
served by a given winter road. For example, for winter roads that support a significant number of 
communities or industries, a modest shortening of the winter road season may trigger a transition 
to alternative forms of transportation. A more significant shortening of the winter road season 
may be necessary to economically justify such an investment for winter roads serving smaller 
populations/industries. As an alternative to this economics-focused approach to decision-making, 
policymakers may also opt to devote resources to winter road alternatives for equity reasons. For 
example, to the degree that even a small reduction in the winter road season exacerbates existing 
disadvantages for a specific community, policymakers may decide to devote resources to 
alternative forms of transportation to serve that community. As these examples illustrate, 
investment decisions regarding winter road replacement are complex and difficult to represent in 
the context of the analysis presented here. 
• 
The choice of adaptation strategy is also likely to vary across winter roads, based on which 
strategies are feasible for a given road and the activities that a given winter road supports. As a 
simplifying assumption, our analysis assesses adaptation costs based on the replacement of a 
winter road with a paved road. In practice, however, the adaptation strategies adopted will vary. It 
is uncertain whether our modeling of paved road construction as the sole adaptation strategy 
systematically underestimates or overestimates climate change costs for winter roads.  
• 
The analysis presented here examines only the cost of developing an alternative to winter roads 
once a certain threshold is met in terms of the shortening of the winter road season.  Before that 
 
 
  
 
84 
 
threshold is reached, however, communities and businesses reliant on winter roads may realize 
various negative impacts that we have not quantified or monetized. For example, Northern 
communities may have more limited access to various goods that are transported via winter roads, 
and businesses that are reliant on winter roads for supplies may produce less than they would if 
the winter road season were to remain unchanged. 
  
3.4 
ELECTRICITY AND ENERGY 
This analysis estimates damages to elements of Canada’s electrical grid infrastructure and the effects on 
hydropower generation under the selected climate change scenarios, using process-based approaches.  
The grid infrastructure analysis is conducted at the census division resolution, whereas the hydropower 
analysis is evaluated at the catchment scale.   
3.4.1 
ELECTRICAL GRID  
A warming and more variable climate will directly affect electrical grid infrastructure, resulting in 
increased replacement, repair, and operations and maintenance costs.  These costs can be considerable – 
in the U.S., Fant et al. (2020) find 2018 to 2099 impacts of approximately 300 billion USD, using 
stressor-response functions that model the impact of various climate drivers on power poles, transmission 
& distribution lines, transformers, and substations.   
Methods 
This analysis focuses on the subset of infrastructure-climate stressor combinations that (a) can be 
characterized with reasonable certainty and (b) are likely to have significant costs.  Meeting the first 
criterion requires sufficiently detailed infrastructure inventory information, usable projections of the 
climate stressor, and a stressor-response function that relates how the stressor affects the infrastructure.  
We rely on the stressor response functions developed by Fant et al. (2020) for the U.S.  The 
infrastructure-stressor damage categories considered in that study are presented in Table 3-34, where 
green highlighting indicates the relationships included in the U.S. analysis, and the physical impact 
assessed is denoted as either repair/replacement (R), lifespan reduction (L), and/or capacity change (C).  
Note that Fant et al. find that floods, high winds, and ice storms are stressors that are too uncertain to 
estimate.  We reach the same conclusion and exclude these stressors due to uncertainty; see the text box 
below on challenges with wind and ice storms.  The analysis is conducted for each Census Division, 
climate scenario, and year, although the results are summarized into two eras: “2050” (2041-2070) and 
“2080” (2071-2100). 31 
 
31 Census Divisions were used here because that is best scale at which we can estimate electric transmission and 
distribution infrastructure 
 
 
  
 
85 
 
TABLE 3-34.  GRID STRESSOR RESPONSE RELATIONSHIPS CONSIDERED IN FANT ET AL. (2020)  
 
There are also several categories analyzed by Fant et al. that we will not be considering.  These include 
the lightning and wildfire because the projections of these variables are not available for Canada, to our 
knowledge. In addition, sea level rise and storm surge were not considered here because these effects 
were minor compared to the overall costs and that is likely to be the case in Canada as well, and would 
require a highly resolved inundation model of coastal Canada. 
 
 
  
 
86 
 
 
The electrical grid analysis considers the remaining categories of effect, which are described in Table 3-
35 and cover the bulk of damages in Fant et al. (2020). In the Fant et al. study, the highest impacts were to 
substation transformers and vegetation management, followed by impacts to wood pole decay and 
distribution transformers.   
Three adaptation scenarios are considered, each of which represents a specific response by decision-
makers to the impacts of a changing climate. For the No Adaptation strategy, utilities make no 
adjustments to infrastructure design, treating climate as if it has remained stationary. When infrastructure 
needs to be replaced, i.e., end of a life cycle, it is replaced with the same design/model. 
For the Reactive and Proactive Adaptation strategies, utilities respond by “designing” infrastructure to 
either recent climate (reactive) or an expected future (proactive) climate based on climate projections. 
This is done by upgrading infrastructure until it meets the baseline performance or service level. For 
example, for wood pole lifespan reductions, upgrades are made until the historic aggregate baseline 
lifespan is achieved. Reactive and Proactive Adaptation are distinguished by designing to different 
climates, either reactive to the past climate or proactive to a projected future climate.  
A Note on Wind and Ice Storms 
Both high winds and ice storms cause a significant amount of damage to distribution infrastructure, and as a result can 
cause power outages ranging from local to regional scales.  Using the Interruption Cost Estimator (ICE), Larsen et al. 
(2016) found that additional power interruptions from wind, ice storms, and other drivers under climate change could 
cost the U.S. economy over 1 trillion USD by the middle of the 21st century.  Within Canada, IBC (2015) used a 
statistical approach to evaluate the change in the frequency and severity of ice and wind storms, and the resulting 
business interruption costs for specific case studies.   
However, as discussed by Fant et al. (2020, supplemental material) the climatological drivers causing wind and ice 
storm events are too complex to produce reasonable projections of either their frequency or severity at a national 
scale.  For wind events, IPCC (2013) indicates low confidence in the projection of near-surface wind speed changes 
from GCM outputs. The GCMs provide wind speed at 10-meter elevation, which is a derived variable based on 
conditions in the atmospheric layer closest to the surface, and does not take into account topography or the other local 
factors that drive these events. At a larger scale, hurricanes and convective storms, which are often the cause of 
distribution infrastructure failure, are not represented in GCMs and need to be approximated using separate modeling 
techniques that post-process GCM outputs (e.g., Emanuel et al. 2013).  The IPCC (2013) also reports low confidence 
in projecting the rate of change in the vertical structure of the atmosphere, which is the underlying driver of ice storm 
events.  While Regional Climate Models (RCMs) have been shown to simulate past ice storm events over Canada 
reasonably well (Bresson et al. 2017), there is less assurance that GCMs (and therefore the statistically downscaled 
GCMs employed in this study) can represent changes in vertical temperature profiles (Klima and Morgan 2015).   
For these reasons, we do not evaluate the impacts of wind and ice storm events on infrastructure, or the resulting 
power interruptions that occur.  Research is ongoing that may open avenues to the analysis of wind and ice storm 
events. Cheng et al. (2011, 2014) apply complex downscaling techniques to provide estimates of changes in wind 
speed gusts and freezing rain event occurrence for a set of meteorological stations across Canada, but these are for a 
small subset of GCMs within the CMIP3 rather than CMIP5 ensemble, and are for specific locations rather than at a 
nationally gridded scale.  Future refinements in GCMs, possibly within the CMIP6 ensemble, may allow for more 
confident downscaling of these events. 
 
 
  
 
87 
 
Proactive Adaptation designs to the future lifespan using an “expected” climate. Perfect foresight is not 
used, as it would be unrealistic. Instead, it is designed using the mean over all the climate projections to 
provide a projected change from current climate. In this way, Proactive Adaptation is forward-looking but 
does not design perfectly. Depending on the actual future climate that occurs, the infrastructure could be 
overdesigned and in others it could be under-designed, both causing undesirable outcomes. For this 
reason, and only in rare cases, the proactive approach can be more costly overall because the uncertainties 
in the projection related to the lifespan of the infrastructure are such that a reactive approach is more cost-
effective. This approach does not take into account potential improvements in climate model projections 
over the next century. 
TABLE 3-35.  SUMMARY OF CLIMATE CHANGE DAMAGES AND ADAPTATION ASSUMPTIONS FOR 
ELECTRICITY AND ENERGY 
EFFECT 
DESCRIPTION 
NO 
CONSIDERATION 
OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE (“NO 
ADAPTATION”) 
STATUS QUO 
(“REACTIVE 
SCENARIO”) 
DESIGN USING 
PROJECTED 
CLIMATE 
(“PROACTIVE 
SCENARIO”) 
Reduced 
Transformer (both 
substation and 
distribution) 
Lifespan  
Changes in air temperature 
cause changes in lifespan of 
large power transformers 
Build 
replacement 
transformers 
with the existing 
design (historical 
climate) 
Build 
replacement 
transformers 
adapted to 
recent climate 
Build 
replacement 
transformers 
adapted to 
projected 
climate 
Reduced 
Transmission Line 
Capacity 
High temperatures on 
transmission lines cause a 
reduction in ampacity 
Build additional 
transmission 
lines using 
existing design  
Ampacity 
upgrade of 
existing lines 
using recent 
climate 
Ampacity 
upgrade of 
existing lines 
using projected 
climate 
Wood Pole Decay 
Changes in precipitation and 
temperature alter the rate of 
decay at the base of the 
wood poles 
Increased wood 
pole 
replacement 
interval 
Steel 
reinforcement as 
needed based on 
recent climate 
Steel 
reinforcement as 
needed based on 
projected 
climate 
Change in 
Vegetation 
Management 
Changes in climate result in 
altered vegetation growth, 
which requires changes in 
vegetation management 
Increased O&M 
options  
Increased O&M 
options (no 
adaptation option 
available) 
Increased O&M 
options (no 
adaptation option 
available) 
 
Further details on the methods for the five categories are provided below, with more extensive 
explanations available in Fant et al. (2020). 
Substations and distribution transformers. Transformers are structures that convert voltage. We 
consider two types of transformers: large power transformers within substations (substation transformers); 
and standalone transformers, either on the ground in a covered metal box or fixed on power poles 
(distribution transformers). As in the Fant et al. work, transformers are modelled as being primarily 
 
 
  
 
88 
 
impacted by changing ambient air temperature, which affects transformer lifespan and capacity.
32 Air 
temperature impacts transformer peak load capacity such that higher temperatures decrease capacity.  
Ambient air temperature also impacts transformer lifespan, by developing “hot spots” within the cooling 
system that can damage the insulating paper that prevent short circuits. We apply a function developed by 
Lundgaard et al. (2004) and Stahlhut et al. (2008) to estimate reduced transformer lifespan. Both the 
reduction in capacity and lifespan results in more transformers needed or more frequent replacement. 
These impacts are valued in the no adaptation scenario by multiplying substation and distribution 
transformer unit costs by the increased number of transformers needed over time.  Under the reactive and 
proactive scenarios, unit costs are higher for transformers with higher temperature thresholds, but 
replacement frequency is lower. 
Change in summertime capacity of the high-voltage transmission system. Rising ambient air 
temperature increases the resistance of conductors and thereby decreases the carrying capacity of cables. 
These decreases in capacity may create a bottleneck in the grid if extremely hot days become more 
common. Bartos et al. (2016) developed a method for evaluating these impacts, which are applied here 
with only minor modifications as described in Fant et al. (2020). The Bartos research found that by mid-
century, U.S. transmission capacity will decline by 1.9 to 5.8 percent.  If planners ignore these capacity 
losses, lines may need to be shut off on hot days, potentially causing major outages. However, typically 
these lines are monitored closely since outages on the transmission system are generally very rare. In 
order to maintain system capacity, we assume that either additional lines will be constructed at estimated 
per mile costs (no adaptation), or existing lines will have ampacity upgrades during routine replacement 
of cables (reactive/proactive), at a higher cost per mile. 
Wood pole decay.  The primary mechanism by which air temperature and precipitation impact wood 
poles is through degradation from fungal attack at the base. Following Fant et al., we estimate timber pole 
degradation using a general form of the relationship between climate and pole decay rate (caused by 
fungal attack) developed by Wang and Wang (2012). Decay reduces the diameter of the pole, which then 
reduces the pole strength to the point of requiring a replacement. Similar to transformers, reduced wood 
pole lifespan means more frequent replacement.  This is valued based on estimated unit costs for wood 
pole replacement under the reactive scenario and based on steel reinforcement under a reactive/proactive 
case. 
Vegetation management.  In Fant et al. (2020), the impact of increased vegetation on the electricity 
transmission and distribution system is quantified in a simple way. With increased vegetation, the authors 
assume vegetation management costs will also increase and that this relationship is linear, while 
recognizing that in areas of the U.S. with more tree cover, vegetation management costs are higher than in 
regions that are drier (e.g., Arizona). Costs are based on costs per line km from Hydro-Québec, which are 
$5,545 / km. Accounting for tree density, these are roughly 4 percent higher than costs used in Fant et al. 
(2020) for the U.S. One of the key variables for this analysis is tree growth rates, which we do not have 
available for Canada.  Instead, a model is developed using the vegetation growth projections from for the 
U.S (CITE)., which is applied to the southern part of Canada only, excluding the northern Territories. 
Growth is approximated with a multivariate linear regression, where changes in precipitation and CO2 
concentrations are both significant and beneficial predictors for vegetation biomass with a n R-squared of 
 
32 Complete transformer failure due to high temperatures or lightning strikes is rare and poorly characterized 
historically, and are thus excluded from this analysis. 
 
 
  
 
89 
 
0.67. It is important to note that while the model explains 67 percent of the variance, it does not 
accurately capture the increase in growth over time and as a result is likely an underestimate of increased 
costs. Increased vegetation management costs under climate change are based on estimated costs per mile 
per tree density. It is assumed that utility companies will increase vegetation management expenses to 
keep vegetation away from lines and other infrastructure instead of neglecting the increased growth, 
which would be much more costly, likely causing outages or requiring repair/replacement. Adaptation is 
not considered for vegetation management, i.e., all adaptation scenarios are the same. 
Inventory of of Electrical grid Infrastructure 
Transmission infrastructure is available from the DMTI dataset and includes the locations of all 
substations and transmission lines. Information on the distribution infrastructure (wood poles, distribution 
transformers, and power lines) is not available for Canada. As a result, estimates of the locations of these 
infrastructure were estimated using an ordinary least squares multivariate linear regression using data 
from the U.S., which is primarily based the 2017 UDI Directory of Electric Power Producers and 
Distributors from S&P Global Platts (S&P Global 2018). 
The most important variables for predicting distribution infrastructure in the U.S. are demand and 
population density. Province and territory electricity demand was sourced from CCI calculations, which 
disaggregate demand into 31 sectors, which can be reduced into 7 major sectors. National demand for 
these sectors is shown in Table 3-36, where the two largest consumers are households and manufacturing. 
Total national demand in 2015 is 555 tera-watt hours (TWh). 
TABLE 3-36.  PROVINCE AND TERRITORY DEMAND (TWH) IN 2015 BY MAJOR SECTOR  
 PROVINCE / TERRITORY 
HOUSEHOLDS 
MANUFACT-
URING 
RESOURCES 
SERVICES 
TRANSPOR-
TATION 
Alberta 
8.0 
19.6 
33.8 
14.1 
1.9 
British Columbia 
18.6 
18.8 
7.1 
16.4 
3.2 
Manitoba 
8.3 
2.8 
6.5 
5.1 
2.0 
New Brunswick 
6.0 
4.1 
0.6 
2.7 
0.2 
Newfoundland and 
Labrador 
4.5 
0.6 
0.4 
2.6 
0.0 
Nova Scotia 
4.7 
1.5 
0.8 
3.8 
0.2 
Ontario 
47.9 
43.7 
5.5 
47.5 
0.4 
Prince Edward Island 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.9 
0.0 
Quebec 
70.1 
68.9 
17.0 
24.3 
4.3 
Saskatchewan 
3.6 
1.9 
9.5 
3.6 
3.4 
Territories 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
TOTAL 
172.4 
162.0 
81.4 
121.4 
15.5 
Note: construction and utilities are not included in the table, which nationally are 0.5 TWh and 1.6 TWh, 
respectively. 
Electricity demand was disaggregated to each Census Division using both population (for household 
demand) and employment counts (for all non-household demand) by labor sector, which were mapped to 
the 31 energy sectors.  
 
 
  
 
90 
 
The inventory of wood power poles, distribution transformers, and distribution lines was developed with 
a two-step approach. First, the model was trained using demand and population density by U.S. State, 
where we have the most confidence in the inventory database. Both demand and population density were 
found to be significant and beneficial predictors of wood power poles and distribution transformers while 
only demand was used for distribution transformers. R-squared values for the models are 0.87 for 
distribution transformers, 0.84 for power poles, and 0.82 for power lines. Province / Territory inventories 
were estimated using these three models, and then disaggregated to Census Divisions using demand. The 
resulting inventory by province / territory is shown in Table 3-37. 
TABLE 3-37.  PROVINCE AND TERRITORY INFRASTRUCTURE INVENTORY  
PROVINCE / TERRITORY 
SUBSTATION 
TRANSFORM-
ERS 
TRANSMISS-
ION LINES 
(km x103) 
DISTRIBUTION 
TRANSFORM-
ERS (x103) 
DISTRIBUTION 
LINES 
(km x103) 
POWER POLES 
(x103) 
Alberta 
 542  
11.3 
676 
253 
6,418 
British Columbia 
 210  
13.1 
586 
135 
5,486 
Manitoba 
 356  
9.9 
309 
68 
2,604 
New Brunswick 
 138  
5.5 
224 
48 
1,721 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
 80  
5.9 
187 
39 
1,338 
Nova Scotia 
 246  
5.1 
209 
44 
1,562 
Ontario 
 3,238  
23.0 
1,102 
260 
10,850 
Prince Edward Island 
 10  
0.3 
146 
29 
909 
Quebec 
 404  
27.6 
1,377 
327 
13,708 
Saskatchewan 
 280  
9.2 
276 
60 
2,260 
Territories 
 18  
1.4 
141 
28 
858 
TOTAL 
 5,522  
112 
5,230 
1,289 
47,713 
 
Results 
The following section presents the results of the analysis by stressor-response, and over time and space. 
Impacts by Stressor-Response 
Figure 3-31 shows the total average annual costs for 2071-2100, which include costs of adaptation as well 
as damages, across the six impact types, by RCP, using the mean of the seven GCMs. Baseline costs are 
subtracted from the future costs to isolate the impact of climate change, which is the case for all costs 
shown in this report. Total costs range from $0.30 to $1.5 billion / year for RCP4.5 and $0.79 to $2.9 
billion / year for RCP8.5 with the higher costs for No Adaptation and the lowest for proactive adaptation. 
For reference, the sum of replacement costs and vegetation management for the baseline is about $24 
Billion CAD / year so the additional costs of $2.9 billion for RCP 8.5, No Adaptation is roughly a 12 
percent increase in annual expenditures. Annual impacts under the more extreme RCP8.5 scenario are 
roughly double the lower emissions RCP4.5 scenario due to the much higher end-of-century temperature 
projections. Moving from a strategy of No Adaptation to a Reactive strategy is about half the expected 
costs of climate change experienced in 2090 for RCP 8.5 but is a about a third for RCP 4.5. This is likely 
 
 
  
 
91 
 
because temperatures accelerate faster for RCP8.5 in the later half of the century, making a reactive 
strategy less effective in reducing costs. A proactive strategy reduces costs even further to about half 
those for the reactive adaptation scenario for both RCPs. 
FIGURE 3-31.  TOTAL NATIONAL ANNUAL COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE OF EACH IMPACT SHOWN 
FOR EACH ADAPTATION SCENARIO  AND RCP, USING THE GCM MEAN FOR THE RCPs, 2080s 
 
Impact Type 
RCP4.5 
RCP8.5 
No Adapt 
Reactive 
Proactive 
No Adapt 
Reactive 
Proactive 
Sub. Transformer Lifespan 
$723 
$241 
$25 
$1,488 
$772 
$240 
Wood Pole Decay 
$433 
$117 
$158 
$630 
$174 
$204 
Distrib. Line Capacity 
$214 
$121 
$18 
$325 
$230 
$59 
Distrib. Transformer Lifespan 
$110 
$62 
$64 
$310 
$189 
$186 
Trans Line Capacity 
$30 
$17 
$17 
$92 
$56 
$55 
Vegetation Management 
$24 
$24 
$24 
$45 
$45 
$45 
TOTAL 
$1,534  
$582  
$307  
$2,891  
$1,467  
$790  
 
The most costly impact categories are substation transformer lifespan reduction and wood pole decay, 
contributing to about 75 to 56 percent of the total, depending on the RCP and adaptation scenario. In most 
cases the proactive strategy is cost-effective. However, that is not true for all impact categories. Similar to 
the U.S. study, wood pole decay is less costly with a reactive strategy over a proactive strategy. The 
fungal growth that causes decay in wood structures thrives in moist soils and is therefore dependent on 
changes in precipitation. Since there is more variance across GCMs on changes in precipitation compared 
to temperature, the adaptation strategy based on the median projection is more likely to over or under 
design. Transmission line capacity and vegetation management represent the two lowest cost categories. 
Vegetation management was the second highest cost in the U.S. study but that is not the case for Canada 
due in part to shorter growing seasons in Canada. Also, these costs may be an underestimate, as 
$0
$200
$400
$600
$800
$1,000
$1,200
$1,400
$1,600
No Adapt
Reactive
Proactive
No Adapt
Reactive
Proactive
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Costs (Mill CAD/year)
Sub. Transformer Lifespan
Wood Pole Decay
Distrib Line Capacity
Distrib Transfomer Lifespan
Trans Line Capacity
Vegetation Management
 
 
  
 
92 
 
mentioned in the previous section, due to the underrepresented trend over time from the statistical model 
of vegetation growth. 
Table 3-38 shows the national average annual costs per unit of infrastructure for transformers, cables, and 
wood poles. In all cases, the scenario without adaptation is the most expensive. Savings with proactive 
adaptation for transformers is significant—almost 10 times cheaper than reactive and over 20 times 
cheaper than without adaptation. For cables, the proactive and reactive scenarios are similar, indicating 
that a forward-looking adaptation strategy may not be worth the extra effort to anticipate climate change 
impacts given the state of climate change uncertainty now. For wood poles, the proactive scenario is less 
effective than a reactive approach because changes in precipitation vary and are difficult to project, as 
already discussed. 
TABLE 3-38.  ANNUAL COSTS PER UNIT OF INFRASTRUCTURE (2015 CAD)  
RCP 
Adaptation 
Scenario 
Transformers 
(CAD/trans.) 
Cables 
(mil. CAD/km) 
Wood Poles 
(CAD/pole) 
RCP4.5 
No Adaptation  
$2,686 
$1.16 
$272 
Reactive 
$1,038 
$0.73 
$74 
Proactive 
$123 
$0.75 
$99 
RCP8.5 
No Adaptation  
$5,194 
$3.19 
$396 
Reactive 
$2,872 
$2.07 
$109 
Proactive 
$856 
$2.05 
$128 
 
Infrastrucuture Impacts Over Time 
The rate of evolution of impacts over time can inform strategies to deal these additional costs. Figure 3-32 
shows the evolution of national annual costs over the century. Each boxplot contains 100 points made up 
of the five GCMs and 20 years within each era.  The whiskers represent the 5th to 95th percentiles of 
these data, the boxes capture the 25th to 75th percentiles, and the filled and open circles are the mean and 
median across the data, respectively. With No Adaptation, RCP 4.5 shows an increase early in the century 
then costs flatten off the later half while RCP 8.5 shows a steady increase throughout the century. 
Variance across GCMs and years is particularly larger for RCP 8.5 than RCP 4.5. With proactive 
adaptation, a very different story emerges. Early spending on adaptation significantly reduces costs in the 
later half of the century, especially for RCP 4.5 where costs in 2090 are nearly half the costs in 2030.   
 
 
 
  
 
93 
 
FIGURE 3-32.  TOTAL NATIONAL ANNUAL COSTS OVER TIME WITH 20 -YEAR ERAS ACROSS THE 
CENTURY FOR THE NO ADAPTATION SCENARIO (LEFT) AND THE PROACTIVE SCENARIO ( RIGHT). 
No Adaptation  
 
 
 
                Proactive Adaptation 
 
      
 
 
Geographic Variability in Costs 
Table 3-39 shows the annual damages for the two eras by province or territory, average across the GCMs. 
Both Ontario and Quebec show the highest damages, composing over half the total for all scenarios. 
These differences between provinces and territories are largely driven by the inventory of grid 
infrastructure. 
 
TABLE 3-39.  PROVINCE AND TERRITORY ANNUAL DAMAGES FOR THE REACTIVE SCENARIO, GCM 
MEAN (MILLIONS 2015 CAD) 
 
 
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Alberta
173
         
224
         
81
          
169
         
British Columbia
86
          
118
         
51
          
120
         
Manitoba
79
          
111
         
39
          
90
          
New Brunswick
62
          
78
          
22
          
56
          
Newfoundland and Labrador
34
          
41
          
11
          
27
          
Nova Scotia
46
          
59
          
17
          
42
          
Ontario
371
         
476
         
180
         
446
         
Prince Edward Island
28
          
32
          
7
            
21
          
Quebec
363
         
493
         
140
         
408
         
Saskatchewan
63
          
89
          
31
          
74
          
Territories
6
            
12
          
3
            
16
          
Province / Territory
2041-2070
2071-2100
 
 
  
 
94 
 
Figure 3-33 shows maps of the census division costs per MWh of electricity demand. It is unclear how 
much of these costs might be absorbed by the utility versus passed along to ratepayers, but these values 
show relative costs to electricity sales for an easier comparison across regions. National costs per sales (or 
demand) range from $0.60/MWh for RCP4.5 - Proactive to $5.30/MWh for RCP8.5 - No Adaptation. 
Impacts vary across census divisions from about $0.30/MWh to $24/MWh. The highest costs per demand 
tend to be in areas with very low demand density, and due in part to the lower population densities, 
infrastructure is comparatively higher per demand in order to connect the grid to the users.  
 
FIGURE 3-33.  COSTS PER MWH DEMAND BY CENSUS DIVISION FOR 2071 -2100 
 
 
No Adaptation 
Reactive 
Proactive 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
 
 
Annual Costs of Climate Change Impacts  
Figure 3-34 shows the national annual costs for both eras, where the dots show the GCM mean and the 
boxes show the range of values across GCMs. In the 2050s era, the range across GCM estimates is 
considerably higher than differences between adaptation scenarios. By the 2080s, the benefits of using a 
proactive or even reactive adaptation strategy are quite evident. Even the range across GCMs, i.e., 
uncertainty, is considerably reduced.     
CAD / MWh 
 
 
  
 
95 
 
FIGURE 3-34.  NATIONAL ANNUAL COSTS FOR BOTH ERAS, BOXES SHOW THE RANGE OF GCM 
OUTPUTS AND DOTS SHOW THE MEAN  
2050s
 
2080s
 
 
These results explore the costs of climate on the electrical grid in Canada. The approach was built around 
a series of stressor-response functions that relate the physical effects of climate change on the various 
components of the transmission and distribution network. The parsimonious approach used here provides 
a national estimate of costs of climate change to transmission and distribution infrastructure focusing on 
those that are likely to have substantial costs and tractable given the information available and scale. The 
hope is that these estimates can inform policy and to identify regions or sectors where resources should be 
used for targeted impacts and adaptation analysis.  
The main takeaways from this analysis are: 
• 
A proactive approach, using climate projections to inform the infrastructure design is cost-
effective in most cases and can significantly reduce future spending in this sector.   
• 
The majority of the costs are from impacts on substation transformers and wood structures. 
Substation transformers are the most expensive per unit in the electrical grid but there are fewer 
to supervise, which may necessitate earlier adaptation measures and real-time monitoring. Wood 
poles are relatively inexpensive per pole but there are many, which may result in less attention 
and monitoring.  
• 
The range of estimates across the climate projections used in this analysis are substantial. In the 
U.S. study, the range of costs across the GCMs was on par with the range across adaptation 
scenarios and RCPs. While the U.S. study only used five GCMs compared to the seven used here, 
along with various other differences in the way the projections were downscaled, the range across 
GCM costs are about 3 times larger than for the U.S. in relative terms. Making decisions for the 
electrical grid under these uncertainties may be challenging going forward. 
Limitations and Caveats  
The major caveats and limitations to this approach are noted below.    
 
 
  
 
96 
 
• 
As mentioned, this work focuses on a subset of six stressor-response infrastructure interactions 
and as such capture only a portion of the range of climate change impacts to the grid.  
• 
While the stressor-response functions are primarily based on physical processes and relationships 
rooted in engineering principles, they are designed to require a limited set of input. Specific 
caveats to each of these are listed in Fant et al. (2020). 
• 
This analysis focuses on long-term infrastructure deterioration or performance reduction and does 
not include consideration of the costs of power interruptions, which have been shown to be 
substantial (Larsen 2016; Larsen et al. 2018). This omission of any customer costs associated 
with power interruptions is a critical area of future study and research in this area needed both in 
terms of characterizing the causes of interruptions and in developing a better understanding of 
how extreme weather events that cause interruptions will change in the future. 
• 
The current state of the infrastructure (e.g., age, deterioration, etc.) is not considered due to lack 
of information. If the infrastructure is already in need of replacement and repair, costs may be 
higher in the near-term. On the other hand, infrastructure components are assumed to be designed 
to historical climate where vulnerabilities that result in impacts occur as the climate changes 
outside the range of observed climate. If design of these components has already incorporated 
long-term trends in climate, costs may decrease. Also, advances in technology may help to reduce 
adaptation costs and future impacts.   
 
3.4.2 
HYDROPOWER GENERATION CAPACITY 
Canada has over 81 Gigawatts of installed hydropower capacity and generates over 380 Terawatt-hours of 
hydropower annually on average, making it the third largest producer in the world in 2018.33  Shifting 
precipitation, snowmelt, and evaporation patterns will affect the magnitude, timing, and variability of 
hydropower generation, potentially posing challenges for energy planners and utilities seeking to achieve 
a stable and reliable energy supply.   
Although conducting a comprehensive and detailed analysis of the effect of climate change on Canadian 
hydropower generation would be an enormously complex endeavor, this study seeks to provide an initial 
assessment of those effects, following an approach similar to Boehlert et al. (2016), who analyzed the 
impacts of climate change on U.S. hydropower generation through 2100.  That study used a water 
systems model with over 2000 river basins and a moderately detailed accounting of the U.S. hydropower 
system.  Although this level of modeling effort was not feasible here, we apply a water balancing 
approach to 184 basins across Canada that evaluates how projected runoff would be converted to 
hydropower generation by tracking reservoir volumes, elevations, and turbine releases in 67 of the basins 
that contain hydropower facilities (see Figure 3-35).  While simplified, this approach offers more detailed 
insights than stylized approaches that have been taken in some other previous studies.  Hamududu and 
Killingtvelt (2012) conduct a global assessment of hydropower generation and use changes in mean 
annual runoff under climate change as an indicator of changes in generation.  Shu et al. (2018) report a 
statistical approach that relates projected changes in precipitation and temperature to changes in 
 
33 https://www.hydropower.org/country-profiles/canada 
 
 
  
 
97 
 
hydropower generation.  Because these approaches assume that annual river flow is the primary driver of 
generation, they will have inaccuracies given the role of seasonal dynamics and reservoir management. 
FIGURE 3-35.  RIVER BASINS ANALYZED 
  
Source: IEc analysis 
Methods 
The objective of this analysis is to provide an estimate of the effects of climate change on hydropower 
generation across Canada.  The analysis follows four steps, which are described briefly here. More detail 
follows.  
1. Develop input dataset on location, installed capacity, reservoir storage, and other information 
for hydropower generation facilities across Canada.  Capacity factors for each facility are 
estimated using generation data at the province/territory level. 
2. Estimate simulated flows and net evaporation in each basin.  A central input to the water 
balance models is projections of river runoff under climate change.  We use a calibrated monthly 
rainfall-runoff model to translate climate data into runoff projections for the baseline and each of 
the 14 climate change scenarios.  These are then translated from runoff into flows (i.e., the water 
available at a hydropower facility), by summing all upstream runoff for each basin.  
3. Build water balance models.  Using information from Steps 1 and 2, we next develop water 
balance models that track monthly hydropower facility water levels, releases, spill, and reservoir 
volumes based on inflows and evaporation.  Hydropower generation is calculated from releases 
 
 
  
 
98 
 
through turbines and reservoir elevation, and these are bias corrected to the approximate 
generation levels for each basin.34 
4. Estimate change in generation and revenues.  The changes in generation are then calculated for 
each basin and facility, and these are aggregated to the province level to estimate total changes in 
energy production.  We then apply an average price per megawatt-hour (MWh) to estimate 
economic implications.   
 
Step 1. Develop Input Dataset 
The aim of this step was to develop a dataset with key information on hydropower facilities that covers 
approximately 90 percent of the installed capacity across the country, as well as ensuring that the majority 
of capacity within each of the provinces and territories is included.  We relied primarily on three sources 
for this: 
• 
For each of over 500 hydropower facilities across Canada, data on installed capacity (i.e., 
megawatts [MW]) and location (latitude and longitude) are available through DMTI.   
• 
Data on reservoir volume and height are available from the Canadian Dams Association large 
dams dataset (CDA 2019).  In many cases, the facility names in the CDA dataset did not match 
DMTI names; in many cases we were able to make the match, but in others no match could be 
established. For larger facilities that were critical to the analysis and were missing data, we 
researched information on reservoir heights and volumes from a range of sources.   
• 
Information on hydropower generation was available at the province/territory level from 
Statistics Canada (2020), but we were unable to locate a centralized source of generation data at 
the facility level.  We also relied on facility level data for some of the larger facilities, and for the 
main river basins within Quebec.  
We also calculated two additional variables derived from those above.  First, we calculated maximum 
turbine capacity (in m3/s) using information on installed capacity and height, assuming a turbine 
efficiency of 90 percent.35  This variable is critical for ensuring that increased flows under climate change 
only increase hydropower generation if they do not exceed turbine capacity.  Second, to approximate 
capacity factors of the facilities (i.e., the ratio of actual hydropower generation to theoretical generation 
based on installed capacity), we aggregated installed capacity (from DMTI) to the province/territory scale 
and then compared the observed mean annual hydropower generation (from Statistics Canada 2020) at 
that resolution to theoretical generation.  We then assigned each facility the capacity factor from its 
province/territory.  
Lastly, we mapped the facilities into each of their respective basins, then created a lumped facility in each 
basin by summing most variables across facilities (volume, installed capacity, maximum turbine 
 
34 Although other water demands don’t typically compete with hydro generation needs in Canada, the model could 
be made more representative with information on upstream water demands, environmental flow considerations, and 
so on.  Given the limited scope of this aspect of the work and the fact that demands are less likely to change 
considerably under climate change, our focus is on runoff impacts only.  
35 The equation to calculate maximum turbine capacity is (installed capacity) / (9.81 * 1000 * 0.9 * height) where 
installed capacity is in MW, and height is in meters. 
 
 
  
 
99 
 
capacity), and then using the installed capacity and maximum turbine capacity to estimate representative 
height, which we take to be maximum head for hydropower generation.  This also allows us to produce an 
estimated level of mean annual hydropower generation for each of the basins.  In the absence of more 
detailed information on the location of facilities within the river network of each catchment, our approach 
assumes that the lumped facility is at the catchment outlet, which means that more runoff is available for 
generation in our model than would be actually available.  Given that this upward bias is present in both 
the baseline and projections, the relative effects of climate change reported here are unlikely to be 
significantly affected. 
This dataset provided the inputs needed for the water balance modeling in Step 3.  In total, this process 
developed facility information for 89 percent of the installed capacity of facilities in the DMTI database, 
distributed across Canada as shown in Figure 3-36.  The figure on the left includes all DMTI facilities, 
whereas on the right only those facilities with data available for the necessary characteristics are included.   
FIGURE 3-36.  INSTALLED CAPACITY ACROSS THE 184 BASINS INCLUDING ALL FACILITIES (LEFT) 
AND THOSE INCLUDED IN THIS ANALYSIS (RIGHT)  
   
 
 
Step 2. Estimate Simulated Flows and Net Evaporation in each Basin 
To generate river runoff projections at the 184 basins, we use model calibration parameters from our 2010 
NRTEE study (Industrial Economics, 2010) to simulate runoff for the baseline and projected climate data 
used throughout this analysis.  The 2010 work calibrated modeled runoff outputs (developed using a 
different climate baseline) to ‘observed’ runoff data produced by the Global Runoff Data Center (GRDC), 
which is a gridded global data product for 12 months at the 0.5° spatial resolution.  Although it was 
beyond the scope of this current activity, recalibrating the model using (a) the climate baseline used in 
this study and (b) an improved and Canada-specific runoff dataset would improve the accuracy of these 
results.  Further, a more refined observed runoff dataset than GRDC would have improved the temporal 
and spatial accuracy of the calibration, however, to our knowledge no such Canada-wide naturalized 
runoff dataset exists.   
 
 
  
 
100 
 
Input data to the projections includes monthly precipitation and potential evapotranspiration (PET; 
calculated using the modified Hargreaves approach) for the 1986 to 2005 baseline and 2011 to 2100 
projection period, and the calibration parameters from the 2010 work, for each of the 184 basins.  The 
projections cover all 14 climate scenarios.  For inputs to the reservoir balance equation, we also estimate 
net evaporation (i.e., PET – precipitation) for each month in each basin.   
Overall, the simulated baseline (between 1970 and 2010) estimates an average Canada-wide runoff of 
3,240 km3 annually, which compares favorably with estimates presented by Natural Resources Canada 
(NRC 2020) of 3,600 km3 per year, and from the AquaStat (FAO 2019) estimate of 2,800 km3.  Figure 3-
37 shows baseline annual runoff and net evaporation.  Basins wholly in the U.S. (shaded in gray) are not 
included in runoff or net evaporation calculations. 
FIGURE 3-37.  MEAN ANNUAL 1986-2005 RUNOFF (LEFT; KM 3) AND NET EVAPORATION (RIGHT; 
MM) 
      
 
 
Projected changes in runoff to the 2080s across GCMs and the 184 basins (i.e., 1288 possibilities for each 
RCP) are presented in Figure 3-38.  The projected changes generally show increasing runoff, ranging 
from decreases of 40 percent to a maximum of a 540 percent increase (all values above 100 are captured 
in the 100 bar).  This pattern of increasing runoff is more exaggerated under RCP 8.5.  
 
 
  
 
101 
 
 
FIGURE 3-38.  HISTOGRAM OF CHANGE IN RUNOFF FROM BASELINE TO THE 2080S, ACROSS 
BASINS AND GCMS 
 
Note that the bar at +100 percent includes all occurrences greater than 100 percent, ranging up to an absolute 
maximum of a 540 percent increase.   
Figure 3-39 looks at changes in runoff spatially for each RCP, averaged across the GCMs. Averaging 
across GCMs mutes the patterns seen in the above histogram somewhat, including almost entirely 
removing any reductions in runoff.  Generally, inland areas are anticipated to have the largest increase in 
runoff, whereas the projected increases in coastal areas will be more muted.  The range of projected 
changes is comparable to findings of Guay et al. (2015), who show modeled increases in runoff for 
Quebec ranging between 2 to 14 percent through 2050.  
 
 
  
 
102 
 
FIGURE 3-39.  PROJECTED PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN MEAN ANNUAL RUNOFF A CROSS GCMs UNDER 
TWO RCPs AND TIME PERIODS 
        
 
As a last step, runoff was converted into flows by assessing the upstream-downstream relationships 
between each basin using topological information in the HydroAtlas (WWF 2020), and summing runoff 
in all upstream basins. Figure 3-40 provides two examples of the basins upstream whose runoff is 
summed to produce flow in the outlet basin, in blue. 
 
 
  
 
103 
 
FIGURE 3-40. ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE UPSTREAM BASINS FROM TWO OUTLETS  
       
 
 
 
Step 3. Build Water Balance Models  
The facility characteristics from Step 1 were combined with the flow and net evaporation projections in 
Step 2 to populate water balance models for each basin.  The basic water balance formulation is: 
𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑡= 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑡−1 + 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑡−𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑝𝑡−𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡−𝑆𝑝𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑡 
Or storage this month is equal to storage last month plus inflow, less net evaporation, releases through the 
turbines, and spill (t denotes each month over the time series).  As noted above, this formulation does not 
consider upstream demands or consumptive use, environmental flow requirements, or seepage from the 
reservoir into groundwater.  The usable storage in this formulation is assumed to be 75 percent of total 
storage from the database in Step 1, where the remaining 25 percent is dead storage not accessible for 
hydropower generation.  This assumption is adopted from Boehlert et al. (2016), who apply these ratios 
for basins in the U.S. where information on dead storage is not available.  The upper bound on release is 
the maximum turbine capacity defined above, and decisions around how to allocate between release, spill, 
and holding water back in storage are driven by a simplified rule curve.  This rule curve is designed to 
accommodate the spring freshet, where more freeboard is maintained in the reservoir from December 
through May, and the reservoir can remain nearly full from June to November.  When storage exceeds 
rule curve levels each month, water is first released through the turbines up to max capacity, then any 
excess is spilled.  Any months where storage is below the rule curve levels, no water is released. 
Reservoir elevation (for head) and area (for evaporation) are calculated each month based on 
representative volume elevation curves.   
We input monthly baseline and projected runoff and evaporation into the above formulation to estimate 
head and turbine releases under the baseline and all climate scenarios.  We use these outputs, combined 
with turbine efficiency, to calculate average power output each month for all climate scenarios (in MW).  
 
 
  
 
104 
 
This is then translated to energy generation (in GWh) by multiplying by number of hours per month and 
the capacity factors for each of the basins estimated in Step 1.  In order to ensure that the total generation 
being modeled is consistent with historically observed levels, a “bias correction multiplier” is then 
developed for each basin that divides the basin-level generation values from Step 1 by the modeled 
baseline levels.  The more this value deviates from 1, the more biased the modeled estimate is.36  This set 
of basin multipliers is then applied to hydropower generation in each scenario. 
Step 4. Estimate Change in Generation 
Lastly, we compare generation levels across GCMs and RCPs to baseline levels.  The hydropower 
generation outputs are aggregated to the province/territory and national levels.   
Results 
The following section presents the results of the analysis over space and time.  Unlike other analyses, this 
study does not monetize the effects because of uncertainties in both modeling generation and how those 
would ultimately be monetized.   
Infrastrucuture Impacts Over Time and across GCMs 
Figure 3-41 shows the overall effects of climate change on hydropower generation at the national scale, in 
terms of percent change relative to the 1986 to 2005 baseline.  From this perspective, even the GCMs that 
show the smallest generation levels still show increases nationally.  Average increases across GCMs are 
roughly 10 percent for the 2050s and 2080s under RCP 4.5 and the 2050s under RCP 8.5.  Given the 
much larger projected increases in temperature into the late century under RCP 8.5, those effects are 
nearly twice as high at an 18 percent average increase.  Under RCP 8.5 in the 2080s, the minimum 
projected increase is 7 percent relative to the baseline period. 
 
36 Generally, the most biased basins appear to be those that have cascades of hydropower facilities.  For this type of 
configuration, a more appropriate way to develop a lumped basin-level facility would be to sum reservoir heights 
and average maximum turbine capacity, rather than the approach we have taken which does the opposite.  It was 
not possible, within the scope of this analysis, to research the configuration of hydropower facilities in each basin 
so this is an outcome of our study design. 
 
 
  
 
105 
 
FIGURE 3-41.  CHANGE IN MEAN ANNUAL GENERATION  OVER TWO RCPs AND PERIODS 
 
Note: the red dot in each bar is the average across the seven GCMs, and the surrounding box shows the range.   
 
Geographic Variability in Costs 
Effects at the provinces at territory level are similar, with the majority experiencing increases that scale 
with time and emissions intensity.  The low-end estimates of future generation levels do show decreases 
relative to the baseline in a few provinces, including Manitoba for all era-RCP combinations, on Ontario, 
Alberta, and British Columbia for a subset of era-RCPs (Table 3-40).  GCMs showing the largest 
increases in the 2080s under RCP 8.5 suggest a roughly 30 percent increase in generation relative to 
baseline levels. 
TABLE 3-40.  PERCENT CHANGE IN MEAN ANNUAL HYDROPOWER GENERATION  FOR PROVINCES 
AND TERRITORIES, FOR THE MINIMUM, MEAN, AND MAXIMUM ACROSS GCMS  
 
Min
Mean
Max
Min
Mean
Max
Min
Mean
Max
Min
Mean
Max
Alberta
-1%
9%
23%
0%
9%
22%
2%
10%
21%
1%
14%
33%
British Columbia
-1%
5%
14%
3%
8%
17%
2%
7%
16%
6%
14%
32%
Manitoba
-7%
9%
19%
-5%
8%
17%
-4%
10%
21%
-2%
16%
25%
New Brunswick
8%
16%
20%
12%
17%
26%
8%
15%
23%
13%
23%
33%
Newfoundland and Labrador
7%
14%
21%
10%
16%
21%
9%
17%
26%
15%
25%
35%
Nova Scotia
1%
5%
8%
6%
7%
9%
3%
6%
10%
3%
8%
12%
Northwest Territories
7%
11%
14%
4%
12%
18%
6%
12%
17%
11%
18%
22%
Nunavut
Ontario
-2%
7%
14%
-1%
7%
18%
-1%
7%
16%
3%
15%
25%
Prince Edward Island
Quebec
4%
9%
13%
3%
10%
16%
2%
11%
18%
6%
19%
28%
Saskatchewan
0%
11%
24%
2%
10%
18%
0%
12%
20%
5%
16%
28%
Yukon
0%
4%
6%
0%
6%
10%
1%
5%
8%
4%
11%
17%
Province/Territory
RCP 4.5
RCP 8.5
2050s
2080s
2050s
2080s
 
 
  
 
106 
 
 
Main takeaways  
The main takeaways from this analysis are: 
• 
Average effects of changes in hydropower generation across eras and GCMs range from 
approximately 2 percent to 26 percent increases in generation annually, depending on the RCP 
and era.  Average increases across GCMs are roughly 10 percent for the 2050s and 2080s under 
RCP 4.5 and the 2050s under RCP 8.5.  Under RCP 8.5, those effects are nearly twice as high at 
an 18 percent increase.   
• 
Effects at the provincial and territorial level are similar, with the majority experiencing increases 
that scale with time and emissions intensity.  The low-end generation levels do show the potential 
for decreases relative to the baseline in a few provinces, including Manitoba for all era-RCP 
combinations, on Ontario, Alberta, and British Columbia for a subset of era-RCPs.  
• 
The above results do not address projected changes in firm power, which is a potentially critical 
effect of climate change, particularly given increases in summer electricity demand for cooling 
under a warmer climate.  Boehlert et al. (2016) found that although overall hydropower 
generation in the U.S. generally increased under climate change (primarily due to rising 
generation in the Pacific Northwest), reliability of monthly flows decreased because of falling 
summer rainfall and earlier snowmelt.   
Limitations and Caveats  
The purpose of this analysis is not to develop facility-level hydropower projections or site-specific 
adaptation recommendations, but rather to understand the possible regional and national-level effects of 
climate change on hydropower generation.  The major caveats and limitations to this approach are noted 
below.    
• 
Calibrating the rainfall runoff model using (a) the climate baseline used in this study and (b) an 
improved and Canada-specific runoff dataset would improve the accuracy of these results, and 
allow for a more defensible estimation of effects on firm power.  How this would affect the 
magnitude of relative changes in generation under climate change, however, is unclear. 
• 
The model of the Canadian hydropower system developed in this work is a highly stylized 
representation of the actual system, for several reasons: 
o Although information on installed capacity for each facility was available, often other 
characteristics such as maximum turbine flow, height, and usable reservoir volume were 
not.  These needed to be reconstructed using available data.  
o One of the sources of data used to tune facility characteristics and system-wide 
production is energy generation at the province/territory level.  Ideally, a dataset with 
more generation data at the facility level would have been available to allow for facility-
specific calibration. 
o Individual facilities within each basin are lumped into a single facility for modeling 
purposes, with an average height and a sum across maximum turbine flows.  As 
documented by Wiberg and Strzepek (2005), how facility characteristics are combined 
depends on the configuration of the system, i.e., if the system is a cascade, summing 
heads is more sensible, whereas if the reservoirs are on separate tributaries within a basin, 
summing across maximum turbine capacities is the better choice. However, in the 
 
 
  
 
107 
 
absence of information about the configuration of facilities in each basin, it was not 
possible to reflect these characteristics in the lumping approach.  
o The management of each basin-level lumped facility is treated as independent, with flow 
from all upstream basins available for hydropower generation.  In reality, these systems 
are interdependent and operated as a system.  Further, absent detailed information on how 
each facility is managed, we use a stylized monthly rule curve that is identical (in 
percentage of volume terms) across basins that may not accurately reflect how releases 
occur each month. 
o Inter-basin transfers, water demands, and environmental flows are not considered.  
Although generally water is plentiful in Canada and unlikely to have a major effect on the 
availability of hydropower flows, in specific instances any of these three omissions could 
have a significant effect.   
• 
The generally positive effects of climate change on hydropower generation in this study are 
driven by projected increases in precipitation and thus runoff, but may be overstated because of 
some of the simplifying assumptions about operational constraints described above.  Under these 
omitted constraints (e.g., minimum required reservoir levels through the summer for recreation, 
releases for salmon, or maximum system energy demand that constrains generation) often more 
water would not allow production of more hydropower. 
 
3.5 
DELAY COSTS 
For many of the sectors described above, the costs of climate change include not only the direct cost of 
repairing, preventing, or minimizing the physical damage caused by climate change but also the indirect 
costs borne by both households and businesses. These indirect costs represent an interruption in the 
normal course of business for households and firms and are an important element of the societal losses 
associated with climate change. 
Although these effects are relevant to several of the sectors included in this report, the available data and 
methods support the analysis of these effects for roads and rail only, in the form of delay costs. Below we 
describe our approach for estimating these delay costs and the results of our analysis. 
Methods 
Roads 
Our analysis of delay costs for the roads sector captures climate-related increases in the costs of motorist 
delay related to road damage. The analysis is based upon the methods applied in Neumann et al. (2019), 
which estimates these effects for the United States. To estimate delays, Neumann et al. (2019) relied upon 
the relationship between present serviceability rating (PSR) and free-flow speed developed by Wang et al. 
(2013), using research by Al-Omari and Darter (1994) to convert IRI to PSR. To quantify the cost of 
delay from the change in free-flow speed, Neumann et al. relied on the following equation:  
 
(4) 
 
 
 
  
 
108 
 
Where: 
L = length of road (miles) 
V= Posted speed limit (mph) 
ΔV=Change in free-flow speed (mph) 
ADT=Average daily traffic (vehicles per day) 
CD=Unit cost of delay (USD/hour) 
To quantify the unit cost of delay for passenger vehicle travel, Neumann et al. (2019) relied on the value 
of travel time savings (VTTS) estimates from the U.S. Department of Transportation’s 2016 guidance for 
intercity surface transportation models. For the average occupancy of passenger vehicles, Neumann et al. 
relied on data from the 2017 National Household Travel Survey (FHWA 2017). To quantify the unit cost 
of delay for freight vehicle travel, Neumann et al. rely on data from the National Cooperative Highway 
Research Program (NCHRP) that are used as inputs to their Truck Freight Reliability Valuation Model 
(NCHRP 2016).  
The methods used in the Neumann et al. (2019) study are applicable to the Canadian context, but to our 
knowledge the data necessary to directly apply this approach to Canada are not readily available. For 
example, we were unable to identify the detailed traffic data necessary to use the Neumann et al. (2019) 
approach. In the absence of these data, we applied the ratio of delay costs to adaptation costs from 
Neumann et al. (2019) to the direct adaptation costs that we estimate for Canada.  Because the types of 
adaptation costs included in this study and in Neumann et al. (2019) are the same, this provides a 
reasonable approximation of delay costs in the Canadian context.  These ratios are summarized in Table 
3-41.  As shown in the table, these ratios vary by RCP, stressor (temperature versus precipitation), and 
scenario (status quo versus proactive).  Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 above describe the types of damages to 
roads and rail, respectively, that can result in delay costs. 
TABLE 3-41.  RATIO OF DELAY COSTS TO ADAPTATION COSTS 
 
PROACTIVE/ 
PRECIPITATION 
STATUS QUO/ 
PRECIPITATION 
PROACTIVE/ 
TEMPERATURE 
STATUS QUO/ 
TEMPERATURE 
Baseline 
1.096 
1.068 
1.034 
1.410 
RCP 4.5 
1.095 
1.050 
1.074 
1.224 
RCP 8.5 
1.093 
1.054 
1.080 
1.165 
Source: Derived from Neumann et al. (2019). 
 
Rail 
Similar to roads, we also examined how climate change may result in delay costs for rail. At the grid cell 
level, our analysis of delay minutes per year under the status quo scenario follows the approach in 
Chinowsky et al. (2019).  Under this approach, we estimate delay based on the reduction in speed per 
delay incident, the total length of rail per grid cell, the total hours of speed reduction orders per grid cell, 
the number of hours that the railroad typically operates, the average number of trains per day, and the mix 
 
 
  
 
109 
 
of passenger and freight traffic.
37  To estimate total delay time based on this information, we follow a 
two-step process: 
• 
Step 1: Estimate train delay minutes per grid cell per incident per train. To match the spatial 
specificity of the climate data, we estimate the per incident delay separately for each grid cell, 
based on the following equation:   
(5) 𝑇𝐷𝑀𝑔= (𝐿𝑔
𝑆𝑟
−𝐿𝑔
𝑆𝑜
) × 60 × 𝐻𝑑
𝐻𝑜
 
Where 
TDMg = Train delay minutes per grid 
Sr = Reduced speed 
So = Base speed 
Lg = Total Length of rail traveled per grid 
Hd = Hours of speed order 
Ho = Hours of railroad operation 
 
• 
Step 2: Estimate annual train delay minutes per grid cell. Building upon the delay per grid cell 
per incident (TDMg) calculated in Step 1, we estimate the annual minutes of delay per grid cell 
per year as follows: 
(6) 𝐷𝑀𝑔= 𝑇𝐷𝑀𝑔× 𝑇𝑑× 𝐼𝑑 
Where 
DMg = Delay minutes per grid cell per year 
Td = Average number of trains per day 
Id = Number of incident days38 
 
As noted above, our analysis of the proactive adaptation scenario assumes that train operators install track 
temperature sensor technology that allow them to implement a risk-based approach to speed orders that 
allows train operators to target speed orders to specific lines based on the temperature and the traffic 
 
37 We estimate train traffic based on Transportation Canada’s grade crossings inventory, which includes data on the 
average number of trains that pass through each crossing daily. This is consistent with the approach applied in 
Chinowsky et al. (2019).  To parse train traffic for a given area between freight and passenger service, we rely on 
the freight versus passenger rail designation for individual rail lines as specified in Natural Resources Canada’s 
National Railway Network data and the national distribution between freight and passenger train traffic published 
by the Railway Association of Canada.  
38 Section 3.2.2 above presents a detailed description of how we estimate the expected number of rail buckling 
events. 
 
 
  
 
110 
 
expected on that line during extreme heat events.  We estimate the hours of delay per grid cell using the 
same approach as applied for the status quo scenario.   
To value changes in delay time, we apply separate approaches for passenger travel versus freight. The 
available rail traffic data was not broken down into freight vs passenger traffic.  To estimate the ratio of 
passenger to freight traffic in the grid, we relied upon data from the NRCan rail stock on “User Type”.  
“User Type” was broken down into three categories: freight, passenger and both.  We assumed that rail 
with freight user type is assumed to have all freight traffic and that rail with passenger user type is 
assumed to have all passenger traffic.  Rail with both freight and passenger user type was assumed to be 
75 percent freight and 25 percent passenger.39  Using these assumptions, the final rail traffic breakdown is 
86 percent freight and 14 percent passenger.  By comparison, freight and passenger train-miles from the 
Railway Association of Canada’s Rail Trends 2019 report indicate that 90 percent of train traffic is freight 
and 10 percent is passenger. Based on this Rail Trends source, we assume 161 passengers per passenger 
train.  
To value passenger travel, we calculate the value of delay based on the average hourly value of an 
individual’s time. For leisure travelers, we specify this time loss based on an average, post-tax market 
income of $27.45 per hour (in year 2015 CAD).
40 The corresponding value for work travel is $34.38 
($2015 CAD), which reflects total pre-tax compensation per hour.41 Assuming that the distribution 
between leisure and passenger train travel in Canada is similar to the corresponding distribution in the 
U.S., we assume that 6 percent of rail passenger trips in Canada are business trips and the remaining 94 
percent are leisure trips (Talebian and Zou, 2015).  To estimate the value of freight delays, we rely on the 
additional costs incurred by freight operators based on the approach specified in Chinowsky et al. (2019).   
Results 
Table 3-42 presents the estimated value of delay costs by scenario (status quo versus proactive), era, and 
RCP.  As indicated by the results, projected delay costs are much higher under the status quo than under 
the proactive scenario. The difference between the two scenarios is most significant under RCP 8.5 during 
the second era, with status quo delay costs nearly an order of magnitude higher than proactive effects.  
The results in Table 3-42 also show that delay costs for roads are generally larger than the corresponding 
effects related to rail, though not in all cases.  For RCP 8.5 during the second era, delay costs related to 
rail are more significant than road-related delay costs, under both the status quo and proactive scenarios. 
 
 
 
39 These values were assumed to yield an aggregate freight-passenger distribution reasonably consistent with that 
reported by the Railway Association of Canada, as summarized below. 
40 This value is based on average post-tax market income of $57,100 in 2018, as reported in Statistics Canada’s The 
Daily on February 24, 2020. We adjusted this value for inflation and converted it to an hourly value by assuming 
2080 labor hours per year. 
41 This value from 2018 is adjusted for inflation and derived from Statistics Canada, Labour productivity and related 
measures by business sector industry and by non-commercial activity consistent with industry accounts, Table 36-
10-0480-01. 
 
 
  
 
111 
 
TABLE 3-42. DELAY COSTS BY SCENARIO, ERA, AND RCP ($2015 CAD, MILLIONS)  
SECTOR 
STATUS QUO 
PROACTIVE 
2040-2069 
2070-2099 
2040-2069 
2070-2099 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
Roads 
$386.4 
$455.6 
$610.3 
$1,143.0 
$72.1 
$84.5 
$58.5 
$86.1 
Rail 
$159.1 
$397.9 
$157.9 
$1,334.8 
$26.1 
$68.0 
$27.5 
$188.6 
Era Total 
$545.4 
$853.5 
$768.1 
$2,477.8 
$98.2 
$152.5 
$86.0 
$274.7 
 
The magnitude of the delay costs shown in Table 3-42 relative to the climate change costs presented 
earlier in this report differs significantly for roads versus rail. The delay costs for roads represent between 
14 and 20 percent of the road-related climate change costs presented in section 3.2.1 above, with the 
exception of one combination of scenario, era, and RCP. Delay costs related to rail, however, are more 
than an order of magnitude higher than the climate change costs for rail presented in section 3.2.2. This 
finding suggests that focusing on the reduction of time losses is the most cost-effective adaptation 
strategy for the rail sector.   
For insights on the climate model uncertainty reflected in the estimates above, Figure 3-42 presents the 
range of delay costs across the seven GCMs applied in this analysis, by scenario, era, and RCP. These 
ranges are represented by the blue bars in the figure; the red dots represent the average values as 
presented above.  For each scenario (status quo and proactive), the range of estimates around the average 
is fairly similar between eras and RCPs, with the exception of RCP 8.5 during the second era. This 
reflects a wider range of results across GCMs rather than a single outlier. 
 
FIGURE 3-42. RANGE OF DELAY COSTS BASED ON MULTIPLE GCMS  
    
  
Note: Due to differences in the magnitude of costs between the status quo and proactive scenarios, the two graphs 
above use different ranges on their vertical axes. 
Table 3-43 presents the estimated delay costs by province/territory. Overall, delay costs are most 
significant for Ontario.  Quebec, Alberta, and British Columbia make up the second tier, with similar 
delay costs across all three provinces. The high delay costs for Ontario reflect the combination of its 
extensive road network and the high volume of rail traffic in Ontario. 
 
 
  
 
112 
 
 
TABLE 3-43.  DELAY COSTS BY PROVINCE/TERRITORY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To further illustrate delay costs by province/territory, Figure 3-43 shows the distribution between road- 
and rail-related delay costs for each province and territory by scenario and RCP for the 2040-2069 era. As 
indicated in the figure, the proportional split between road- and rail-related delay costs varies significantly 
by province/territory. For example, delay costs related to speed orders for the rail network account for 
most of the delay costs projected for Saskatchewan but a much smaller fraction of delay costs in Alberta. 
In addition, rail makes up a much larger fraction of delay costs in most provinces under RCP 8.5 than 
RCP 4.5.  
The main takeaways from our analysis of delay costs are: 
• 
Delay costs are significant relative to the sector-specific costs presented for roads and rail in 
previous sections.  This is particularly true for rail, as delay costs are more than an order of 
magnitude higher than the rail-related adaptation costs presented earlier in this report. This 
suggests that strategies focused on reducing delay costs are an important element of cost-effective 
adaptation. 
• 
Proactive adaptation can significantly reduce the extent to which climate change leads to delay 
costs, for both roads and rail.   
 
 
  
 
113 
 
FIGURE 3-43.  DELAY COSTS COSTS BY PROVINCE AND SECTOR FOR THE FIRST ERA 
 
Limitations and Caveats  
The delay costs associated with climate change are complex and subject to multiple uncertainties. We 
therefore note the following limitations and caveats for our analysis: 
• 
Although delay costs related to road and rail damage represent important indirect costs of climate 
change, other sectors may also experience indirect climate change costs. For example, focusing 
on the electric power sector, to the degree that climate change increases the frequency and/or 
duration of power outages, households and businesses will both experience losses. Inland 
flooding may also hamper business activity in affected areas, for short periods of time or for more 
extended periods in more extreme cases.  
• 
Our assessment of delay costs related to roads is based upon the relationship between delay costs 
and adaptation costs for roads, as derived from a study focused on the U.S. To the extent that the 
relationships derived from this study are not representative of the relationship between road-
related delay costs and adaptation costs in Canada, we may underestimate or overestimate delay 
costs associated with Canada’s road network. 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
114 
 
CHAPTER 4  |  SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Having presented detailed methods and results for each of the categories individually in Chapter 3, this 
chapter summarizes the category results, then provides a set of recommendations for future work. 
4.1 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 
Table 4-1 summarizes the costs of climate change by the eight infrastructure categories presented in this 
report, and delay costs resulting from road and rail impacts.  Under the reactive strategy, inland flooding 
has the highest annual mid-range estimates of costs at between $5 billion and $8 billion per year, which is 
15 to 135 percent larger than the next highest category, depending on RCP and era.42  Road-related costs 
are next, then resulting delay cost effects in the 2080s, then impacts to the electrical grid, which 
collectively range between $600 million and $7 billion per year.  The next tier includes impacts to coastal 
properties, driven by permafrost thaw, and to winter roads in the 2050s under RCP8.5 range between 
$120 million and $450 million.  Effects on winter roads in the 2080s and 2050s under RCP4.5, and to rail 
are generally lower, ranging from $7 million to $60 million.   
Adopting a proactive strategy generally has dramatic benefits, driving reactive costs down 76 to 98 
percent for roads, rail, and delay costs; 45 to 77 percent for coastal properties; and 38 to 47 percent for the 
electrical grid.  Cost reductions for permafrost thaw and inland flooding impacts are more modest.  In the 
case of permafrost thaw, this is because of the challenge of adapting to this climate hazard – generally 
costs can be delayed but not avoided, which is why a proactive strategy increases costs in the 2050s and 
2080s under RCP 8.5.  For flooding, the proactive costs consider only a single adaptation response – 
abandoning or relocating the most vulnerable properties to flood-free areas –so these adaptation savings 
are best seen as a partial estimate.     
TABLE 4-1. SUMMARY OF ANNUAL NATIONAL COSTS  AND ADAPTATION SAVINGS ($MIL 2015 CAD) 
Category 
Reactive 
Proactive 
Proactive Reduction in Costs 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
RCP 4.5 
RCP 8.5 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
2050s 
2080s 
Coastal Properties 
$131  
$240  
$146  
$453  
$71  
$90  
$78  
$104  
-45% 
-62% 
-47% 
-77% 
Inland Flooding 
$5,269  
$5,011  
$5,961  
$8,289  $4,922  $4,684  $5,579  $7,751  
-7% 
-7% 
-6% 
-6% 
Roads 
$2,242  
$3,117  
$3,270  
$7,229  
$532  
$295  
$591  
$118  
-76% 
-91% 
-82% 
-98% 
Rail 
$6.7  
$6.7  
$18  
$61  
$1.2  
$1.3  
$1.2  
$1.3  
-83% 
-81% 
-93% 
-98% 
Permafrost Thaw 
$193  
$206  
$196  
$172  
$152  
$174  
$200  
$211  
-22% 
-16% 
2% 
23% 
Winter roads 
$38  
$29  
$117  
$51  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Electrical Grid 
$1,223  
$582  
$1,621  
$1,467  
$663  
$307  
$997  
$790  
-46% 
-47% 
-38% 
-46% 
Delay Costs 
$545  
$768  
$853  
$2,478  
$98  
$86  
$152  
$275  
-82% 
-89% 
-82% 
-89% 
 
42 Note that mid-range estimates are an average across GCMs. The range of GCM specific results for each impact 
category is reported in the relevant sector chapters of this report. 
 
 
  
 
115 
 
 
Figure 4-1 presents the variability in total costs across GCMs under the RCP 8.5 scenario, in the 2050s.  
The reactive costs are split onto two vertical axes to accommodate the large difference in costs between 
the flooding and reactive roads impacts, and all remaining categories of reactive and proactive costs.  
Generally, costs vary much more significantly across GCMs for the flooding, roads, the electrical grid, 
and delay cost categories than the others.  This is because impacts in these four categories are driven 
partly by precipitation projections, which vary much more across GCMs than temperature projections.   
FIGURE 4-1. VARIATION IN AVERAGE ANNUAL COSTS ACROSS GCMS, RCP 8.5 SCENARIO, 2050s 
($MIL 2015 CAD) 
 
Note: The red dot for each category is the average across GCMs; the blue box surrounding the dot shows the range. 
The distribution of these costs over Provinces and Territories varies considerably across the infrastructure 
damage categories.  Table 4-2 provides an example of this distribution for RCP 8.5 in the 2080s, where 
the size of bars within the cells reflects the magnitude of values wthin a given infrastructure category 
rather than across all categories.  Some categories, such as roads, rail, the electrical grid, and delay costs, 
tend to scale roughly based on population (i.e., Ontario has the highest impacts, and British Columbia, 
Quebec, and Alberta tend to have large effects).  Although there are notable exceptions, such as the low 
flooding impacts in Quebec and the high rail impacts in Saskatchewan.  Other impacts are also driven 
based on geography, such as coastal property, permafrost, and winter road effects.   
In particular, the combined impacts of permafrost thaw and winter road effects are pronounced for the 
three Territories (about $170 million per year), considering their combined population is roughly 100 
times lower than that of Ontario (i.e., 120,000 versus 14.5 million).    
 
 
  
 
116 
 
TABLE 4-2. AVERAGE ANNUAL COSTS BY PROVINCE/TERRITORY AND INFRASTRUCTURE DAMAGE 
CATEGORY, RCP 8.5 SCENARIO, 2080 s, REACTIVE ADAPTATION ($MIL 2015 CAD) 
 
Note: the size of bars within cells reflect the magnitude of values within a single infrastructure impact category (i.e., 
table column), rather than across all categories.   
 
4.2 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE WORK 
This study provides a partial estimate of the potential economic impacts of climate change to Canada and 
the possible benefits of adaptation. Areas of ongoing research, modeling, and data collection will open 
avenues to consider a wider range of damages, for example: urban-scale flooding owing to local failure of 
urban drainage systems to handle higher short-term hydrologic loads, including those from hurricane 
events; impacts on coastal ports and downstream effects on supply chains; fiscal impacts of climate 
change linked to infrastructure impacts – such as loss of property tax base and business activity in 
vulnerable coastal areas, or the impacts on productivity from the impact of transportation system delays 
on supply chains.  Below, we provide several recommendations for future work in the specific categories 
we analyze in this study.   
• 
A more comprehensive update to a National coastal risk analysis, incorporating sea-level rise 
and storm surge threats, could be useful in guiding GHG mitigation, adaptation, and economic 
development policy.43    
 
43 In particular, the Stanton et al. (2010) work that currently informs Canadian received knowledge on coastal risks 
in Canada should be updated with more contemporary assessment of the risk of storm surge, made possible by 
significant enhancements to the understanding of baseline risks (from JBA) and future coastal storm and surge risk 
modeling.  While such a study was not possible as part of the current report, the current report does provide a basis 
 
Province/Territory
Coastal 
Properties
Inland 
Flooding
Roads
Rail
Permafrost 
Thaw
Ice Roads
Electrical 
Grid
Delay Costs
Alberta
-
$968
$1,580
$8.5
$0.1
$3
$169
$383
British Columbia
$276
$1,209
$916
$7.0
$1.5
$0
$120
$370
Manitoba
-
$592
$582
$5.6
$6.4
$17
$90
$173
New Brunswick
$63
$156
$256
$0.8
$0.0
$0
$56
$53
Newfoundland and Labrador
-
$135
$66
$0.3
$0.0
$0
$27
$20
Northwest Territories
-
$5
$21
$0.1
$54
$12
$5.2
$2.8
Nova Scotia
$59
$209
$155
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$42
$34
Nunavut
-
$1.3
$1.4
$0.0
$54
$0.1
$5.2
$0.1
Ontario
-
$4,111
$1,510
$15
$0.3
$16
$446
$679
Prince Edward Island
$16
$7
$104
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$21
$17
Quebec
$39
$780
$1,574
$10
$2.1
$0.0
$408
$418
Saskatchewan
-
$103
$447
$13
$0.2
$3.6
$74
$325
Yukon
-
$12
$18
$0
$54
$0.0
$5.2
$2.6
TOTAL
$453
$8,289
$7,229
$61
$172
$51
$1,467
$2,478
 
 
  
 
117 
 
• 
Potentially important omissions in the sectoral scope of the coastal sector analysis that may 
be worth considering for enhancement in future work include intensification of wind damage 
from coastal storms; accelerated loss of coastal wetlands and other natural areas that provide 
ecosystem service flows such as flood protection and commercial fish nursery grounds; effects of 
sea-level rise on the extent of high-tide flooding and other high frequency/low consequence 
coastal events; and the potential for disproportionate impacts of coastal vulnerability and 
adaptation decision on socially vulnerable populations.44 
• 
Disproportionate impacts of inland and coastal flooding on small and disadvantaged 
communities that rely critically on access to coastal or riverine resources, particularly in 
Northern Canada, should be assessed with specialized methods that consider both the unique 
nature of the climate stressors (e.g., loss of winter ice pack in the Arctic Ocean and Hudson’s 
Bay) and the relatively larger economic reliance on these resources among these communities. 
• 
Refining hydrologic and hydraulic modeling.  There appears to be continued effort across 
Canada, mostly at the urban scale, to further refine the hydrologic and hydraulic modeling basis 
to assess impacts of inland flooding.  We recommend use of the national-scale analyses presented 
here, which by necessity rely on more simplified hydrologic and hydraulic modeling methods, to 
guide geographic priorities for refining hydrologic, hydraulic, and infrastructure impact modeling 
under future climatic conditions. 
• 
More comprehensive consideration of benefits of climate change in the roads and rail 
analysis will be important to develop a more complete view of impacts to those sectors. 
Currently, we exclude the benefits to rail of fewer extreme cold temperature breaks, and the 
benefits to asphalt maintenance of higher minimum temperatures.    
• 
A process-based permafrost modeling approach, similar to the Melvin et al. (2017) study of 
Alaska’s infrastructure, would allow for a much more refined analysis of permafrost impacts.  
Although no such model is currently available for Canada, the Permafrost Partnership Network 
for Canada is currently developing projected permafrost conditions under a range of climate 
models that could be leveraged once available. 
• 
Considering the costs of electric power outages from more frequent damaging weather events 
such as ice storms, lightning strikes, and wildfires.  Although data and modeling needed to 
conduct such research in Canada is currently limited, a starting point could be adapting the 
Interruption Cost Estimate (ICE) Calculator from Lawrence Berkeley National Labs (LBNL) to 
 
for prioritizing the geographic scope of future work.  We suggest that an updated model be developed and tested 
for one or more of the potentially more economically vulnerable coastal locations in Canada (e.g., Vancouver, 
Quebec City), including surrounding areas which might be less likely to exhibit the dense urban development that 
provides the most cost-effective justifications for adaptation investments, to explore the margins of economically 
well-justified coastal adaptation. 
44 Adaptation decision in particular may be heavily influenced by economic efficiency and access to capital criteria, 
leaving a strong potential to exacerbate existing social inequities.  All of these areas are the subject of active 
research at the local scale and/or in other countries, potentially providing an analytic model for enhancements to 
the national-scale work completed here, and each of these touch on solutions that might involve infrastructure 
investments, including increasingly well-studies investments in nature-based coastal protections. 
 
 
  
 
118 
 
the Canada context.  This research will be particularly important as electrification initiatives for 
transport and home heating advance. 
• 
More detailed analysis of hydropower impacts that allows for analysis of firm power effects.  
Boehlert et al. (2016) found that although annual hydropower generation rises in the U.S. under 
climate change, firm power declines.  Most importantly, this assessment will require a more 
detailed hydrological dataset so that rainfall runoff models can be properly calibrated to low 
flows.   
 
 
 
 
  
 
119 
 
REFERENCES 
Abeysirigunawardena, Dilumie S., Dan J. Smith and Bill Taylor. 2011. Extreme Sea Surge Responses to 
Climate Variability in Coastal British Columbia, Canada. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers, September, Vol. 101, No. 5, pp. 992-1010 
Al-Omari, Bashar & Darter, Michael. 1994. Relationships between international roughness index and 
present serviceability rating. Transportation Research Record Journal of the Transportation Research 
Board. 130-136. 
Arnell, N. W., S. Brown, S. N. Gosling, J. Hinkel, C. Osborn, R. J. Nicholls, and P. Zelazowski. 2016. 
Global-scale climate impact functions: the relationship between climate forcing and impact. Climatic 
Change 134:475–87. 
Bank of Canada. 2020. Annual Exchange Rates. Available at 
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/rates/exchange/annual-average-exchange-rates/. 
Berkshire Regional Planning Commission. 2001. The Massachusetts Unpaved Roads BMB Manual: A 
Guidebook on How to Improve Water Quality While Addressing Common Problems, prepared for 
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Available at https://megamanual.geosyntec.com/npsmanual/Unpaved%20Road.pdf.  
Boehlert, B., K. Strzepek, Y. Gebretsadik, R. Swanson, A. McCluskey, J. Neumann, J. McFarland, and J. 
Martinich. 2016. Climate change impacts and greenhouse gas mitigation effects on US hydropower 
generation. Applied Energy.  doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.09.054. 
Bresson, E., R. Laprise, D. Paquin, J. Theriault, and R. de Elia. 2017. Evaluating the Ability of CRCM5 
to Simulate Mixed Precipitation. Atmosphere-Ocean. doi: 10.1080/07055900.2017.1310084. 
Burn, Donald H., Paul H. Whitfield. 2015. Changes in floods and flood regimes in Canada. Canadian 
Water Resources Journal. https://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2015.1026844 
CDA (Canadian Dams Association). 2019. Dams in Canada.  Accessed from 
https://www.cda.ca/En/Dams_in_Canada/EN/Dams_In_Canada.aspx?hkey=11c76c52-7794-4ddf-
b541-584f9ea2dbe9. 
Cheng, C., G. Li, and H. Auld. 2011. Possible impacts of climate change on freezing rain using 
downscaled future climate scenarios: Updated for eastern Canada. Atmos.–Ocean, 49, 8–21.  
Cheng, C., E. Lopes, C. Fu, and Z. Huang.  2014. Possible Impacts of Climate Change on Wind Gusts 
under Downscaled Future Climate Conditions: Updated for Canada. Journal of Climate. doi: 
10.1175/JCLI-D-13-00020.1. 
Chinowsky, P. and C. Arndt. 2012. “Climate change and roads: a dynamic stressor-response model”. Rev. 
Dev. Econ. 16(3):448–462. 
Chinowsky, P., Helman, J., Gulati, S., Neumann, J., & Martinich, J. 2019. Impacts of climate change on 
operation of the U.S. rail network. Transport Policy, 75, 183–191. 
 
 
  
 
120 
 
Chinowsky, P.S., J.C. Price, and J.E. Neumann. 2013. Assessment of climate change adaptation costs for 
the U.S. road network. Global Environmental Change. 23(4):764-773. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.03.004. 
Cunderlik, Juraj M., Taha B.M.J. Ouarda. 2009. Trends in the timing and magnitude of floods in Canada. 
Journal of Hydrology https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2009.06.050 
Darrow, M.M., 2011. Thermal modeling of roadway embankments over permafrost. Cold Regions 
Science and Technology 65: 474–487. DOI: 10.1016/j.coldregions.2010.11.001 
Dave, E. V., Helmer, B., Hanson, C., Munch, J., & Johanneck, L. 2016. Implementation of laboratory 
testing to predict low temperature cracking performance of asphalt pavements. In 8th RILEM 
International Symposium on Testing and Characterization of Sustainable and Innovative Bituminous 
Materials (pp. 993-1003). Springer, Dordrecht. 
Ehmele, Florian, and Michael Kunz. 2018. Flood-related extreme precipitation in southwestern Germany: 
development of a two-dimensional stochastic precipitation model. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 23, 
1083–1102, 2019. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-23-1083-2019 
Emanuel, K.A. 2013. Downscaling CMIP5 climate models shows increased tropical cyclone activity over 
the 21st century. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110:12219–12224. Available: 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1301293110.  
Fant, C., B. Boehlert, K. Strzepek, P. Larsen, A. White, S. Gulati, Y. Li, and J. Martinich. 2020. Climate 
change impacts and costs to U.S. electricity transmission and distribution infrastructure. Energy.  
FAO (U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization).  2019 Country Fact Sheet: Canada.  Accessed from 
https://storage.googleapis.com/fao-
aquastat.appspot.com/countries_regions/factsheets/summary_statistics/en/CAN-CF.pdf.   
Fussel, H. M., F. L. Toth, J. G. van Minnen, and F. Kaspar. 2003. Climate impact response functions as 
impact tools in the tolerable windows approach. Climatic Change 56:91–117. 
Gaur, Ayushi, Abhishek Gaur, and Slobodan P. Simonovic. 2018. Future Changes in Flood Hazards 
across Canada under a Changing Climate. Water, 10, 1441; doi:10.3390/w10101441 
Gordian. 2017. Heavy Construction Costs with RSMeans Data 2017.  
Government of Canada. 2020. Transport Networks in Canada - CanVec Series - Transport Features. 
Accessed from https://open.canada.ca/data/en/dataset/2dac78ba-8543-48a6-8f07-faeef56f9895. 
Guay, C., M. Minville, and M. Braun.  2015. A global portrait of hydrological changes at the 2050 
horizon for the province of Quebec.  Canadian Water Resources Journal. doi: 
10.1080/07011784.2015.1043583.w 
Guy Carpenter. 2015. Guy Carpenter launches new G-CAT® Canada flood model. 
http://www.gccapitalideas.com/2015/04/16/guy-carpenter-launches-new-g-cat%C2%AE-canada-
flood-model/. Accessed 12 Oct 2017. 
Gruber, S. 2012: Derivation and analysis of a high-resolution estimate of global permafrost zonation, The 
Cryosphere, 6, 221-233. doi:10.5194/tc-6-221-2012. 
 
 
  
 
121 
 
Hamududu, B., & Killingtveit, A. 2012. Assessing climate change impacts on global hydropower. 
Energies, 5(2), 305–322.  
Heginbottom, J.A., Dubreuil, M.-A., Harker, P., 1995. Permafrost - Canada (National Atlas of Canada 
MCR 4177, scale 1:7,500,000). Energy, Mines, and Resources Canada. 
Hjort, J., O. Karjalainen, J. Aalto, S. Westermann, V. Romanovsky, F. Nelson, B. Etzelmuller, and M. 
Luoto. 2018. Degrading permafrost puts Arctic infrastructure at risk by mid-century.  Nature 
Communications. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07557-4. 
IBC [Insurance Bureau of Canada]. 2015. The Economic Impacts of the Weather Effects of Climate 
Change on Communities. http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Studies/IBC-The-Economic-Impacts.pdf    
Industrial Economics. 2010. Costing Climate Impacts and Adaptation: A Canadian Study on Public 
Infrastructure.  Report prepared by IEc for National Round Table on the Environment and the 
Economy (NRTEE).  15 July 2010. 
IPCC. 2013. Climate change 2013: The physical science basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the 
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate change. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1535 pp  
JBA Risk Management, 2018, JBA Canada 30m Flood Data Executive Briefing.  Available at: 
https://www.jbarisk.com/media/1532/canada-30m-flood-data-executive-briefing.pdf 
Kish, Andrew and Gopal Samavedam. 2013. Track Buckling Prevention: Theory, Safety Concepts, and 
Applications. Rep. no. DOT/FRA/ORD-13/16, Federal Railroad Administration. 
Klima, K. & Morgan, M.G. 2015. Ice Storm Frequencies in a Warmer Climate. Climatic Change. 2015. 
133: 209. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-015-1460-9 
Kulp, Scott A., Benjamin H. Strauss, CoastalDEM: A global coastal digital elevation model improved 
from SRTM using a neural network. Remote Sensing of Environment, Volume 206, 1 March 2018, 
Pages 231-239. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.12.026 
Larsen, P. 2016. A Method to Estimate the Costs and Benefits of Undergrounding Electricity 
Transmission and Distribution Lines. Energy Economics, 60, 47-61. 
Larsen, P.H., Boehlert, B., Eto, J., Hamachi-LaCommare, K., Martinich, J. and Rennels, L. 2018. 
Projecting future costs to U.S. electric utility customers from power interruptions. Energy, 147, 
pp.1256-1277. 
Leopold, L. B. and Maddock, T. J., 1953, Hydraulic geometry of stream channels and some 
physiographic implications. U. S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 252, 55 p. 
Lewkowicz, A.G. 2020. A possible method to model future impacts of permafrost thaw on highways in 
northern Canada. Unpublished report to Canadian Climate Institute. April 13 2020. 
Melvin, A.,  P. Larsen, B. Boehlert, J. Neumann, P. Chinowsky, X. Espinet, J. Martinich, M. Baumann, L. 
Rennels, A. Bothner, D. Nicolsky, and S. Marchenko. 2017. Climate change damages to Alaska 
public infrastructure and the economics of proactive adaptation. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences. 114(2): E122-131.  doi: 1611056113. 
 
 
  
 
122 
 
Neumann, J.E., Price, J., Chinowsky, P. et al. 2015. Climate change risks to U.S. infrastructure: impacts 
on roads, bridges, coastal development, and urban drainage. Climatic Change 131, 97–109. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-1037-4. 
Neumann, J.E., P. Chinowsky, J. Helman, M. Black, C. Fant, K. Strzepek, and J. Martinich. 2019. 
Climate effects on U.S. infrastructure: the economics of adaptation for rail, roads, and coastal 
development, manuscript submitted for review. 
Neumann, J.E., J. Willwerth, J. Martinich, J. McFarland, M.C. Sarofim, G. Yohe. 2020. Climate damage 
functions for estimating the economic impacts of climate change in the United States. Review of 
Environmental Economics and Policy.  Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rez021 
Nordhaus, W., and J. Boyer. 2000. Warming the world: economic models of global warming. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
NRC (Natural Resources Canada). 2019.  The Atlas of Canada.  Accessed on Feb 20, 2020 from 
https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/maps-tools-and-publications/maps/atlas-canada/10784. 
NRC (Natural Resources Canada). 2020. Accessed from https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/maps-tools-
publications/tools/geodetic-reference-systems/water/16888  
O'Neill, H B; Wolfe, S A; Duchesne, C. 2020. Ground ice map of Canada. Geological Survey of Canada, 
Open File 8713, (version 1). https://doi.org/10.4095/326885 (Open Access). 
Obu, Jaroslav; Westermann, Sebastian; Kääb, Andreas; Bartsch, Annett. 2018. Ground Temperature Map, 
2000-2016, Northern Hemisphere Permafrost. Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar 
and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, PANGAEA, https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.888600 
Oswell, J. and J. Nixon. 2015. Thermal Design Considerations for Raised Structures on Permafrost. 
Journal of Cold Regions Engineering. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)CR.1943-5495.0000075. 
PBO (Parliamentary Budget Officer), Canada. 2016. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster 
Financial Assistance Arrangements due to Weather Events 
Public Safety Canada (2015) “Floods.” December 16. Retrieved from 
https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/ntrl-hzrds/fld-eng.aspx 
Roy, Robert Leconte, Francois P. Brissette, and Claude Marche. 2001. The impact of climate change on 
seasonal floods of a southern Quebec River Basin. Hydrol. Process. 15, 3167–3179 (2001) DOI: 
10.1002/hyp.323 
S&P Global. 2018. S&P Global Platts Electric Power Services. [online] Available at: 
https://www.spglobal.com/platts/en/products-services/electric-power [Accessed 15 May 2018]. 
Shu, J., Qu, J. J., Motha, R., Xu, J. C., & Dong, D. F. 2018. Impacts of climate change on hydropower 
development and sustainability: A review. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 
163(1). 
Smith, M. and D. Riseborough. 2002. Climate and the Limits of Permafrost: A Zonal Analysis. 
Permafrost and Periglacial Processes.  DOI: 10.1002/ppp.410 
 
 
  
 
123 
 
Sweet, William, Greg Dusek, Jayantha Obeysekera, John J. Marra. 2018. Patterns and Projections of High 
Tide Flooding Along the U.S. Coastline Using a Common Impact Threshold. NOAA Technical 
Report NOS CO-OPS 086 
Singh, Vijay P. 2003. On the Theories of Hydrologic Geometry. International Journal of Sediment 
Research, Vol. 18, No. 3, 2003, pp. 196-21 
Stanton, E. A., Davis, M., & Fencl, A. 2010. Costing climate impacts and adaptation. A Canadian Study 
on Coastal Zones. A report commissioned for the National Round Table on the Environment and the 
Economy, Stockholm Environmental Institute.Statistics Canada. (2019). Population Projections for 
Canada (2018 to 2068), Provinces and Territories (2018 to 2043). Available: 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/91-520-x/91-520-x2019001-eng.htm 
Statistics Canada.  2020.  Electric power generation, monthly generation by type of electricity.  Accessed 
from https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=2510001501.  
Thistlethwaite, J., Henstra, D., Brown, C. et al. How Flood Experience and Risk Perception Influences 
Protective Actions and Behaviours among Canadian Homeowners. Environmental Management 61, 
197–208 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-017-0969-2 
Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat.  (undated).  Safety guide for operations over ice.  Retrieved on 
August 19, 2020, from https://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/eppp-archive/100/201/301/tbs-
sct/tb_manual-ef/Pubs_pol/hrpubs/TBM_119/CHAP5_3_e.html. 
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 2006. Longterm Pavement 
Performance (LTPP) Data Analysis Support: National Pooled Fund Study TPF-5(013) – Effects of 
Multiple Freeze Cycles and Deep Frost Penetration on Pavement Performance and Cost, Publication 
No. FHWA-HRT-06-121, November 2006. 
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 2015. Gravel Roads Construction 
& Maintenance Guide. Available at https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/construction/pubs/ots15002.pdf.  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2017. Multi-model framework for quantitative sectoral impacts 
analysis: a technical report for the Fourth National Climate Assessment. EPA 430-R-17-001. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2020. Consumer Price Index (CPI) Database. Available at 
https://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/surveymost. 
Wang, Ting & Harvey, John & Lea, Jeremy & Kim, Changmo. 2014. Impact of Pavement Roughness on 
Vehicle Free-Flow Speed. Journal of Transportation Engineering. 140. 1-11. 
10.1061/(ASCE)TE.1943-5436.0000689.  
Wiberg, D. and K. Strzepek. 2005. Development of Regional Economic Supply Curves for Surface Water 
Resources and Climate Change Assessments: A Case Study of China. The International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis.  Paper RR-05-001. 
Wilks, Daniel (1993) Comparison of three‐parameter probability distributions for representing annual 
extreme and partial duration precipitation series. Water Resources Research, Vol. 29, Issue10, Pages 
3543-3549. https://doi.org/10.1029/93WR01710 
 
 
  
 
124 
 
Withey, Patrick, Van Lantz, Thomas Ochuodho. 2015. Economic Costs and Impacts of Climate-induced 
Sea-Level Rise and Storm Surge in Canadian Coastal Provinces: A CGE Approach. Applied 
Economics Vol. 48, No. 1, 59–71. DOI: 10.1080/00036846.2015.1073843 
Wotling, G., Ch. Bouvier, J. Danloux, J.-M. Fritsch (2000) Regionalization of extreme precipitation 
distribution using the principal components of the topographical environment, Journal of Hydrology, 
Vol 233, Issues 1–4, 12 June 2000, Pages 86-101. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-1694(00)00232-8 
WWF (World Wildlife Federation). 2020. HydroAtlas. Accessed at 
https://www.hydrosheds.org/page/hydroatlas. 
Zhai, Li, Blair J.W. Greenan, John Hunter, Thomas S. James, Guoqi Han, Phillip MacAulay, and Joseph 
A. Henton (2015) Estimating Sea-Level Allowances for Atlantic Canada using the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the IPCC. Atmosphere-Ocean, 53 (5) 2015, 476–
49http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07055900.2015.1106401Allen, P. M., Arnold, J. G. and Byars, B. W., 
1994, Downstream channel geometry for use of in planning-level models. Water Resources Bulletin, 
Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 663-671.  
Zhang, Merrina, Aliereza Roghani, and Christian Barker. 2018. Track research: longitudinal rail stress 
management gap analysis research report (phase 1), National Research Council Canada. 
https://doi.org/10.4224/23004461. 
 
 
 
  
 
A-1 
 
APPENDIX A  |  CCI NOTE ON CLIMATE SCENARIO SELECTION 
Introduction 
Climate change impact analyses in Canada frequently uses ensembles of 24 statistically downscaled 
general circulation models (GCMs) to determine the possible worlds under various emissions pathways. 
While the 24 model ensemble is useful in capturing average annual changes and general trends, 
ensembles cannot be used to analyze variability and changes at a daily temporal scale. Further, the use of 
ensemble distribution slices to capture a range of model outputs can produce incongruent physical 
realities across the country. 
The Canadian Climate Institute is developing an analysis of climate change impacts and associated costs 
to Canada. The Cost of Climate Change project will require daily precipitation and temperature 
projections at a national scale in order to model impacts to various infrastructure systems. While the 
analysis seeks to capture the range of possibilities represented by various GCMs, time constrains limit the 
ability to run an analysis for each of the 24 statistically downscaled GCMs commonly used in Canada. 
Herein, the Institute has conducted an analysis to determine if a sample of GCMs can be used to capture 
the range of model outcomes that is represented in the 24 model ensemble. 
Methods 
Following the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) approach to model selection for 
the Climate Impact and Risk Analysis, the Institute has examined the average annual temperature and 
average annual precipitation changes projected by 24 GCMs in Canada. Sensitivity analysis was 
conducted to examine intranational variation as well as model output characteristics at a daily scale.  
Average annual precipitation and average annual temperature data was obtained for 24 statistically 
downscaled GCMs for periods 1971-2000, 2041-2070, and 2071-2100 and for representative 
concentration pathways (RCPs) 4.5 and 8.5. Additionally, indices for annual days with precipitation 
>10mm and for 3 consecutive days with temperature >25c was obtained for the RCP 8.5 end of century 
scenario. Data was obtained from the Canadian Centre for Climate Services. 
National analysis was conducted by calculating the delta average annual temperature and delta percent 
average annual precipitation for each GCM, scenario, and era. Data was plotted on a scatterplot with a y 
axis of percent precipitation change and x axis of degrees of temperature change (figure 1). Using the 
EPA Locating and selecting scenarios online (LASSO) technique, a polygon was mathematically drawn 
around the parameter of the scatterplot, selecting the models that represented the margins of all 
temperature X precipitation outcomes. 
 
 
  
 
A-2 
 
 
Figure 1 
Following the national analysis, an GCM outputs for each province and territory were examined in order 
to determine the spatial differences of model outcomes. This process ensured that models used for the 
Cost of Climate Change project would also reflect the range of possible outcomes at a regional scale. For 
the regional analysis, boundaries of each jurisdiction were used to cut the baseline and future GCM 
outputs prior to determining the delta. Gridded cells were only included that were fully within the 
jurisdictional boundaries. Results were then analyzed using the LASSO process (figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2 
 
 
  
 
A-3 
 
Since the Cost of Climate Change project will be using daily level precipitation and temperature data, it 
was important that daily variability was analyzed and captured by the selected models. Herein, indices of 
extreme precipitation and extreme temperature were used to determine the range of projected outcomes. 
This analysis was only conduced at a national level for RCP 8.5 and for the end of century timeframe. 
The scatterplot and LASSO technique was similarly used to analyze results (Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3 
Results 
The parameter GCMs for each analysis were compared across temporal (eras of 2041-2070, 2071-2100) 
and spatial (national and province and territory) scales. We tabulated the number of times each model was 
selected in the analysis (Table 1). This led to the selection of 7 models that can be effectively used to 
represent the range of model projections for Canada. These models align with the analysis of interannual 
variability. We examined each scatter plot then to confirm that even for the scenario or era where a 
peripheral model was not selected, there was an adequate representation of high temperature and low 
precipitation, high temperature and high precipitation, low temperature and high precipitation, and low 
temperature and low precipitation outcomes. 
 
  
 
 
  
 
A-4 
 
Table 1 
 
 
 
 
  
 
B-1 
 
APPENDIX B  |  CLIMATE CHANGE PROJECTIONS 
The baseline training climate dataset used in this project is a gridded observational dataset produced by 
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan), available at 300 arc second spatial resolution (1/12° grids, ~10 km) 
over Canada. The bulk of the daily minimum and maximum temperature, and precipitation amounts were 
produced by Hopkinson et al. (2011) and McKenney et al. (2011) on behalf of the Canadian Forest 
Service (CFS), NRCan. Gridding was accomplished with the Australian National University Spline 
(ANUSPLIN) implementation of the trivariate thin plate splines interpolation method (Hutchinson et al., 
2009) with latitude, longitude and elevation as predictors. Precipitation occurrence and square-root 
transformed precipitation amounts were interpolated separately on each day, combined, and transformed 
back to original units. Quality-controlled, but unadjusted, station data from the National Climate Data 
Archive (NCDA) of Environment and Climate Change Canada data (Hutchinson et al., 2009) were 
interpolated onto the high-resolution grid using thin plate splines. Station density varies over time with 
changes in station availability, peaking in the 1970s with a general decrease towards the present day 
(Hutchinson et al., 2009). Thus, the number of stations active across Canada between 1950 and 2011 
ranged from 2000 to 3000 for precipitation and 1500 to 3000 for air temperature (Hopkinson et al., 2011). 
Figure B-1 shows average annual mean temperature and precipitation for the 1986-2005 period, which is 
the utilized baseline era for this project.  
FIGURE B-1. BASELINE AVERAGE ANNUAL MEAN TEMPERATURE (°C; LEFT) AND ANNUAL 
PRECIPITATION (MM; RIGHT)  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
B-2 
 
 
B.1  PROJECTIONS 
The statistically downscaled climate scenarios used in this work were obtained from the Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium (PCIC) (Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, 2019), which used the training data 
described in the previous section to produce daily climate scenarios at the 300 arc second spatial 
resolution (1/12° grids, ~10 km) over Canada for minimum temperature, maximum temperature, and 
precipitation. For more details on the statistical downscaling process, referred to as the bias 
correction/constructed analogues with quantile mapping reordering (BCCAQV2) method, see the PCIC 
resource here: https://pacificclimate.org/data/statistically-downscaled-climate-scenarios.  
The dataset provides 27 global circulation models (GCMs) for 3 Representative Concentration Pathways 
(RCPs).  Of these, this project used 7 GCMs and 2 RCPs, as listed below in Table B-1.  The selection 
process was conducted jointly by CCI and IEc, and is documented in Appendix A.   
 
TABLE B-1. MODEL ENSEMBLES 
GCM 
RCP 
Variable 
2.7 
4.5 
8.5 
tasmax 
tasmin 
pr 
CCSM4 
x 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
GFDL-CM3 
x 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
GFDL-ESM2M 
x 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
HadGEM2-AO 
x 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
HadGEM2-ES 
x 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
MIROC-ESM-CHEM 
x 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
MRI-CGCM3 
x 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
 
B.2  ADMINISTRATIVE-RESOLUTION RESULTS 
On a national scale, these 14 scenarios represent a wide set of potential futures and allow for an 
understanding of uncertainty in the predictions. Figure B-2 shows the national level change in 
temperature and precipitation for the 14 unique combinations of 7 GCMs and 2 RCPs.  This scatter plot 
specifically shows the change from the 1986 – 2005 baseline to the 2080s era. 
 
 
 
  
 
B-3 
 
FIGURE B-2. NATIONAL AVERAGE CHANGE IN ANNUAL TEMPERATURE (°C ) AND PRECIPITATION 
(MM/YR) FOR THE 2080S 
 
 
Tables B-2 and B-3 displays the changes in temperature and precipitation summarized at the provincial 
spatial resolution (rows) for each era and rcp (columns). These values are averaged across all 7 GCMs. 
 
TABLE B-2. PROVINCIAL AVERAGE CHANGE IN ANNUAL TEM PERATURE (°C) FOR THE 2080S  
Province/Territory 
 change in mean temperature (°C ) 
rcp 4.5, 
2050s 
rcp 4.5, 
2080s 
rcp 8.5, 
2050s 
rcp 8.5, 
2080s 
Alberta 
2.76 
3.36 
3.62 
5.90 
British Columbia 
3.06 
3.71 
4.00 
6.52 
Manitoba 
2.52 
3.05 
3.33 
5.38 
New Brunswick 
2.97 
3.47 
3.77 
5.84 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
2.35 
2.89 
3.15 
5.10 
Northwest Territories 
2.97 
3.45 
3.79 
5.87 
Nova Scotia 
2.73 
3.22 
3.53 
5.54 
Nunavut 
2.99 
3.46 
3.81 
5.91 
Ontario 
2.78 
3.30 
3.62 
5.72 
Prince Edward Island 
2.48 
2.99 
3.29 
5.26 
 -
 2.00
 4.00
 6.00
 8.00
 10.00
 12.00
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
Delta Mean Temperature (ºC)
% Change in Precipitation (mm/yr)
RCP 8.5
RCP 4.5
 
 
  
 
B-4 
 
Province/Territory 
 change in mean temperature (°C ) 
rcp 4.5, 
2050s 
rcp 4.5, 
2080s 
rcp 8.5, 
2050s 
rcp 8.5, 
2080s 
Quebec 
2.87 
3.40 
3.71 
5.87 
Saskatchewan 
2.72 
3.28 
3.56 
5.73 
Yukon 
3.18 
3.94 
4.14 
6.86 
 
TABLE B-3. PROVINCIAL AVERAGE CHANGE IN ANNUAL PRECIPITATION (MM/YR) FOR THE 2080S  
Province/Territory 
% change in precipitation 
rcp 4.5, 
2050s 
rcp 4.5, 
2080s 
rcp 8.5, 
2050s 
rcp 8.5, 
2080s 
Alberta 
3% 
6% 
5% 
13% 
British Columbia 
14% 
17% 
18% 
26% 
Manitoba 
5% 
7% 
8% 
12% 
New Brunswick 
3% 
5% 
6% 
12% 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
5% 
7% 
7% 
10% 
Northwest Territories 
5% 
7% 
6% 
10% 
Nova Scotia 
2% 
5% 
5% 
10% 
Nunavut 
7% 
9% 
8% 
12% 
Ontario 
4% 
6% 
8% 
13% 
Prince Edward Island 
0% 
2% 
2% 
5% 
Quebec 
4% 
6% 
7% 
14% 
Saskatchewan 
2% 
5% 
5% 
11% 
Yukon 
6% 
10% 
11% 
19% 
 
B.3  GRIDDED RESULTS 
Figures B-3 and B-4 below show changes in temperature and precipitation at a gridded resolution in 2 x 2 
panels of two eras, the 2050s and the 2080s, and for two RCPs, RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5. Shown are a 
selection of GCMs that capture a wide range of possible futures. 
 
 
  
 
B-5 
 
FIGURE B-3. PROJECTED CHANGE IN MEAN ANNUAL TEMPERATURE (°C) 
   
   
 
GFDL-CM3 
 
 
 
 
HadGEM2-AO 
 
FIGURE B-4. PROJECTED CHANGE IN MEAN ANNUAL PRECIPITATION (MM) 
   
   
GFDL-CM3 
 
 
 
 
HadGEM2-AO 
 
B.4  ADJUSTMENTS 
Initial exploration of the provided data revealed a few cases of anomalously high or low values for the 
maximum temperature variable in the baseline dataset. While these cases were very few in number, they 
could be problematic in later analysis, and thus needed to be adjusted.  
Based on historical records, we chose a minimum feasible temperature of – and a maximum feasible 
temperature of °C. Any values that fell outside of these ranges were replaced with the average maximum 
temperature for that month across the baseline dataset. 
 
 
 
  
 
B-6 
 
REFERENCES 
Hopkinson, R.F., McKenney, D.W., Milewska, E.J., Hutchinson, M.F., Papadopol, P., Vincent, L.A., 
2011. Impact of Aligning Climatological Day on Gridding Daily Maximum–Minimum 
Temperature and Precipitation over Canada. J. Appl. Meteorol. Climatol. 50, 1654–1665. 
https://doi.org/10.1175/2011JAMC2684.1 
Hutchinson, M.F., McKenney, D.W., Lawrence, K., Pedlar, J.H., Hopkinson, R.F., Milewska, E., 
Papadopol, P., 2009. Development and Testing of Canada-Wide Interpolated Spatial Models of 
Daily Minimum–Maximum Temperature and Precipitation for 1961–2003. J. Appl. Meteorol. 
Climatol. 48, 725–741. https://doi.org/10.1175/2008JAMC1979.1 
Jarvis, A., Reuter, H.I., Nelson, A., Guevara, E., 2006. Hole-filled seamless SRTM data V3.1 available 
from the CGIAR-CSI SRTM 90m Database. 
McKenney, D.W., Hutchinson, M.F., Papadopol, P., Lawrence, K., Pedlar, J., Campbell, K., Milewska, 
E., Hopkinson, R.F., Price, D., Owen, T., 2011. Customized Spatial Climate Models for North 
America. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 92, 1611–1622. https://doi.org/10.1175/2011BAMS3132.1 
Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, University of Victoria, (Feb. 2019). Statistically Downscaled 
Climate Scenarios. Downloaded 
from https://data.pacificclimate.org/portal/downscaled_gcms/map/ on July, 2020. Method: 
BCCAQ v2.  
 
 
