SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
1
The Toolkit
FNMPC Technical and Policy Toolkit for Assessing 
and Seeking Restitution for Project-Specific and 
Cumulative Effects on Indigenous Cultural Rights
Spirit of the Land
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
2
The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit has been  
co-developed by the First Nations Major Projects Coalition (FNMPC) 
and its First Nation partners, the Anishinabek Nation, and Stellat’en First 
Nation, Nadleh Whut’en First Nation, Saik’uz First Nation, and Cheslatta 
Carrier Nation (“Carrier First Nations”). 
Spirit of the Land
Cover artwork  is created by Indigenous artist, Johnny Ketlo III who is a member Nadleh Whut’en 
located in north central BC. The Nadleh Whut’en community is a member of the FNMPC.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
3
The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit (“ICRIT”, or the “Toolkit”) 
represents a series of integrated policy and technical guidance (“Tools”) 
for characterizing and exploring compensation for project-specific and 
cumulative effects on Indigenous cultural rights, in support of consent-based 
decision making on major projects and the protection and promotion of 
Indigenous cultural rights. 
Recognizing the existing gap surrounding cultural rights assessment in Environmental Assessment (EA) 
policy and law, the Toolkit is designed to provide support to Indigenous Groups that are engaging with 
project proponents and the Crown in discussions about offsetting residual cumulative effects affecting 
cultural rights and values within their territories. As a technical support, the Toolkit will be particularly useful 
in situations where a proposed project poses serious, long-term, or irreversible, impacts to an Indigenous 
Group’s cultural rights. By providing a framework for evaluating and responding to adverse effects, this 
Toolkit seeks to empower Indigenous Groups in the assessment of potential impacts to their way of life. The 
Toolkit may also benefit Proponents seeking greater clarity and certainty around what Indigenous cultural 
rights are and how they can be assessed and mitigated in collaboration with impacted First Nations, and 
governments that are charged with the task of appropriately assessing the cumulative risks and impacts of 
major projects on First Nations. 
While collaborative implementation with Proponents/Government and Indigenous groups, coupled with 
capacity support, is an option to help foster relationships, this Toolkit should not be unilaterally applied 
by Industry or Government. This Toolkit is first and foremost an Indigenous-led process, grounded in a 
community’s principles and leadership. 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
4
The Toolkit is comprised of five distinct tools: 
TOOL 1 -  Inventory of Cultural Rights
1
Inventory of 
Cultural Rights
Step 1 of Undertaking an Assessment 
of Impacts to Cultural Rights and Values  
Tool 1
Spirit of the Land
TOOL 2 - Characterizing Existing Cumulative Eff ects on Indigenous Cultural Rights
1
Spirit of the Land
Characterizing 
Existing Cumulative 
Eff ects on Indigenous 
Cultural Rights
Step 2 of Undertaking an Assessment 
of Impacts to Cultural Rights 
Tool 2
TOOL 3 - Identifying Impact Pathways, Conducting an Eff ects Characterization, and Evaluating the Severity of Potential Impacts 
1
Identifying Impact 
Pathways, Conducting 
an Eff ects Characterization, 
and Evaluating the Severity 
of Potential Impacts 
Step 3 of Undertaking an Assessment 
of Impacts to Cultural Rights and Values
Tool 3
Spirit of the Land
TOOL 4 - Addressing Residual Impacts to Cultural Rights
1
Addressing 
Residual Impacts 
to Cultural Rights 
Step 4 of Undertaking an Assessment 
of Impacts to Cultural Rights and Values
Tool 4
Spirit of the Land
TOOL 5 - Considering Financial Compensation for Residual Eff ects to Cultural Rights
1
Considering Financial 
Compensation for Residual 
Eff ects to Cultural Rights
Step 5 of Undertaking an Assessment 
of Impacts to Cultural Rights
Tool 5
Spirit of the Land
Tool #1: (page 12)
How to undertake an inventory of cultural rights (including areas, important cultural landscapes, areas 
of preferred use, etc.) within a First Nation’s territory deemed to be at risk in relation to a proposed 
major project.
Tool #2: (page 30) 
How to characterize the cumulative effects, or historical context, related to cultural rights within which 
the potential impacts of new proposed projects may occur.
Tool #3: (page 38)	
 
How to identify impact pathways, conduct effects characterization and evaluate the severity of 
potential impacts. This includes weighting historical context, considering potential future impacts, 
implementing community-focussed criteria, and drawing on community-focussed thresholds in such 
determinations.
Tool #4: (page 49)	
 
How to analyze and determine the extent to which impacts can be accommodated (i.e., forms of 
compensation), as well as for addressing “non-compensable impacts” to cultural rights and values.
Tool #5: (page 69)	
 
Considerations for when financial compensation for impacts to cultural rights and values (including 
community values, community, and Indigenous Knowledge, etc.) adversely impacted by likely effects 
on cultural rights associated with proposed major projects, is desired.
Given the critical role that Indigenous Knowledge of the culture holders themselves must play in 
any meaningful cultural impact assessment, proponents and the Crown should not attempt to use 
these Tools themselves without collaboration or preferably a lead role for the impacted First Nations 
themselves.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
5
Understanding Indigenous  
Cultural Rights
It is important to note that the objective of the toolkit is not to characterize the legal dimensions 
of cultural rights. Canadian law does not provide an understanding of cultural rights grounded in 
First Nations perspectives, and so this Toolkit looks to each individual Nation to articulate their own 
understanding of their cultural rights. As such, there are as many possible definitions for culture as 
there are distinctive cultures themselves. As a result of the varying systems of knowledge, values, 
beliefs, and behaviour underlying cultural rights, the content of cultural rights will also vary from Nation 
to Nation. As a result of both the self-definition and variability inherent to cultural rights, providing a 
concrete definition of cultural rights is inherently challenging. Rather than implementing a reductionist 
approach, it is our intention to develop a framework that relies on a generic and malleable formulation 
of cultural rights. This generic understanding of cultural rights has been derived from common 
attributes of cultural rights defined by Indigenous peoples and including consideration of definitions 
put forward by governing and legislative bodies: 
“[Culture] includes the way of life, the system of knowledge, values, beliefs, and behaviour, 
all of which is passed down between generations. Culture is reflected and embedded in 
practice, the built and natural environment, and the relationships between people and their 
natural environment”.1
This definition includes both the tangible and intangible facets of culture. Culture is more than 
physical, or tangible,2 manifestations such as art, buildings, heritage sites, and documents. The 
concept must be understood as including elements such as non-physical, or intangible, manifestations 
such as relationships, stories, knowledge, and ways of life. Furthermore, Indigenous culture is not 
static, but temporally fluid, evolving, passed down, and adapting over time. 
This Toolkit therefore defines the right to culture:3  as the right to protect, practise, transmit, 
revitalize, and access in any preferred means both the tangible and intangible elements of 
culture. The right to protect, teach, learn, and speak one’s own language is an example of a cultural 
right. Other cultural rights include the right to protect and transmit knowledge, sense of identity and 
place, a worldview, and a way of life. In the context of a major project, this may include but would not 
be limited to the right to protect certain places or landscapes that hold special cultural significance 
and are integral to practicing a cultural right. Cultural rights are rooted in cultural values, and they may 
often involve practices, stories, and beliefs that are attached to specific geographic locations.
1	 Gibson, “Survey of the Field,” 8, emphasis added. This definition also draws on conceptualizations such as those put forth by the UNESCO Intergovernmental Committee  
	
for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage on its activities (2001) and the UN’s independent expert in the field of cultural rights, Shaheed, “Cultural  
	
Rights: What Are These and Why Are They Important for Women’s Right to Development?,” Conference Proceedings (Asia Pacific Regional Consultation with UN Special  
	
Procedures: Women’s Right to Development, Phnom Penh: 2011).
2	 The terms “physical” culture and “tangible” culture are used interchangeably to refer to cultural structures, items, and locations that can be touched, visited, and/or  
	
mapped (e.g., physical structures, settlements, encampments, burial sites, etc.). Similarly, the terms “non-physical” and “intangible” culture are used to refer to the  
	
elements of culture which are more difficult to define and quantify and cannot necessarily be touched or situated on a map (e.g., beliefs, spiritual significance, traditions,  
	
identity, sense of place, etc.).
3	 The Toolkit’s definition of a right to culture is further grounded in the principles articulated in the United Nation’s Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (2007),  
	
which sets out a series of principles designed to protect the distinct identity and cultural integrity of Indigenous peoples. For further information on how the concept of  
	
cultural rights was defined, please see the Toolkit Backgrounder (pages 2-5).
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
6
Some examples of Indigenous cultural rights include or apply to:
»
Hunting, trapping, and fishing practices and locations;
»
Food plants and medicine gathering locations and practices, including the location and act of 
collecting plants and natural materials for cultural activities;
»
Ancestral cultural locations (e.g., archaeological sites);
»
Camps and important sites; 
»
Intergenerational knowledge transfer;
»
Aspects of cultural identity associated with place and territory;
»
Sense of place;
»
The right to practice culture, including language, customs and ceremonies, traditional land-
based and water-based harvesting activities, etc.;
»
The right to revive cultural practices and sustain them into the future;
»
The right to access, use, protect, and conserve special cultural/spiritual locations;
»
Stories and songs related to place, both present and historical (i.e., ancient, or mythical time);
»
Cultural landscapes associated with stories, songs, and language; and
»
Areas of historical and cultural significance (e.g., associated with historical or myth-time 
events of the Nation).
A key element of cultural rights includes the ability to access all the spaces, places, activities, 
resources, etc. necessary to engage in, transmit, and perpetuate cultural practices. This includes 
cultural activities that are currently practiced, as well as those that will be practiced in the future. A 
central tenet of the right to cultural continuity is the ability and assurance that culture will live on and 
be meaningfully practicable for subsequent generations. There are two primary forms of impacts on 
cultural rights: those arising as a result of changes to the environment (e.g., changes to hunting as a 
result of deforestation and removal of vegetation), and those arising from changes in socio-economic 
conditions (e.g., outside worker influx in the area, changes to the local economy and income flow, 
rotational work, etc.). The right to cultural continuity emphasizes factors such as kinship and practices 
integral to a certain way of life.
A second foundational element of cultural rights relate to locations of cultural importance. Cultural 
rights include the right to protect and enjoy these sites of importance, and the rights cannot be 
extinguished even if the locations are not currently accessible due to various developments, 
relocations, or additional factors. Often, these sites will have great importance culturally, spiritually, 
and/or traditionally. For example, cultural sites of importance may be locations tied to creation stories 
or a Nation’s history. While continued access to these sites may no longer be available, they still retain 
their value and importance. 
It is important to note that the cultural rights discussed in this toolkit represent a non-exhaustive 
list. These categories of cultural rights are artificial constructs used throughout this Toolkit to aid in 
facilitating discussion and help ensure a robust approach to understanding and protecting cultural 
rights.  In reality, culture holders may not distinguish between such categories, and it is their right to 
insist that culture and impacts on culture be assessed in a holistic way through the lens of Indigenous 
understanding.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
7
Toolkit Methodology
This Toolkit has been collaboratively developed by the 
First Nations Major Projects Coalition and our partner 
First Nations: the Anishinabek Nation, and Stellat’en First 
Nation, Nadleh Whut’en First Nation, Saik’uz First Nation, 
and Cheslatta Carrier Nation (collectively the “Carrier First 
Nation”). Referred to as the Spirit of the Land Project by the 
Anishinabek Nation, this Toolkit was developed through 
extensive back and forth communications, research, and 
literary review. This process has helped ensure that the 
Toolkit provides applicable policy and technical guidance 
options for characterizing, evaluating, and where desired, 
determining restitution for project-specific and cumulative 
effects on Indigenous cultural rights. 
It is readily recognized that Environmental Assessment (EA)4 is a predominantly 
western process, which has historically excluded and failed to meaningfully 
include Indigenous peoples, Indigenous Knowledge, protocols, and ways of 
knowing/being. EA has commonly alienated Indigenous communities and 
peoples from the state-run process of assessing proposed projects, neglecting 
to find space for Indigenous ways of knowing and disregarding the importance 
of Indigenous Knowledge to understanding how a project might impact the 
environment and the people who live in it.  
We acknowledge that First Nations have always assessed the impacts of 
human activity on their values and relied upon Indigenous systems of law and 
governance to decide how to address those impacts. The failure of EA processes 
to integrate Indigenous decision making is part of challenge of assessing project 
impacts to cultural rights. The revitalization and recognition of Indigenous legal 
systems is therefore necessary to achieve true partnership and collaboration. 
We recognize that, while this Toolkit acknowledges that the evolution of cultural 
rights protections is deficient, it fails to challenge the relative distribution of 
power between First Nations and other jurisdictions. However, in presenting 
options throughout the Tools, this Toolkit seeks to provide a technical capacity 
enhancement to support First Nations exercising self-determination.
4	 For the sake of this Toolkit, the term Environmental Assessment should be understood as being inclusive of Canadian Impact Assessment (IA).
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
8
To address this gap, we have sought to ground the Toolkit in concepts such as Two-Eyed Seeing 
and Walking on Two Legs. To do so, we have approached the Toolkit and Tools development from 
an Indigenous perspective, emphasizing feedback and practices gathered through our engagement 
with our partner First Nations. The Tools provide a variety of options available to First Nations when 
engaging in EA processes. We have worked to provide options that are grounded in Indigenous 
Knowledge and practice and emphasize those which ensure First Nations maintain control over 
the use and interpretation of the provided information. The Toolkit also prioritizes and emphasizes 
the need to operate within community processes. This means that community-based deliberation 
and determination processes form the basis on which EA process engagement is built. Lastly, the 
Toolkit takes a distinctions-based approach to reflects the diverse and distinct interests and values of 
individual First Nations.
Etuaptmumk (Two-Eyed Seeing)
Mi’kmaq Elder Albert Marshal introduced Etuaptmumk, or Two-Eyed Seeing,5 as a means of utilizing 
both Indigenous Knowledges and Western knowledges, without either dominating or overpowering 
the other.6 Two-Eyed Seeing refers to the power of looking at the world from two world views: 
Indigenous and Western. The goal of Two-Eyed Seeing is “learning to see from one eye with the 
strengths of Indigenous Knowledges and ways of knowing, and from the other eye with the strengths 
of Western knowledges and ways of knowing and to using both of these eyes together.”7 By bringing 
together different ways of knowing, Two-Eyed Seeing allows for a greater understanding of the world, 
where Indigenous Knowledge is respected as a distinct and whole knowledge system alongside, and 
equal to, Western science.8 
To integrate this approach into the Toolkit development, we brought together environmental impact 
assessment professionals alongside Indigenous Knowledge holders to develop Tools which 
uphold both Indigenous and Western ways of knowing. These Tools seek to meaningfully integrate 
Indigenous ways of conceptualizing cultural rights into Canadian EA systems while ensuring that 
Indigenous Knowledge is not taken out of context or misconstrued.
Walking on Two Legs
Articulated by Secwépemc Elder Ronald E. Ignace, Walking on Two Legs represents the balancing 
of western science with Indigenous Knowledge to uphold the principles of respect, reciprocity, and 
responsibility. Similar to Two-Eyed Seeing, Walking on Two Legs is “practice and action-oriented, 
with the joint walking – guided by an Indigenous mind – compelling movement forward”.9 In this way, 
Walking on Two Legs requires a shift away from the incorporation of Indigenous Knowledge into 
Western practices, but rather requires the revisioning of such practices as being inclusive of, and 
grounded in, Indigenous stewardship and governance systems. 
5	 Albert Marshall, “Learning to See with Both Eyes (The Green Interview)” (Canada, 2018), https://www-mcintyre-ca.proxy.library.carleton.ca/carletonu3/code/PT0105.
6	 Annamarie Hatcher et al., “Two-Eyed Seeing: A Cross-Cultural Science Journey,” Green Teacher, no. 86 (Fall 2009): 5.
7	 Cheryl Bartlett, Murdena Marshall, and Albert Marshall, “Two-Eyed Seeing and Other Lessons Learned within a Co-Learning Journey of Bringing Together Indigenous and 7	
	
Mainstream Knowledges and Ways of Knowing,” Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences 2, no. 4 (November 2012): 335, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13412-012-0086-8. 
8	 Bartlett, Marshall, and Marshall, “Two-Eyed Seeing,” 336
9 	 Sarah Dickson‐Hoyle et al., “Walking on Two Legs: A Pathway of Indigenous Restoration and Reconciliation in Fire‐adapted Landscapes,” Restoration Ecology 30, no. 4 
	
(2022): 1, https://doi.org/10.1111/rec.13566.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
9
Distinctions-Based Approach
It is important to recognize the vast array of histories and circumstances faced by First Nations 
across Canada. The Toolkit is meant to be flexible to allow the general concepts it present to be 
integrated into the existing governance systems, policies, and/or laws of the relevant Nation. For 
example, a Nation may have existing policies or laws pertaining to:
»
Indigenous-defined impact pathways between the biophysical environment and culture 
(i.e., connections between the health of the environment and Indigenous cultural 
vitality).
»
Indigenous-defined benchmarks or thresholds for the health/abundance of the 
biophysical environment that are directly or indirectly related to the ability to practice 
cultural rights (i.e., standards of territorial and ecological “intactness” and “sufficiency” 
to support the practice of cultural rights).
»
Indigenous-defined protection measures directly or indirectly related to cultural rights. 
These existing procedural tools can, and should, be used to supplement and refine the tools 
contained within this Toolkit in order to best meet the First Nation’s needs. 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
10
Purpose of the Toolkit
At the broadest sense, this Toolkit is proposed as a means of driving 
community conversation about what elements of Indigenous culture 
are most important to protect and promote, the current state of cultural 
rights, the desired state of cultural rights, and how to get there. As such, 
this Toolkit is designed to present practical options to First Nations to 
understand, assess, and respond to project impacts on cultural rights and 
interests. It is important to note that this Toolkit is not designed to define 
the individual rights of First Nations. 
This Toolkit provides a series of Tools useful for both preparation beforehand and applicable during 
the assessment of project effects on Indigenous cultural rights. As a preparatory tool, this Toolkit can 
help a First Nation identify and characterize cultural rights within their territory, as well as flag which 
cultural rights are more sensitive to change and/or are already impacted as a result of past and 
present cumulative effects. The Toolkit can also assist a First Nation in pre-determining what cultural 
rights and values are “non-compensable” (i.e., cannot be impacted under any circumstances) as 
well as desired programs or initiatives that may be prioritized in discussions around compensation. 
In doing so, this Toolkit can help contribute to a Nation’s internal capacity and help prepare First 
Nations for EA processes before they begin.
The Toolkit can also be directly applied to either a proposed or ongoing major project within a 
Nation’s territory. Through this application, the Toolkit is designed to help a First Nation advocate 
for and ensure the protection of cultural rights, and where necessary, secure restitution for residual 
impacts to cultural rights. It can also be applied retroactively to determine how cultural rights have 
been impacted over time and through specific projects. This information may help a First Nation 
prepare for future proposed projects, and better understand the cultural needs and desires of the 
community. Overarchingly, this Toolkit seeks to advance the assessment of, and restitution for, 
cultural impacts in the EA process. To do so, the Toolkit is designed to create space for Indigenous 
ways of knowing and ensure Indigenous Knowledge is meaningfully included in assessing how a 
project might impact the environment and the people who depend on it.
Furthermore, this Toolkit has been designed with the intent to support collaboration by providing 
a foundation for problem solving discussions. While this Toolkit is designed for implementation by 
First Nations, it can provide value to proponents and governments seeking to build well-informed 
and mutually beneficial relationships. By supporting First Nations in understanding, assessing, and 
responding to anticipated project impacts, the opportunities for building positive relationships will 
be enhanced.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
11
Confidentiality and OCAP® 
This Toolkit has been developed to reflect and implement the principles of confidentiality 
contained within The First Nations Principles of OCAP®. Standing for ownership, control, access, 
and possession, OCAP ensures that “First Nations have control over data collection processes, 
and that they own and control how this information can be used”.10 This Toolkit recognizes the 
principles of OCAP and calls for their application throughout all instances where a CIA is being 
conducted. These principles are:
»
Ownership: A First Nation owns information collectively in the same way that an 
individual owns his or her personal information.
»
Control: First Nations, their communities, and representative bodies are within their 
rights to seek control over all aspects of research and information management 
processes that impact them.
»
Access: First Nations must have access to information and data about themselves and 
their communities regardless of where it is held. 
»
Possession: First Nations retain physical control of data to ensure that ownership can 
be asserted and protected.11 
10	 First Nations Information Governance Centre, “The First Nations Principles of OCAP®,” The First Nations Information Governance Centre, accessed September 24, 2021,  
	
https://fnigc.ca/ocap-training/.
11	 First Nations Information Governance Centre, “The First Nations Principles of OCAP®”.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
12
Inventory of  
Cultural Rights
Step 1 of Undertaking an Assessment  
of Impacts to Cultural Rights and Values  
Tool 1
Spirit of the Land
Purpose
The first step in assessing the potential cultural impacts of a proposed 
major project is to develop an inventory of cultural rights. By identifying and 
documenting what matters most to the community, including cultural rights 
that are most at risk and priorities for revitalization, a First Nation can best 
allocate time and resources towards their protection and resurgence. The 
process of determining at-risk rights and community priorities includes 
looking at potential impacts from the new project as well as combined 
effects of multiple developments that have occurred, are occurring, or are 
likely in the future to occur12 within the same culturally important areas. 
This Tool is designed to bring Indigenous voices, stories, knowledge, and 
experiences to the forefront to help understand the value and use of the 
potentially impacted territory from the perspective of the cultural rights 
holders. Within an Environmental Assessment (EA) process, this Tool seeks 
to inform the government and/or Proponent about what is important and 
what is at stake from an Indigenous lens.
Terminology
The following terminology is used throughout this Tool. Definitions for each term are 
provided below.
»	 Cultural Landscape: large areas that are culturally known and connected to cultural 
use in ways passed down between generations; also known as the lived landscape.
»	 Cultural Keystone Places: areas of exceptional high cultural importance, often 
associated with areas of regional biodiversity.
»	 Cultural Keystone Species: species that “shape in a major way the cultural identity 
of a people, as reflected in the fundamental roles these species have in diet, 
materials, medicine, and/or spiritual practices”13.
13
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
12	 These non-project specific effects are called “cumulative effects”.
13	 Garibaldi and Turner, “Cultural Keystone Species,” 4.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
14
Principles
In the development of its Guidance Appendices to the Major Projects Assessment Standard (2020), 
the First Nations Major Projects Coalition (FNMPC) identifies some key principles associated with 
the practice of cultural impact assessment in relation to Indigenous peoples during major project 
assessment. These principles include:
»	 Recognition that Indigenous cultures have different ways of knowing and communicating that 
should be incorporated into the cultural impact assessment.
»	 Cultural knowledge and information is the property of culture holders and must be protected 
and respected.
»	 Recognition that cultural impacts can only be understood in context – from the perspective of 
the culture holders themselves.
»	 Recognition of culture as multi-dimensional, and that impacts can occur on a variety of 
cultural resources
Building on these principles, some further considerations for conducting an inventory of cultural rights 
may include:
»	 The identification of cultural rights should be done by the Nation and led by the Nation’s 
Knowledge holders. 
»	 The identification of cultural rights should include both past and present considerations (for 
example, some cultural spaces may no longer be accessible, yet should still be considered in 
this assessment). 
»	 The identification of cultural rights should include the spaces, areas, activities, resources, 
environments, plants, animals, etc., that are important and currently located or practiced 
within the Nation’s territory, as well as those that may no longer be accessible or practicable. 
»	 When identifying cultural rights, both tangible (material) and intangible (immaterial) rights 
should be identified. Tangible cultural rights are typically understood as physical and may 
including things such as burial sites, important harvesting grounds, and hunting camps. 
Intangible cultural rights and values are generally considered non-physical and may include 
things such as sense of place, spirituality, way of life, stories, and cultural identity. 
»	 When identifying cultural rights, take into consideration the geographic extent of the right. 
Some cultural rights may not be as geographically situated as others (e.g., a specific site 
necessary for ceremony as opposed to a building necessary for ceremony that can be 
relocated).  Some cultural rights may be less tied to or dependent upon continued access to, 
or the integrity of a specific geographic setting, but could still be impacted by a major project 
(e.g., a fishery may be a necessary location for cultural practice and knowledge transmission, 
but the specific location of the fishery is less important).  
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
15
Example Approaches to Identify and 
Inventory Cultural Rights 
The following list represents a selection of example approaches available to First Nations to aid 
in identifying and inventorying cultural rights. These approaches can be used on their own, or in 
combination with one. Selection of the approach should be grounded in a First Nation’s needs. 
Contextual factors should inform the selection of an appropriate approach, such as the extent to which 
access and use to a Nation’s traditional territory has been constrained by existing development or 
settlement (i.e., it is “fenced off” from use), the existing extent of cumulative effects, and the type and 
location of the project. For example, First Nations that have had significant alterations to their ability 
to access traditional territories may derive substantive value from a Traditional and Current Use Study 
which illustrates how their ability to engage in cultural practices has changed over time. Other key 
factors to consider when selecting an approach to identifying and inventorying cultural rights include 
staffing capacity (e.g., the number of individuals able to participate in the approach), available funding, 
and the capacity of the community to engage in discussions and meetings. 
It is important to note that the approaches to identifying and inventorying cultural rights presented 
below do not need to be implemented in isolation. A method of triangulation, where multiple methods of 
identifying cultural rights are applied, can be a useful tool. Triangulation allows for multiple findings to be 
compared. Where there is agreement on the findings, triangulation can serve as a way of “confirming” 
the study results and increases the confidence in effects assessment. Comparatively, if the findings 
disagree, this can initiate a transparent examination of the sources of difference. If differences cannot 
be reconciled, the confidence in the predictions will be reduced and a more precautionary approach 
is required. In general, it is always preferable to implement a triangulation approach so that data from 
multiple sources can be brought together to increase confidence in study results.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
16
Direct Community Engagement Sessions 
and Surveys 
Direct community engagement is a useful way to collect data with community members. This 
approach includes methods like interviews, focus groups, and surveys, and you may choose one or 
more methods to address an issue. Interviews work well for detailed conversations with individual 
members about a topic and can be flexible depending on the person and the context. Focus groups 
are appropriate when discussion about a topic with a group of members would provide helpful 
information. Surveys are useful tools for reaching higher percentages of community membership to 
answer a fixed set of questions. All direct engagement methods are useful because they allow for 
community members’ Knowledge, thoughts, and opinions to be communicated.
The principles of Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) and ensuring anonymity are key 
components of ethical community engagement. FPIC ensures that community members have the right 
to understand and consent to their participation in research, empowering them as active participants 
in the process. Similarly, anonymity protects the privacy and confidentiality of participants, allowing for 
honest and open communication without fear of reprisal.
Benefits of direct community engagement include the ability to gather rich and detailed insights 
directly from community members, tailor approaches to specific community needs, empower 
community involvement in decision-making, and foster a sense of ownership and inclusion. It also 
fosters trust and transparency between community members and researchers as well as facilitates the 
identification of unique community strengths and resources. Potential drawbacks include resource 
intensiveness (e.g., time and money), potential bias in data collection, and difficulties in ensuring 
representation. 
All of these engagement methods follow a general process:
1.	 Plan the method: choose the method and design the questions to be asked 
2.	 Plan the engagement: create a list of members for potential participation, contact them to see 
if they are interested, and make a participant list of people who say yes
3.	 Obtain consent: describe the process to participants and obtain their consent before 
proceeding
4.	 Conduct the engagement: proceed with the method and document the results (audio / video 
recording, note-taking, survey collection)
5.	 Manage information: process and store the data properly after the engagement (transcription, 
editing, survey cleaning)
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
17
6.	 Analyze data: conduct thematic analysis of the data based on the questions you are  
trying to answer
7.	 Communicate the results: this can be a written report, a map, a video, whatever is the best 
way to communicate with the intended audience
 
The following table summarizes some key strengths and limitations of the direct community 
engagement/survey approach: 
Some resources providing further 
information on direct community 
engagement/survey approaches include:
Community Resource Handbook 2021:  
A Guide to Community Engaged Research 
Indigenous Community Engagement Methods
Strengths
»	 Directly engages with community 
members and Knowledge holders, 
allowing for the collection of 
detailed and specific information
»	 Engagement sessions and 
surveys can be modified based 
on community needs to provide 
specific information
»	 Empowers community members 
to have their voices heard on what 
matters most to them 
Limitations
» 	 Collected information is often 
highly diverse and will need some 
form of coding/compilation 
»	 Engagement sessions can be time- 
intensive and expensive 
»	 There can be difficulty ensuring 
robust representation of diverse 
identity groups within a First Nation
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
18
Use and Occupancy Studies
Use and Occupancy Studies are often included as an aspect of Impact Assessment. Other names for 
this type of study include Knowledge and Use Study, Traditional Use Study (TUS), Traditional Land 
Use (TLU) Study, Traditional Land Use and Occupancy Study (TLUOS), Traditional Knowledge and Use 
Study (TKUS). These studies refer to a category of research that uses mapping interviews to document 
where and how community members practice their rights and culture throughout their territory. The 
intention of such studies is to document knowledge and experience from members within their living 
memory. This includes knowledge that has been passed down to them by previous generations and 
can also include historical and ethnographic data.
The process for this type of study centers on interviews with members in which they map their use, 
occupancy, and rights-practice including tangible, bio-physical elements and activities, as well as more 
intangible aspects like knowledge transmission and connection to place. Use and occupancy data 
is valuable for demonstrating ongoing practice of rights and culture as well as documenting change 
over time in rights practice (cumulative effects) and anticipated impacts in the future (project-specific 
impact assessment).
Traditional and current use studies are the most common form of study conducted by and with First 
Nations in relation to a proposed project. This means that in some cases there is already readily 
available traditional and current use studies information for that First Nation in the proposed project-
affected area. Great caution and deference to Nation requirements is critical to the choice of whether 
and how to use existing study data rather than conduct a new study, however. While using existing 
data can reduce consultation fatigue amongst community members, it is also possible that older data 
may have changed over time due to changing conditions and new community members engaging in 
cultural practices. Older studies may not appropriately match the geographic area of focus for a new 
project. And relying on older data may also remove the ability to engage community members on the 
critical question of how the new proposed project is likely to impact on their cultural rights. In the end, 
it is critical for First Nations to decide whether and how to use the results of older studies and whether 
new studies are required.
In addition, it is never appropriate to use traditional and current use data from one First Nation as a 
proxy/stand-in for another Nation, as use and occupancy and values differ from one group to another.
The following table summarizes some key strengths and limitations of the traditional and current use 
studies approach: 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
19
Strengths
»	 Draws on a variety of knowledge 
sources, including oral histories, 
input from Knowledge holders, and 
archival review 
»	 Captures Indigenous perspectives 
and Indigenous Knowledge, 
fostering cultural revitalization and 
community empowerment
»	 Illustrates both past and present 
conditions, identifying changes 
over time 
»	 Existing information and studies 
can sometimes decrease 
the engagement burden on 
communities 
»	 Can provide detailed and relatively 
up to date Indigenous use and 
occupancy data for the Project-
affected area
Some resources providing further 
information on Traditional Use and 
Knowledge Study approaches include:
Chief Kerry’s Moose: A Guidebook to Land Use 
and Occupancy Mapping, Research Design, and 
Data Collection
Living Proof by Tobias and Associates
Limitations
» 	 Where past information is not 
available, extensive community 
engagement is required which can 
contribute to consultation fatigue
» 	 Traditional/past use may be difficult 
to assess and under-reported due 
to loss of knowledge and access 
to culturally important locations, 
resources, and practices
» 	 Only a portion of the population 
is likely to be involved in any such 
study. Again, absence of recorded 
value is not to be confused for 
absence of value
» 	 Use of the data needs to have 
community-endorsed confidentiality 
provisions in place 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
20
Density of Use Maps and Mapping of  
High Priority Areas 
Developing maps that depict traditional use areas, occupancy on the land, spiritual, learning and 
gathering sites, cultural landscape values, and travel routes, etc., can produce a visual representation 
of cultural rights. A density use map shows how different places are used and how crowded they 
are. They can show us things like where people most frequently use the land, areas that people are 
avoiding, and can locate areas where people have noticed a lot of negative environmental impacts 
from industry. These maps are useful because they help us understand how land is being used (or not 
used) and help to make decisions about things like where to avoid putting a road. 
Density use maps are especially useful during cumulative effect assessments because they provide 
spatial data on land uses and activities. By overlaying these maps with other datasets like habitat maps 
and pollution sources, researchers can identify areas vulnerable to cumulative impacts.
There are, however, some important limitations of this mapping process: 
»	 While mapping can represent both tangible and intangible cultural rights and values, the 
process relies heavily on cultural values that can be identified on a map. This means that 
some cultural rights and values which are not tied to a specific geographic location may not 
be identified in the mapping process. 
Area of low density of cultural use
Area of medium density of cultural use
Area of high density of cultural use
Area of critical density of cultural use
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
21
Strengths
»	 Provides a visual representation of 
areas of higher reported cultural 
values 
»	 Allow for the representation of raw 
data (e.g., number of moose) and 
also rates and ratios (e.g., how often 
something happens in one place 
compared to another place)
»	 Serves as a method for compiling 
and organizing diverse data 
»	 Community members may feel 
at home physically and visually 
representing how and where their 
rights are practiced, allowing them 
to share knowledge in a way that is 
valuable to them
Limitations
»	 Requires extensive community 
engagement and surveying 
»	 Can be costly and resource intensive
»	 Heavily reliant on geographic 
locations and may exclude cultural 
rights and values that are not tied to 
a specific place 
»	 Lack of data appears as “non- 
importance” meaning that some 
locations are undervalued when 
in fact absence of evidence is not 
“evidence of absence” of value
»	 Communities may not want to 
share either areas of higher value, 
or distinguish between higher and 
lower value areas, which suggests 
some areas are “open” 
»	 Culture holders may be reluctant to share sensitive information about important places 
and spaces. In addition, only a subset of culture holders will be involved in any such data 
collection exercise. As a result, any lack of data should not be taken to reflect absence of 
value. With mapping processes there is always the chance that data may be misrepresented. 
Confidentiality is critical and must be assured through the methods used to collect, analyze, 
and represent cultural information.
»	 Cultural values mapping can be converted to show areas with higher density of reported 
cultural use and values. That said, they tend to be focused on quantity of reported uses and 
values; it is much harder to map quality of use and values, which may be of equal or greater 
importance depending on the valued embodied in the location. 
The following table summarizes some key strengths and limitations of the cultural values density 
mapping approach:
Some resources providing further information on cultural values 
density mapping approaches include:
Density Mapping with GIS
Dot Density Maps
»
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
22
14	 Parks Canada, “Parks Canada Guiding Principles and Operational Policies,” 119.
15	 Susan Buggey, “An Approach to Aboriginal Cultural Landscapes” (Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada, March 1999), 32.
16	 The Northwest Territories Protected Areas Strategy Advisory Committee, “Northwest Territories Protected Areas Strategy,” September 27, 1999, 3, https://www.gov.nt.ca/ 
	
sites/ecc/files/resources/pas_1999.pdf.
Identification of Cultural Landscapes 
The identification of cultural landscapes represents another method for identifying and inventorying 
cultural rights and values. Defined as “any geographical area that has been modified, influenced, 
or given special cultural meaning by people”14, cultural landscapes represent the intersection 
of landscape with the impressions, beliefs, and rituals (culture) associated with the place. The 
significance of cultural landscapes is determined by the “spiritual, cultural, economic, social and 
environmental aspects of the group’s association with the identified place, including continuity and 
traditions”15. The identification of cultural landscapes therefore represents a unique way of protecting 
cultural rights and values that are tied to the land. 
This method can be used as a management tool for efforts such as cultural heritage preservation/
revitalization, environmental impact assessment, land use planning, cumulative effects management, 
monitoring programs, decision-making processes, and others. Methodologies used to delineate 
cultural landscapes may be diverse and rooted in the values and worldviews of local Indigenous 
people; approaches often require working with Indigenous Knowledge Holders, land users and 
community members to:
1.	 Define the ICL through multiple lenses and multi-faceted values, including environmental, 
economic, ecological, physical, social, cultural, spiritual, historical and/or other key ways of 
understanding the importance of the landscape; 
2.	 Characterizing relationships with the land, including the interface between the landscape and 
the traditional way of life on the land; and 
3.	 Articulating the Indigenous rights and responsibilities associated with stewardship of the 
land. 
Delineation of cultural landscapes may also involve further documentation and characterization of 
the landscape in the form of mapping, photography/video, archival research, collection of traditional 
stories and oral histories, and/or supplemental gathering of place-based Indigenous Knowledge 
regarding key areas within the landscape. Using these methods to identify, recognize and safeguard 
Indigenous Cultural Landscapes (ICLs) can help protect Indigenous cultural heritage for generations 
to come while also contributing to decolonization, reconciliation, self-determination and revitalization 
of Indigenous governments and Nations.
A number of organizations have implemented the concept of cultural landscapes to support the 
protection of ecological areas. For example, the Northwest Territories’ Protect Areas Strategy (PAS) 
has implemented the use of cultural landscapes to “protect special natural and cultural areas,” and 
“protect core representative areas within each ecoregion”. This PAS further works to reinforce the 
leadership role of communities, regional organizations and/or land claim bodies in land and water use 
management16. To determine the boundaries of a distinct cultural landscape, the PAS requires a series 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
23
Strengths
»	 Can lead to physical recognition 
and associated protection of an 
important landscape (e.g., Tribal 
Park, cultural landscape under 
the Historic Sites and Monuments 
Board of Canada, or other 
delineation)
»	 Identifies culturally important 
locations – including both tangible 
and intangible factors 
Limitations
»	 Because it is based on identified 
geography, there must be clearly 
identified boundaries 
»	 Only represents cultural rights and 
values tied to specific locations 
»	 Can take an extensive amount of 
time and resources
of studies including ecological and socio-cultural studies, the examination of place names, on-territory. 
Boundary delineation, and the examination of historical records and harvesting patters. These studies 
are conducted in a community-driven setting where there is an Indigenous community that is the 
“sponsor” of the area subject to cultural landscape delineation.
Similarly, the identification of Tribal Parks, such as the K’ih Tsaa?dze Tribal Park in British Columbia is 
way to protect and manage cultural landscapes under using ecosystem-based conservation planning 
methods for the purpose of maintain Indigenous traditional and contemporary cultural uses while 
restoring and maintaining ecological integrity and biological diversity17. 
It is worth noting that cultural landscape delineation is only applicable to geographically situated 
cultural sites. This means that cultural landscapes are generally “mappable” and have boundaries that 
are clearly definable. However, as previously noted, many cultural rights are intangible and may not be 
connected to a single definable location. In these situations, cultural landscape delineation may fail to 
accurately identify a Nation’s breadth of cultural rights.
The following table summarizes some key strengths and limitations of the cultural landscape 
delineation approach: 
Some resources providing further information on Cultural Landscape 
approaches include:
Doig River First Nation Cultural Spaces Plan
Indigenous Cultural Landscapes Final Report by The Wahkohtowin Development Group Inc. 
A cultural landscape approach to community-based conservation in Solomon Islands by 
Richard K. Walter and Richard J. Hamilton. 
»
17	 K’ih Tsaa?Dze Tribal Park,” Doig River First Nation, accessed June 29, 2022, https://doigriverfn.com/our-lands/kiht-saadze-tribal-park/.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
24
Indigenous Knowledge and Ecological 
Studies, and the Identification of Cultural 
Keystone Places/Species 
By combining Indigenous Knowledge with Western scientific ecological studies, places, species, and 
resources of cultural importance can be identified. Ecological studies that identify habitat suitability 
data and the distribution of biophysical resources can provide an initial layer of information regarding 
the relative value and productivity of certain areas and species to the exercise of rights. When 
appropriately combined with Indigenous Knowledge, the cultural importance of these areas and 
species can be identified. 
Because Indigenous Knowledge is developed through long-term observation of natural phenomena 
and relationships within specific environments over time, there are many ways in which this 
Knowledge can be incorporated into Environmental Assessments. For example:
»	 Indigenous Knowledge can provide insight into biodiversity, local ecosystems, ecological 
processes, and ecological health that may otherwise not be documented through western 
science knowledge. This may include distributions and populations of species, habitat 
preferences, animal health, and information on migration corridors and seasonal movements. 
This can also include changes in species population numbers and fluctuations in the 
abundance of keystone species.
»	 Indigenous Knowledge can contribute to the gathering of critically important information on 
changing climate systems, including changes to weather and climate patterns and associated 
impacts on wildlife movements and behaviours.
»	 Indigenous Knowledge may provide information on threshold levels related to animal, fish, 
plant, and other resource harvesting (i.e., to identify boundaries between acceptable and 
unacceptable levels of impact or change), which can inform monitoring strategies.
»	 Indigenous Knowledge may provide information on important cultural and social values 
including traditional stories and oral histories, ceremonies, medicinal practices, sacred-sites, 
cultural heritage and traditional practices, archaeological sites, travel routes, traditional 
camps, timelines, identity, sense of place and other land-based social, cultural, or spiritual 
practices or historical information.
One way to incorporate Indigenous Knowledge into EA processes is through the identification of 
Cultural Keystone Places and Species. 
Defined as “particular places of high cultural importance – places that are also generally high in 
regional biological diversity”18, Cultural Keystone Places (CKPs) are one method of identifying “places 
18	 Cuerrier et al., “Cultural Keystone Places: Conservation and Restoration in Cultural Landscapes,” 430.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
25
of exceptional and cultural value so that the depth of their roles in a people’s cultural fabric can be 
more widely appreciated”19. Similarly, Cultural Keystone Species (CKSs) represent species that “shape 
in a major way the cultural identity of a people, as reflected in the fundamental roles these species 
have in diet, materials, medicine, and/or spiritual practices”20. CKPs and CKSs therefore represent 
another means of identifying cultural rights and values. 
There are a variety of ways in which a cultural keystone place can be identified. The following 
questions can be used to help guide the identification of a cultural keystone place:21
1.	 Is there agreement within a cultural group about the importance of the place?
2.	 Does this place occur in language and discourse (i.e., does the place have a particular name 
or associated vocabulary)?
3.	 To what degree and extent is the place visited, occupied, or involved in cultural activities?
4.	 What types of cultural activities are carried out at the place?
5.	 How is the place reflected in archaeological resources, in cultural narratives, origin stories, 
songs and/or ceremonies, etc.?
6.	 To what extent is the landscape, habitats, or plant and animal species managed or tended at a 
place?
7.	 To what extend is the given place unique in its role of supporting cultural identity and 
survival?
8.	 What is the degree of diversity (of both species and habitats) represented at the place?
9.	 Is the place important as a meeting location where groups come together for economic and 
social exchange?
10.	 What role does the place play in cultural protocols?
Similarly, the following elements can be considered when identifying a cultural keystone species22:
1.	 The intensity, type, and various forms of use of the species;
2.	 The naming and terminology of the species in a language;
3.	 The role of the species in narratives, ceremonies, or symbolism;
4.	 The persistence and memory of use of the species in relationship to cultural change;
5.	 The level of unique position the species has in culture;
6.	 The extent to which the species provides opportunities for resources acquisition from beyond 
the territory.
By asking these questions and engaging directly with community members to determine which 
places and species they feel are key to their identity and survival, cultural keystone places and 
species represent methods of identifying cultural rights which may allow for the identification of 
more intangible elements of cultural rights and may better include cultural rights that are not easily 
delineated geographically.
19	 Cuerrier et al., “Cultural Keystone Places: Conservation and Restoration in Cultural Landscapes,” 440.
20	 Garibaldi and Turner, “Cultural Keystone Species,” 4.
21	 Based on the ten general indicators for assessing the overall importance of a place as provided by Cuerrier et al., “Cultural Keystone Places”, 432.
22	 Ann Garibaldi and Nancy Turner, “Cultural Keystone Species: Implications for Ecological Conservation and Restoration,” Ecology and Society 9, no. 3 (2004): 5, https://doi.	
	
	
org/10.5751/ES-00669-090301.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
26
Strengths
»	 Helps to identify areas and 
species of cultural and ecological 
importance 
»	 Uses “two eyed seeing”, combining 
Western scientific data and 
Indigenous Knowledge, adding 
the temporal depth and location-
specific knowledge of Indigenous 
Knowledge holders to the 
quantitative data of scientists
Some resources providing further information on Joint Indigenous 
Knowledge/Ecological approaches include:
Enacting and Operationalizing Ethical Space and Two-Eyed Seeing in Indigenous 
Protected and Conserved Areas and Crown Protected and Conserved Areas by Danika 
Littlechild and Colin Sutherland.
Decolonizing Research Paradigms in the Context of Settler Colonialism: An Unsettling, 
Mutual, and Collaborative Effort by Mirjam B.E. Held
Limitations
» 	 Focuses on “pinpointing” key 
species, resources, and areas, 
and may fail to represent the 
holistic nature of culture and the 
environment 
» 	 Requires extensive community 
engagement 
» 	 The focus on ecological study 
means that some cultural values 
may be missed if they do not have 
a tangible “use value” (i.e., use as 
a food source, as medicine, as a 
resource, etc.) 
» 	 There are potential risks of 
Indigenous Knowledge component 
being “tokenized” in comparison to 
Western science
»
The following table summarizes some key strengths and limitations of joint Indigenous Knowledge/
Ecological Studies approaches: 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
27
23	 Aaron Mills describes a lifeworld as the nature, origin, and way of knowing that defines an Indigenous way of life, “which situate us in creation and thus allow us to orient  
	
ourselves in all our relationships in a good way” (Aaron Mills, “The Lifeworlds of Law: On Revitalizing Indigenous Legal Orders Today,” McGill Law Journal 61, no. 4  
	
(December 22, 2016): 852, https://doi.org/10.7202/1038490ar).
24	 Mills, “The Lifeworlds of Law,” 847–84.
25	 Mills, “The Lifeworlds of Law,” 883. 
26	  Hadley Friedland, “Practical Engagement with Indigenous Legal Traditions on Environmental Issues: Some Questions,” in Environment in the Courtroom. Allan Ingelson  
	
(Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2019), 82-91. 
Codification of Laws and Norms 
Many of the Nation’s laws and norms represent both cultural values and intangible cultural resources. 
These laws and norms can therefore be used as guide to identify cultural rights and what may be 
considered an adverse impact on those cultural rights. 
For example, the enactment of the water management regime by the Yinka Dene ‘Uza’hné from  
Nadleh Whut’en, Stellat’en and later Saik’uz First Nation (including both the Yinka Dene ‘Uza’hné 
Surface Water Management Policy and Yinka Dene ‘Uza’hné Guide to Surface Water Quality 
Standards) represents an expression of living governance and laws. The Policy and Standards are 
designed to recognize that importance of surface waters and water quality in Aboriginal title and 
rights. In doing so, the Policy and Standards highlight the centrality of water as a cultural right and 
value. By codifying existing laws and norms held by the Nation, important cultural rights and values 
can be identified and inventoried. 
In addition, if laws and norms are codified, they may actually be used as a foundation or “lens” for the 
assessment of effects from a project on culture and other Indigenous values.
It is important to note that the “translation” of Indigenous laws and norms into forms that can be 
compared and applied to Western legal and policy traditions has been critiqued as trivializing 
Indigenous lifeworlds23 and governance24. By codifying laws and norms, there is a potential risk of 
“open[ing] up Indigenous legal orders to further colonization”25, as this codification may mold, or 
reshape, Indigenous legal traditions into forms which are unable to accurately reflect the complex and 
holistic nature of Indigenous ways of life. To avoid such risks, one possible approach could be working 
to make Indigenous laws “accessible” to non-Indigenous others, while simultaneously ensuring that 
these laws remain grounded solely within the Nation’s way of knowing. Such a process may help 
ensure Indigenous laws and norms are not generalized and are not seen as static and either aligned 
with, or contrary to, Western legal traditions. One way to help make Indigenous laws accessible is draw 
on community processes and procedures to illustrate how legitimate collective decisions have been 
reached for specific issues.26 Overarchingly, individual Indigenous Nations will need to assess what 
works best for them and how they wish to operationalize their systems in relation to western systems 
of EA. Some examples of First Nations that have used some aspect of their laws and norms as lenses 
through which to assess the acceptability of effects of specific projects include the Okanagan Indian 
Band (Revelstoke Unit 6 Generating Station) and Tsleil-Waututh Nation (Trans Mountain Expansion 
(TMX) tanker and pipeline project).
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
28
Some resources providing further 
information on the Codification of Laws 
and Norms approaches include:
Yinka Dene ‘Uza’hné Surface Water  
Management Policy 
Yinka Dene ‘Uza’hné Guide to Surface Water 
Quality Standards 
Strengths
»	 Draws on existing Nation-specific 
laws and norms 
»	 Ties cultural rights and values to 
broader Nation sovereignty and 
rights 
»	 Can be used to attribute value 
to both tangible and intangible 
cultural rights and values, including 
both practices and identity 
»	 Can provide an Indigenous “lens” 
through which effects of a project 
may be assessed
Limitations
» 	 Limited by the availability of laws 
and norms; if laws and norms are 
not already codified, this can take 
many years to complete
» 	 May require the sharing of 
sensitive information 
» 	 Must be under the control of the 
First Nation when converting 
laws and norms into any sort of 
assessment “lens”; this cannot be 
done by any outside party
The following table summarizes some key strengths and limitations of the codification of laws and 
norms approach: 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
29
Summary
Tool #1 is designed to help identify inventory cultural rights and the 
related cultural resources necessary to uphold those rights, within 
a First Nations’ territory. The identification of these rights should 
be grounded in the voices, stories, knowledge, and experiences of 
community members. The information collected through this Tool 
may be used to inform the government and/or Proponent about what 
is important to the Nation, and what is at stake. This identification 
and inventorying may also take into consideration past and present 
conditions (e.g., spaces and resources that are currently practiced 
as well as those that are no longer accessible), both tangible and 
intangible cultural rights, and the geographic extent of the right. There 
are a variety of different ways to identify and inventory cultural rights, 
each with their own strengths and weaknesses. These methods 
include direct community engagement, density of use and heat 
maps, traditional and current use studies, the identification of Cultural 
Landscapes, Indigenous Knowledge/Ecological studies and the 
identification of cultural keystone places/species, the codification of 
laws and norms, and the important role that “triangulation” of results 
from multiple sources and approaches to the inventorying of cultural 
rights can have in the confidence we have that cultural rights have 
been properly inventoried. 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
30
Spirit of the Land
Characterizing  
Existing Cumulative  
Effects on Indigenous 
Cultural Rights
Step 2 of Undertaking an Assessment  
of Impacts to Cultural Rights 
Tool 2
From FNMPC’s perspective, cumulative effects assessment should be a core element of any major 
project assessment. Cumulative impacts are those which arise from the combined total effects from 
past, present, and likely future human actions, and the way in which potential project-specific effects 
may interact with these accumulated effects. Characterizing cumulative effects will assist in illustrating 
the ways that cultural rights have already been and still are being impacted by multiple cumulative 
stressors on the environment and people.
Purpose
By better understanding past and ongoing changes on cultural rights, a more 
detailed and accurate assessment of potential project impacts on cultural 
rights can be made. This characterization of cumulative effects is especially 
important when a First Nation has already faced significant cultural change 
through processes such as displacement and development within ancestral 
territories. As a result of past and ongoing existing cumulative effects and 
additional stressors, cultural rights may be more vulnerable to project impacts. 
For example, cutting down one of the last two trees in an area is more 
significant than cutting down one of the last two hundred trees. Cumulative 
effects analysis allows for diminished opportunities due to historical 
cumulative effects to be assessed. If the cumulative effects context is not 
understood, the extent of this vulnerability cannot be properly understood.
31
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
32
Terminology
The following terminology is used throughout this Tool. Definitions for each term are 
provided below.  
»	 Cumulative Effects:  Changes to environment, rights, culture, and/or society that 
are caused by the combined effects of past, present, and future actions. 
»	 Cumulative Effects Assessment: The examination of how all past, present and 
likely future activities combine to impact an area or specific values (such as moose 
or salmon).  
»	 Induced Effects: “Knock on” or “spin off” effects caused as a result of the direct and 
indirect effects of a major Project (i.e., increased exploration and other industrial 
activities after the building of a new road into a previously secluded area) 
»	 Temporal: The scope of time considered, which may include past, present and 
future changes 
»	 Vulnerability: The lessened ability to withstand the effects of a harm or  
disturbance due to adverse effects suffered in the pre-Project circumstance 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
33
Cultural Cumulative Effects 
Assessment Principles 
The First Nations Major Projects Coalition (FNMPC) provides guidance for major project assessment 
of cumulative effects in Principle 8 of its Major Project Assessment Standard. Designed to be read by 
Proponents and Government, these requirements provide a framework for an overall assessment of 
cumulative effects. Drawn from this work, the following principles reflect a consideration of cumulative 
effects assessment through a cultural rights lens and represent a series of principles that may be 
considered.
»	 Cultural cumulative effects assessment should consider impacts to cultural rights across 
at a large landscape  and across the full extent of a Nation’s traditional territory. This area 
may cross jurisdictional borders and boundaries, and some of this area may no longer be 
accessible. Cultural cumulative effects should therefore include the consideration of more 
than just “local” impacts. 
»	 Cultural cumulative effects assessment should consider a time frame which extends into the 
recent and distant past, as well as the likely (i.e., predictable) future. This means that known 
likely future projects – sometimes called “reasonably foreseeable future developments” - and 
other human caused changes such as climate change should be integrated into cultural 
cumulative effects assessment. Similarly, cultural cumulative effects assessment should take 
into consideration how cultural practices have changed over several generations.
»	 Cultural cumulative effects assessment should encompass both human and natural drivers 
of change and evaluate trends of change in order to meaningfully capture how impacts have 
accumulated over time, to accurately assess current vulnerabilities, and to anticipate the 
potential future condition of cultural rights and values according to the assessed trajectory of 
change. Considering how specific effects interact with specific aspects of cultural rights can 
strengthen a cumulative effects assessment by meaningfully grounding it in concrete details. 
»	 The significance of cultural cumulative effects should be compared to past or lesser 
disturbed conditions(e.g., during pre-contact or pre-industrial periods) as opposed to current 
conditions which may already represent accumulated impacts and therefore serve as a 
flawed baseline against which to assess project-specific impacts. 
»	 Additionally, thresholds of acceptable change, identified by First Nations themselves, should 
be incorporated into cultural cumulative effects assessments in order to better understand 
discrepancies, where they exist, between the current condition of a given cultural right and 
the appropriate baseline against which those conditions can be evaluated. This can also point 
to ways in which the practicability of a cultural right may be ameliorated or diminished.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
34
Approaches to Characterize Cumulative 
Effects on Indigenous Cultural Rights
Often, cumulative effects are determined through three steps: 
1.	 Characterization of current conditions (see Tool #1: Identifying and inventorying cultural rights).
 
2.	 “Backcasting” or the establishment of historical context and change over time from a point 
in the past to the current conditions. It is important to keep in mind that backcasting is a 
challenging process requiring the collection of large amounts of information that is not always 
readily available or easily accessed; an extensive backcasting effort may require substantial 
time and resources.
3.	 Determination of potential project-specific impacts to cultural rights, including consideration of 
likely future impacts and changes (see Tool #3 Identifying Impact Pathways, Conducting Effects 
Characterization, and Evaluating the Severity of Potential Impacts). 
The following list represents a selection of common approaches and methods available to First Nations 
to aid in the characterization of cumulative effects on  cultural rights. These approaches can be used on 
their own or, preferably, in combination with one another (see the description of triangulation in Tool #1). 
The selection of an approach should be grounded in a First Nation’s worldview, community processes, 
needs, and available capacity and time. Contextual factors such as the Nation’s degree of alienation from 
the land and the type and location of the project should inform the selection of an appropriate approach. 
For example, while on-territory data collection may be an effective means of collecting information on 
past cumulative effects to cultural rights, if a community is alienated from their territory, such on-territory 
data collection may not be possible. Instead, a desktop-based exercise, such as a review of compiled 
community data and records may be more useful.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
35
Direct Community Engagement 
Sessions and Surveys 
Historical context and changes over time can be determined by engaging directly with Knowledge 
Holders, Elders, and community members. Through the inclusion of oral histories and stories, 
past practices, resources, values, and way of life, etc., can be determined. This can be done purely 
qualitatively through the collection of narratives/oral history. In addition, in some cases First Nations 
may choose to canvas members about how the quality and quantity of resources and experiences 
related to cultural rights have changed over time, overall and/or in specific culturally important 
locations. This can be accomplished, for example, using structured surveys where community 
members compare the quality and quantity of resources over time (e.g., “out of 10, where 10 is 
excellent, how was access to good moose habitat in the 1960s”, with the same question posed to 
participants for subsequent decades).
On-Territory Data Collection
On-territory data collection, conducted in collaboration with Indigenous community members, offers 
a unique opportunity to draw out firsthand observations, values, and changes over time. By traversing 
the territory together, community members can share their intimate knowledge of the land, revealing 
valuable insights into its significance, usage, and evolving dynamics. This approach fosters a deeper 
understanding of the community’s connection to their territory and ensures that their perspectives 
and experiences are accurately represented in research and decision-making processes. 
On-territory data collection can take the form of a map. Unlike digital mapping methods, this 
approach uses paper maps, GPS devices, or smartphones/tables for mapping, rather than relying 
solely on digital tools such as Google Earth or ArcGIS. During the interviews, participants survey the 
area and discuss important cultural or environmental features, past and present community uses, 
oral histories associated with particular sites, and potential future uses of the area. Additionally, 
these interviews are typically recorded, and participants may collect additional media such as photos 
or videos to add to the database. 
Compiled Community Data and Records
Community data and records may be useful in the establishment of historical context and changes 
over time. Reviewing records of things such as traditional territories, camping sites, trapping lines 
and hunting grounds supports the determination of whether and how these cultural practices have 
changed over time and as a result of past developments.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
36
Ethnographic Data and Oral History 
Ethnographic data refers to qualitative information collected through ethnographic research 
methods (e.g., field notes, interviews, observations, photographs, videos, artifacts, etc.). Oral 
histories are traditional narratives and stories that preserve cultural knowledge, traditions, and 
histories that are passed down through generations within communities. They provide rich 
narratives and cultural insights that highlight the historical and contemporary significance of the 
lands and waters that Indigenous peoples occupy. By documenting traditional practices, land uses, 
and knowledge transmission over time, this information enables researchers to identify things such 
as cumulative effects on the territory, for example changes in biodiversity, cultural landscapes, or 
resource availability. 
Past Project Data and Records 
As major project impact assessment requires the determination of baseline conditions, past project 
assessments may provide insight to how baseline conditions have changed over time as a result 
of project construction, operation, and decommissioning. It is important to note that many of these 
reports rely heavily on biophysical indicators (such as fish populations, toxicology, water flows, etc.) 
and have rarely included intangible cultural values (such as sense of place, identity, knowledge 
transmission, etc.).  
Ecological Stock and Trend Data
Stock and trend data may be available both qualitatively from First Nation members through recall, 
and from scientific studies that have been conducted over time. Understanding if the amount of fish 
and wildlife in the First Nation’s traditional territory has gone up, down or stayed in similar population 
numbers over time is important, as is understanding factors influencing changes in these stocks 
over time. 
Mapping Data Showing Changes over 
Time in Land Use
The compilation of cartographic and other data about land cover and use are valuable in 
establishing changes in habitat availability and suitability over time, and both areal and linear 
disturbance levels where industrial, municipal, agricultural or infrastructure developments have 
been introduced to a First Nation’s territory. The calculation of the amount of territory that is still 
available for “quiet enjoyment” of the natural environment can be critical to understanding the 
degree to which cultural rights are still practicable. And the presentation of these changes is 
inherently a visual exercise, allowing the First Nation members and other decision makers to see 
what has been lost and what remains in a way that the written word struggles to convey.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
37
Summary
Cumulative effects assessment includes the consideration of 
impacts that arise from incremental and/or combined effects from 
past, present, and future human actions. This Tool can help develop 
an understanding and contextualization of a proposed project with 
respect to past changes, developments, challenges, etc. This may 
result in a more detailed assessment of potential project impacts  
to culture. 
For further information, some examples of successful Indigenous cumulative effects 
studies include the resources listed below. While these cumulative effects assessment 
are not specific to cultural rights, the approaches maybe applied to a cultural context:
»
Samson Cree Nation Cumulative Effects Assessment: Updated Analysis for 
Selected Valued Components Specific to the Edson Mainline Expansion Project
»
Ktunaxa Nation Title, Rights and Interests: Revelstoke Generating Station Unit 6 
Project Environmental Assessment Certificate Application (see in Part C)
»
Cumulative Effects on the Aboriginal Rights and Interests of Samson Cree 
Nation: A preliminary desktop analysis of Valued Components in the project affected 
area of NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL) – 2021 System Expansion Project
»
Okanagan National Alliance Title, Rights and Interests Submission to the 
Revelstoke Generating Unit 6 Project Environmental Assessment Certificate 
Application: A study that implements a cumulative-effects lens to holistically assess 
project effects on the rights and interests of the Okanagan Nation
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
38
Identifying Impact  
Pathways, Conducting  
an Effects Characterization, 
and Evaluating the Severity 
of Potential Impacts 
Step 3 of Undertaking an Assessment  
of Impacts to Cultural Rights and Values
Tool 3
Spirit of the Land
Following the identification and documentation of cultural rights, and the establishment of the degree 
of cumulative effects on those cultural rights to date, the next step in undertaking an assessment of a 
major project’s potential effects on cultural rights are:
1.	 To establish valid impact pathways whereby the project in question has the potential to 
interact, both positively and negatively, with the exercise of cultural rights. 
2.	 Conduct an assessment of committed-to project mitigation measures to see if and how they 
will reduce potential project impacts to cultural rights. This will result in the determination of 
residual impacts to the cultural rights.
3.	 Conduct an effects characterization using an approach acceptable to the First Nation. In this 
characterization, each potential residual impact on cultural rights from the proposed project 
can be assessed according to characterization criteria such as likelihood, magnitude, and 
scale, among others. This will allow for a determination of severity of impacts.
While conducting an effects characterization and determining the severity of impacts, and any 
time thereafter, First Nations reserve the right to identify additional conditions to avoid, reduce, or 
compensate for residual impacts on cultural rights that need to be applied over and above those 
already committed to by the proponent or applied by the Crown. 
Purpose
Identifying impact pathways is necessary for evaluating the potential 
effectiveness of committed-to mitigation measures: it allows for an accurate 
assessment of how mitigation measures will potentially intersect with impact 
pathways to reduce project impacts on cultural rights, whether residual 
impacts will remain after the application of mitigation measures, and what 
the implications of those residual impacts will be for cultural rights.
Subsequently, a clear and thorough assessment of residual effects through and effects 
characterization will help a First Nation engaging in an Environmental Assessment to determine the 
acceptability of residual impacts and identify specific areas where additional avoidance, mitigation, 
and restitution measures are required. While avoidance is generally the preferred option, it is not 
always possible and impact minimization through mitigation measures must be applied. Restitution 
may be needed if avoidance and minimizations are not possible or sufficiently effective, and adverse 
effects on cultural rights remain after mitigation (see Tool #4: Accommodating Potential Impacts and 
Cumulative Effects Through Restitution). It is also important to note that avoidance/mitigation and 
restitution are not mutually exclusive approaches. In fact, it is rare for a project’s mitigation measures 
to fully reduce all impacts, even where mitigation measures are robust, and First Nations have had 
input. An effects characterization will allow a Nation to determine ways that avoidance, mitigation, and 
restitution can be used in unison to address residual impacts to cultural rights. 
39
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
40
Terminology
The following terminology is used throughout this Tool. Definitions for each term are provided below. 
»	 Avoidance: Avoidance is the most preferred approach of dealing with potential project impacts as 
it would see an impact not occur at all. Avoidance can also be the most difficult type of measure to 
apply because it often requires the project to be substantially modified or expensive and/or time-
consuming measures adopted. 
»	 Cultural Indicators: Cultural indicators are measurable or otherwise observable parameters used to 
measure and report on the status and trends of Indigenous culture. Cultural indicators are used to 
provide qualitative and quantitative data to support evaluating the significance of potential impacts of 
major projects on culture. 
»	 Effects: changes to the environment or to health, social or economic conditions and the positive and 
negative consequences of these changes
»	 Mitigation: Mitigation is any action that is designed to avoid, reduce the severity of, or offset/
compensate for a potential project effect. This can be done in many different ways, from modifying 
the project design or moving the location of project components, to improving environmental 
management systems, among many other options. Monitoring is not considered mitigation.
»	 Residual Effects: the adverse effects of a project on a Valued Component or Right likely to remain 
after committed-to mitigation measures are applied; effectively the effects of a project that are 
unlikely to be fully mitigated with committed-to measures in place
»	 Resilience: The ability to be insulated from or recover from a harm or a disturbance. A person, 
community, or environment with low resilience is more likely to be seriously adversely affected by a 
development than one with higher resilience.
»	 Restitution: Restitution involves financial com spensation for impacts, the restoration/protection of 
the impacted cultural right, or another form of offsetting that is meaningful compensation for and 
adverse impact on (in this case) a cultural right.
»	 Risk Perception: The judgements that people make about the characteristics and severity of a risk. 
Risk perception can be influenced by the historical, social, religious, cultural, political, and economic 
factors associated with those at risk and their understanding of the physical works and activities that 
create the risk, and therefore varies among different population sub-groups and individuals.
»	 Valued Component: cultural, environmental, economic, health, social, and other elements of the 
natural and human environment that is identified as having scientific, social, cultural, economic, 
historical, archaeological, or aesthetic importance.27 
»	 Vulnerability: The lessened ability to withstand the effects of a harm or disturbance due to adverse 
effects suffered in the pre-Project circumstance. Related to the concept of resilience. Typically (but 
not universally), high vulnerability is correlated with low resilience and low vulnerability is correlated 
with high resilience.
27	 Impact Assessment Agency of Canada, “Technical Guidance for Assessing Cumulative Environmental Effects under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, 2012,”  
	
guidance - legislative, March 5, 2018, https://www.canada.ca/en/impact-assessment-agency/services/policy-guidance/assessing-cumulative-environmental-effects- 
	
ceaa2012.html.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
41
Principles
Drawing off of, and building on, the guidance principles contained in the FNMPC’s Major Project 
Assessment Standard (2019) and Guidance Appendices to the Major Projects Assessment Standard 
(2020), The following principles that may be relevant when identifying impact pathways, conducting an 
effects assessment, and evaluating the severity of potential impacts on cultural rights.
»
The identification of impact pathways and the characterization of effects and determination 
of severity should be grounded in the First Nation’s legal system and should take into 
consideration any policies, laws, and norms that are applicable.
»
Impacts on cultural rights, and on the effective exercise of those rights, have complex 
pathways and outcomes; adequate time and care must be taken to meaningfully assess 
impact pathways in a way that acknowledges and addresses this complexity.
»
First Nations can call for a “Key Line of Inquiry” approach, were greater time, funding and 
focus are placed on priority concerns identified by affected First Nations.
»
Impacts to both tangible and intangible cultural values should be considered.
»
The approach to identifying project pathways and conducting an effects assessment should 
prioritize and emphasize community-identified concerns related to potential project effects 
on their cultural rights. Emphasis should be placed on the protection of those groups who will 
be most affected by project impacts and those most vulnerable to impacts.
»
The metrics (e.g., likelihood, magnitude, etc.) applied in the effects characterization should 
be selected based on the First Nation’s preferences and guided by the First Nation’s specific 
concerns.  By developing a community-focussed approach for evaluating the potential 
impacts of major projects, including relevant historical context, community-focused criteria, 
and community-focused thresholds, communities will be more effective in defining cultural 
impacts in their own terms.
»
The characterization of various potential project impacts should be assessed in a consistent 
and methodological fashion, using a schema developed by the impacted Indigenous group.
»
Impacts must be interpreted through the filter of culture holders, as the severity of impacts on 
cultural resources is culturally defined.
»
Each Nation may approach the evaluation of severity differently. In some cases, Nations 
may choose not to determine severity of impacts to each separate category of right and may 
instead emphasize the severity of the project as a whole and seek solutions that best defend 
their cultural rights in face of the project.
»
Thresholds of severity may be designed by the community in and may reflect impacts to 
spiritual practice, traditional use, and subjective community-defined ways of living.
»
The assessment of the severity of potential adverse and beneficial cultural effects arising 
from a proposed project must be given the same effort and prioritization as biophysical and 
socio-economic effects.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
42
Recommended Approaches to Identifying 
Impact Pathways, Conducting an Effects 
Characterization, and Evaluating the 
Severity of Potential Impacts 
The following list represents a selection of best practice approaches available to First Nations to aid in 
identifying impact pathways, conducting effects characterisation, and evaluating the severity of potential 
impacts on cultural rights. 
First, identifying project-specific impact pathways will support a clear picture of how anticipated project 
impacts will affect relevant cultural rights and practices by mapping the direct and indirect relationships 
between them. This step also helps visualize the complex relationships between impacts and the 
diverse aspects (access, availability, preference, etc.) of cultural rights and practices.  Once these 
pathways have been established, they can then be used to determine how, how effectively, and to what 
extent committed-to mitigations measures will interact with pathway components and relationships 
to address potential project impacts. Subsequently, residual impacts, i.e., those impacts which remain 
after taking mitigations measures into account, can be evaluated for severity by conducting an effects 
characterisation.
These approaches can be used on their own, or in combination with one another. Selection of the 
approach should be grounded in a First Nation’s worldview and needs. Contextual factors used to ground 
the identification of impact pathways, effects characterization, and evaluation of severity may include, but 
are not limited to, the Group’s values and policies concerning such things as:
»
The vulnerability of cultural rights and practices
»
Existing threats to cultural rights and practices 
»
The current geographic scope of cultural rights and practices
»
The size, type, and location of the proposed project
»
The Group’s prior experience with similar or related projects
»
Existing community policies and plans
»
Cumulative changes being experienced by the Nation
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
43
Grounding in an Indigenous group’s worldview is important as impact pathways, effects 
characterization, and determinations of severity may not be conceptualized by a First Nation in the 
same way as typically understood by proponents and the Crown in EA. As a result, impacts and 
their resulting severity, as understood by a First Nation, may not be assessable using traditional EA 
processes and instead must be assessed through community deliberation.
Identifying Impact Pathways
The structure provided below outlines a generalized methodology for identifying impact pathways, as 
used in EA processes28. First Nations may also wish to develop an entirely different way of approaching 
impact pathways or modify what is offered below.
In an impact pathway, the source is the activity or event that threatens a cultural right. The source may 
be the project as a whole, or a specific project element (e.g., a specific project facility or an influx of 
project works in the area). The source reaches the receptor, the cultural right(s) that will be affected, 
through a pathway. The pathway is the mechanisms through which a change to a cultural right occurs 
and may be more than one step. An example of an impact pathway is provided below.
Source
The designated 
project or physical 
activity
Source
The designated 
project or physical 
activity
Pathway
The mechanism 
of change in the 
environment
Pathway
Reduction in water 
flows in the river 
and increased 
freeze-up in winter
Pathway
Reduced ability 
of fish to navigate 
river, and 
increased mortality
Receptor
Reduction in 
the ability of 
community 
members to catch 
fish necessary for 
subsitence and 
ceremony
Receptor
The effect on a 
cultural right(s)
28	 Drawn from Canada, “Technical Guidance for Assessing Cumulative Environmental Effects under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, 2012.”
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
44
Considering Mitigations and  
Their Effectiveness
After an impact pathway has been established, mitigation measures can be assessed to see if they 
will reduce impacts on receptors, or cultural rights. Mitigation measures generally focus on either 
changing the factors or triggers that lead to adverse impacts (i.e., change the pathway). Alternatively, 
mitigation measures can strengthen the Nation’s own cultural pathways that nurture and strengthen 
cultural rights and values. For a mitigation measure to be considered effective, it should:
»
Consider all possible alternatives
»
Include culture holders as partners in the identification of appropriate mitigation, 
implementation, monitoring, and feedback
»
Be transparent and specific
»
Be adequately funded, resourced, and staffed
»
Be precautionary
»
Deal with impacts regardless of where they may be located
»
Have outcomes that are measurable against goals
After taking into consideration mitigations and their effectiveness, residual impacts to rights can be 
determined through an effects characterization and severity determination. 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
45
Conducting Effects Characterization  
and Determining Severity
Standard EA Significance Criteria 
One of the key factors used to determine the acceptability of a proposed project is consideration 
of the severity its potential adverse effects. EA has developed more or less standard methods to 
evaluate significance, but it may be more appropriate to develop community-specific metrics. The 
box below summarizes standard EA criteria and presents several options for developing community-
specific metrics.
Standard EA 
significance criteria
»   Context: The current and future vulnerability and resilience of the value to 
change (e.g. rarity of similar values in the territory, past industrial effects and 
change over time).
»   Magnitude: The expected scale and/or severity of the effect (e.g. intensity of 
community concern, perceived risk, extent of change in use).
»   Extent: The spatial area over which the effect is expected to occur (e.g. extent 
of affected water courses, movement patterns of wildlife and land users, 
boundaries of traditional/family use areas, zone of avoidance)
»   Duration: The length of time the effect persists (e.g. generational effects, 
knowledge transmission, time to repair and re-establish relationships between 
people, animals).
»   Frequency: How often the residual effect occurs (e.g. timing with respect to 
important seasons, animal movements, and cultural activities).
»   Reversibility: Whether the residual effect on the VC can be reversed (e.g. 
permanent loss of Indigenous Knowledge for effects lasting longer than one 
generation).
»   Affected Populations: The distribution of the effect amongst the population 
of affected people. Effects may be evenly distributed or be disproportionately 
experienced by certain subpopulations. 
Criteria used by 
the Mackenzie 
Valley Environmental 
Impact Review Board 
(MVEIRB)
»   The magnitude, or degree, of change of the impacts that might be caused
»   The geographical area that the impact might affect
»   The duration that the impact might have, i.e., how long will the effect occur
»   The reversibility of the impact that might occur
»   The nature of the impact, i.e., how important is the component that the impact 
will affect? 
»   The possibility that the impact could occur
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
46
1.	The “Reasonable Person” Approach: Setting thresholds for what is considered 
significant by asking whether a reasonable person would consider the change to be 
significant. For example — would a reasonable person consider a 20% drop in yearly 
fish catch significant? If yes, then that is significant. 
2.	The “Qualitative, Value-Specific” Approach: Adopting defined, yet still largely 
qualitative, significance thresholds. Each threshold has the benefit of a narrative and 
measurability specific to the value. For example:
1.	Water – a water management regime that lacks adherence to Indigenous water 
values and norms and does not support a pre-contact range of fish and fish 
habitat and other resource values.
2.	Fish – high level of reduction in the distribution, abundance, and population 
health of a culturally important fish species; reduction in habitat for critical life 
stages of any culturally important fish species.
3.	The “Deference to Most Sensitive Receptors” Approach: This approach suggests 
that if affected Indigenous groups (the most sensitive receptors in the human 
environment) themselves deem the likely outcome significant, it is therefore significant. 
This relies heavily on subjective inputs of the most affected parties.
4.	The “Unacceptable Risk” Approach: This approach holds that where there is a lack of 
confidence in predictions and/or the potential for extremely high magnitude outcomes 
is present, that a likelihood lower than 50% (in other words, where the impact outcome 
is less likely to occur than not occur) may still be an unacceptable risk, and likelihood 
greater than 50% is not critical to determining whether the effect is significant. This is 
particularly important for extremely high magnitude outcomes like loss of the use of a 
river or a critical cultural site due to project effects.
5.	The “Indigenous Laws and Norms” Approach: This approach holds that changes 
to any value, and all values in combination, from a project and associated cumulative 
effects, may impact on the ability to adhere to the laws and norms of Indigenous 
peoples. If, for example, a natural law is that water should be allowed to run its natural 
course unimpeded, any changes to the hydrological regime through activities such as 
dams and impoundment of rivers, may be deemed significant, because the law is being 
“broken.”
6.	The “Sufficiency of Resources” Approach: This approach holds that the full 
practice of Indigenous rights reasonably includes access to sufficient lands, aquatic 
environments, and resources in which the rights can be exercised. “Sufficient” refers 
not only to quantity but quality and is evaluated from the perspective of what is 
required to fulfill not only subsistence requirements, but also cultural needs, of the 
First Nation now and into the future.
7.	The “Contribution to Reconciliation” Approach: This is a new approach suggesting 
that given the amount of existing, often Crown-caused, damage to Indigenous lives, 
lands, culture and resources, Crown decisions to approve 
8.	The “Rights Infringement’ Approach: This approach would identify significant effects 
where a project caused (or added additional effects to already existing) infringements 
of asserted or recognized rights.
Options for 
community-specific 
metrics
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
47
Heat Mapping
Similar to the mapping processes identified as potential options for Tool #1 (Density of Use Maps and 
Mapping of High Priority Areas), Heat Mapping represents a visual expression of where areas that may 
be impacted by a proposed project overlap with spaces and places of heightened Indigenous cultural 
value. Cultural heat maps can illustrate geographic locations where project impacts are likely to 
occur in proximity to or in direct overlap with areas that have greater reported cultural rights practice 
and value. While useful as a flagging tool, it is important to note that heat mapping fails to accurately 
represent cultural rights which are not tied to a specific geographic location. If areas of heightened 
overlay between project effects and cultural values are identified, more detailed, community-led 
qualitative analysis, including on-territory mapping among other activities, may be necessary to fully 
flesh out the severity of impacts.
Risk Matrix
A risk matrix is a visual depiction that draws on standard EA significance criteria. By cross comparing 
the likelihood of an impact occurring to the magnitude of predictable impact, the resulting risk and 
severity can be determined.
High Likelihood
Low Magnitude
Medium Magnitude
High Magnitude
Moderate Likelihood
Low Likelihood
Summary
This Tool provides some options and guidance for the identification of 
impact pathways and the characterization of effects and determination 
of severity. While some standard approaches are provided, it is 
important to note that each First Nation may which to approach the 
identification of impact pathways and the characterization of effects in 
a different way. For example, when determining the severity of residual 
effects, it may be beneficial to emphasize the severity of the project 
as a whole in some cases. In others, it may be better to determine 
the severity of impact to the category of right, or to individual cultural 
rights. This process of characterizing project effects and determining 
impact severity can help a First Nation to define cultural impacts 
in their own terms. It is therefore important that the identification 
of impact pathways and the characterization of residual effects are 
grounded in a community’s historical context (as determined in Tool 
#2). This will allow for the consideration of cumulative effects and 
varying thresholds of change. 
48
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
49
Addressing  
Residual Impacts 
to Cultural Rights 
Step 4 of Undertaking an Assessment  
of Impacts to Cultural Rights and Values
Tool 4
Spirit of the Land
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
50
Once residual effects of a project are determined through an effects characterization and severity 
determination, they must be addressed. First Nation systems should serve as the vehicles for assessing 
the decisions presented in the context of responding to impacts. This is done by assessing whether 
certain impacts of a project can be avoided, and if so, how; whether mitigation measures can be 
implemented to reduce impacts; or whether restitution is required for impacts that can’t be mitigated. In 
some cases, where potential impacts are unacceptable, the conclusion of this analysis may be to seek 
the termination of the project. The FNMPC recognizes that the EA system is a flawed and evolving set of 
regulations and processes. We seek, however, to provide transparent information that Nations can use at 
their discretion to make their own determinations about consent, mitigation, and compensation.
In general, avoidance of potential residual impacts is preferred option. However, this is not always 
possible and impact minimization must be applied through mitigation measures. Restitution may be 
needed if avoidance and minimization are not possible or sufficiently effective and adverse effects on 
cultural rights remain. It is important to note that mitigation and restitution are not mutually exclusive 
approaches. In fact, it is rare for a project’s mitigation measures to fully reduce all impacts, even where 
mitigation measures are robust and First Nations have been incorporated into their design and review. In 
these cases, mitigation and restitution measures can be taken in unison. Each Nation can determine the 
focus of efforts in this regard and choose which measures to pursue. 
The decision to seek restitution should be taken only after careful consideration, as it may impact the 
Nation’s position in other realms. For example, if a Nation seeks to protect its cultural rights in a Canadian 
court, previous acceptance of restitution may prejudice their legal position. However, in cases where 
litigation is not being considered, restitution can be a way for a Nation to receive compensation if the 
project proponent is unable or unwilling (alone and in combination with Crown conditions or measures) 
to sufficiently reduce project impacts to the Nation’s cultural rights. 
There are a variety of forms of restitution. This Tool identifies three primary forms of restitution for 
impacts to cultural rights: cultural restoration, cultural offsetting, and financial compensation. The 
following diagram illustrates these three options for restitution.
Cultural  
Restitution
Cultural Offsetting
(Tool 4)
e.g., Socio-Economic 
or Socio-Cultural  
Programs and Activities
e.g., Land Swaps or 
Repatriation Programs
Financial 
Compensation
(Tool 5)
e.g,. Cultural Site or 
Landscape Restoration/
Protection Initiatives
e.g,. Targeted 
Language and Cultural 
programming
Cultural Restoration  
and/or Protection
(Tool 4)
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
51
This diagram illustrates three primary means of restitution: restoration, offsetting, or compensation. 
Assessing compensation for residual impacts to cultural rights is the subject of Tool #5.29   
Cultural Restoration is any action that works to directly restore or return an impacted cultural right, or 
aspects of the cultural right, back to a desired condition. Unlike offsetting, restoration involves actions 
or investments that are directly targeted at restoring the same specific cultural values (e.g., a sacred 
site, or degree of language use in a community) that have been impacted. Cultural restoration may be 
directed at both a geographically situated set of cultural values, such as a cultural landscape, or at a less 
geographically situated set of cultural values, such as language retention.
In contrast, the Tool defines Cultural Offsetting as a form of restitution that is not directly linked to the 
specific geographic location or specific kind of cultural value being impacted. In this Tool, the term of 
“offsetting” is used more generally than how the concept of habitat offsetting is used in biophysical 
Environmental Assessment. Rather, it is defined as an action that works indirectly to address the lost or 
diminished opportunity to receive benefit from, or to exercise, a cultural right. 
Restoration of a geographically 
situated set of cultural values
When, in response to a loss or 
degradation of a geographically 
situated set of cultural values, 
environmental and/or structural 
restoration investments are made to 
assist recovery of values important 
to the retention or practice of cultural 
rights in the same geographic vicinity. 
matters most to them 
Restoration of lost or infringed 
cultural right that is not necessarily 
geographically situated
When cultural loss is restored through 
programs, developments, projects, 
policies, etc. that seek to restore the 
same aspect of culture, e.g., language 
programs to address anticipated 
adverse effects on language 
transmission.
Restoration
29	 For the purposes of this tool, compensation is defined as providing financial compensation based on an assigned monetary value, preferably as defined by the affected First  
	
Nation, for the lost or diminished opportunity to exercise a cultural right.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
52
That is, here the concept of an offset is an action that is different in nature and extent from the dimension 
of culture that is being impacted. For example, project impacts to a fishing site may be “offset” by the 
establishment of protected area in a different part of the Nation’s territory to support for other cultural 
values or activities, e.g., hunting and trapping. In this hypothetical case, while the protected area has a 
different kind of value from the fishing site, and while the protected area doesn’t “restore” the impacts on 
the fishing site, it is deemed by the impacted Nation to provide an acceptable degree of restitution. 
Hence, the main distinction between how the concepts of restoration and offsetting are used in this 
Tool is that restoration is directly focussed on restoring the specific cultural right that is being impacted, 
with “like for like”, while offsetting provides a more general form of non-monetary restitution that while 
deemed generally equivalent in compensatory value to what is being lost, it provides a different kind of 
cultural value or benefit from the cultural right being impacted.
It is important to note that in the area of intangible culture, there may be similar types of programs and 
activities to address both restoration/protection and offsetting initiatives (e.g., culture camps or language 
immersion). In one case they may be needed to address an immediate risk or impact posed by a specific 
project (restoration/protection initiatives). In other cases, it may not be directly related to the project but 
viewed as a preferred form of offsetting by a Nation.
Offsetting for a lost or infringed cultural right that is may or may not be 
geographically situated
When a cultural loss is restituted through restoration investments, developments, 
programs, policies, etc. that are NOT directly tied to the impacted cultural right, e.g., 
development of a language centre as a form of offsetting loss of a trapline.
Offsetting
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
53
Terminology
The following terminology is used throughout this Tool. Definitions for each term are 
provided below. 
»
Cultural Offsetting: a form of non-monetary restitution that is not directly linked to 
the specific geographic location or specific kind of cultural value being impacted. 
These initiatives work indirectly to address the lost or diminished opportunity to 
receive benefit from, or to exercise, a cultural right.
»
Cultural Repatriation: processes that return lost cultural property (often tangible 
cultural heritage) to the rightful owners.
»
Cultural Restitution: processes that address residual adverse impacts on a cultural 
right or rights, including restoring the practicability of a cultural right to its original 
state, offsets of equal or greater value to cultural losses, or financial compensation 
for cultural losses.
»
Cultural Restoration/Protection: any action that works to directly restore or 
return an impacted cultural right, or aspects of the cultural right, back to a desired 
condition. These initiatives may be connected to either a specific geographic 
location or cultural right being impacted by a project and focuses on the protection 
and restoration/revitalization of specific cultural rights such as language, tangible 
cultural heritage, etc.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
54
Principles
The following principles may be considered when addressing residual cultural impacts:
»
There should be a focus on cultural impact avoidance as a priority, with adequate minimization and 
compensation measures demonstrably employed where impact avoidance cannot be assured.
»
Indigenous Nations should be included, or allowed to lead, the development and implementation 
of avoidance, mitigation, and restitution measures to ensure that they meet their needs and 
requirements.
»
Where avoidance of cultural impacts cannot be achieved, Indigenous communities should be 
involved in verifying the nature and magnitude of all residual adverse effects on culture prior to 
a determination being made on what accommodation measures (i.e., offsets, compensation) are 
required.
»
Addressing residual cultural impacts should include the consideration of reconciliation, namely the 
possibility and opportunity for potential beneficial impacts to culture arising from a project. A project 
should do more than “not harm” an Indigenous community; it should bring about a net benefit.
The following principles may be considered when pursuing avoidance of residual  
cultural impacts:
»
Indigenous Nations should be able to determine contexts in which impacts to cultural rights are 
non-negotiable and must be avoided at all costs. For example, there may be some locations so 
valued and sensitive that it is not possible to mitigate adverse effects to them through any means 
other than outright avoidance.
»
High-value cultural sites/cultural landscapes should be avoided and maintained intact with 
appropriately sized protective buffers placed around them, as determined by affected Indigenous 
Nations.
The following principle may be considered when pursuing mitigations for residual  
cultural impacts:
»
Cultural monitoring plans and their implementation must be agreed to and preferably conducted 
by the First Nation themselves. However, it must also be kept in mind that monitoring does not 
constitute a form of mitigation and should not be treated as such. 
The following principles may be considered when pursuing restitution for residual  
cultural impacts:
»
Restitution can take many forms, including, but not limited to, offsetting, restoration, and financial 
compensation.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
55
»
Negotiations about restoration, offsetting and compensation measures must be culturally sensitive 
and trauma-informed. It is important to observe cultural protocols when engaging in these 
negotiations.
»
The trade-offs between likely adverse impacts on a nation or community’s cultural rights and 
beneficial impacts in other areas of value to the same group must be:
•
Understood (i.e., well characterized with a relatively high degree of confidence in the 
predicted outcome, relatively free from uncertainty);
•
Shared with the First Nation in an acceptable format, and
•
Acceptable to the First Nation, with the appropriate formal consent processes set out by 
the Indigenous Nation.
»
Restitution practices, such as restoration of a cultural site, should be led - planned, managed, and 
implemented - by the affected First Nations themselves.
»
Wherever possible, restitution mechanisms should do more than simply reduce negative impacts, 
they should also ensure and promote benefits for the community.
»
When the impacted First Nation requests it, all reasonable efforts shall be given by all parties to 
find non-monetary restitution measures to protect or restore practicability of cultural rights, before 
considering financial compensation.
»
In determining the nature and extent of overall restitution owed to an impacted community, 
cumulative effects must be taken into consideration. Crown agencies may be required to get 
involved, including in the identification of complementary measures to protect and promote 
Indigenous cultural rights that the Crown will support over and above proponent commitments and 
Crown conditions on the proponent.
»
Indigenous communities should be able to identify their preferred means of restitution in 
accordance with their own institutions and governance systems.
»
In order to allow Indigenous communities to identify their preferred means of restitution, they 
must be provided with the time, funds, and resources necessary to make these assessments. 
This includes conducting relevant studies, engaging with leadership and community members, 
determining what works best for the Nation, and funds for engagement with the proponent and 
consultation with the Crown to ensure that measures are adopted.
 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
56
Recommended Approaches for 
Addressing Residual Impacts to 
Indigenous Cultural Rights
The selection of an approach to address residual impacts to cultural rights must be grounded in an 
Indigenous Group’s context, history, and legal systems, as well as existing policies, protocols, norms, 
and laws. As previously identified, avoidance is the most commonly preferred form of addressing 
residual cultural impacts. In the event that avoidance is not possible, mitigation and/or restitution 
mechanisms can be implemented. 
Mitigation Measures
As noted above, mitigation measures are often developed through collaboration and engagement 
with the proponent and/or relevant government agencies. While the focus of this Tool centres 
on determining opportunities for restitution, it is important to note that, at a minimum, mitigation 
measures should focus on either changing the actors or triggers that can lead to adverse impacts; or 
alternatively, strengthening the Nation’s cultural resilience by supporting conditions that nurture and 
strengthen cultural rights. 
In accordance with general EA policy, for mitigation measures to be considered effective, they should:
»
Consider all possible alternatives
»
Include culture holders as partners in the identification of appropriate mitigation, 
implementation, monitoring, and feedback
»
Be transparent and specific
»
Be adequately funded, resourced, and staffed
»
Be precautionary
»
Deal with impacts regardless of where they may be located
»
Have outcomes that are measurable against goals
»
Be adaptable
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
57
Restitution Measures
In general, the deliberation and decision-making about potentially appropriate and 
preferred restitution measures should be conducted internally within the First Nation, 
prior to engagement with the Proponent and/or government. For the sake of this Tool, 
we have identified three forms of restitution: cultural restoration, cultural offsetting, and 
financial compensation. These forms of restitution can overlap and the desired measure 
for restitution may be a combination of all three. 
While each Nation will have different requirements for the purposes of restitution, 
informed by its own unique needs and priorities, the act of determining the Nation’s 
preferred path to restitution might take will likely involve some or all of the following 
steps. The following decision tree (Figure 1) illustrates the key steps in one approach to 
determining a desirable restitution mechanism or mechanisms. The steps are described 
in further detail in Figure 1.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
58
Figure 1: Form of Restitution Decision Tree
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
59
Step 1:
Can the damaged cultural right be restored/protected? Yes/No
Yes – Restoration (see Step 3)
No – Offsetting or Financial Compensation (see Step 2)
Determine whether restoration and/or protection opportunities are feasible. The 
severity of potential impacts of the proposed major project on the cultural right(s) will 
be a factor in this determination.  Restoration opportunities within the impacted area 
may not be feasible or practical in all contexts, and if so, offsetting may offer the best 
options for effective means of restitution.  Where there is an opportunity to invest 
in the recovery and/or renewal of a cultural area or place, or a non-geographically 
situated cultural right, the Nation’s own policies and laws can give direction. For 
example, where a project has the potential to adversely effects an area that a Nation 
has identified in its land-use plan for important cultural use, restoration and/or 
protection measures should be prioritized.  
Step 2:   
If it’s not feasible to restore a cultural area, is it acceptable and 
preferrable to pursue financial compensation over offsetting 
measures?  A Nation’s policies and laws in this area can serve as 
guidance in making this decision.
Yes – Financial Compensation (see Tool #5)
No – Offsetting (see Step 4)
Determine whether financial compensation is possible and/or desired by the 
community. Financial compensation may be difficult to calculate for intangible cultural 
values and is not always applicable. In some instances, offsetting mechanisms may 
provide a greater benefit to the preservation and protection of cultural values than 
financial compensation. Further information on the complexities and limitations of 
financial compensation is provided in Tool #5: A Model for Evaluating the Economic 
Value of Cultural Rights.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
60
Step 3: 
Are you seeking to restore/protect a geographically-situated 
cultural right (i.e., a specific site or landscape)?
Yes – Determine preferred geographically situated restoration measure(s) (e.g., cultural 
site or landscape restoration/protection initiatives), then continue to Step 5
No – Determine preferred non-geographically situated restoration measure(s) (e.g., 
general cultural continuity measures), then continue to Step 5
Determine what specific restoration and protection initiatives (e.g., fish habitat 
restoration project, establishment of a cultural centre) are necessary to rectify the 
impacts to cultural rights. General examples of restoration and protection initiatives 
are provided below, and a listing of example initiatives undertaken by Nations across 
Canada are included in Appendix A.
Some examples of geographically situated restoration measures (e.g., Cultural Site or 
Landscape Restoration/Protection Initiatives) include:
»
Revitalization of natural landscapes, local vegetation, and native fauna within the 
project-affected area with the same cultural values that support the continued 
or enhanced exercise of the same cultural right being impacted;
»
Restoring the project area to a certain quality following project-closure; and
»
Targeted cultural programs and activities within the project area, such as 
language programs and culture camps, aimed and designed at supporting and/
or restoring resilience in cultural dimensions that may be adversely affected.
Some examples of non-geographically situated restoration and protection initiatives 
include:
»
Enhancing or protecting key cultural areas outside of the project affected area 
that are used for the exercise of the cultural right being impacted; and
»
Targeted cultural programs and activities outside of the project area, such as 
language programs and culture camps, aimed and designed at supporting and/
or restoring resilience in cultural dimensions that may be adversely affected.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
61
Step 4: 
Are you seeking to offset a geographically-situated cultural 
right (i.e., a specific site or landscape)?
Yes – Determine preferred geographically situated offsetting measure(s) (e.g., land-for-
land offsets and/or restoration programs), then continue to Step 5
No – Determine preferred non-geographically situated offsetting measure(s) (e.g.,  
socio-economic and/or socio-cultural programs and activities), then continue to Step 5
Determine what specific types of offsetting initiatives (e.g., activity/program, land swap) 
are necessary to rectify the impacts to cultural rights and bring the community back into 
balance. General examples of offsetting initiatives are provided below, and a listing of 
initiatives undertaken by Nations across Canada are included in Appendix B.
Some examples of geographically situated offsetting measures, such as Land-for-Land 
Offsets and Restoration Programs include:
»
Legal administrative, land transfer and/or land-purchase financing to support 
preservation of an area/landscape/location within the project area with different 
cultural values that support the continued or enhanced exercise of cultural 
rights;
»
Providing long-term funding to support ecological restoration and stewardship 
programs for areas that support different cultural rights; and
»
Return of (off-reserve) lands to community control and jurisdiction.
Some examples of non-geographically situated offsetting programs and activities, such 
as Socio-Economic and/or Socio-Cultural Programs and Activities include:
»
Funding community project and initiatives (including long-term funding to 
support programs such as cultural camps for elders and youth);
»
Repatriation of cultural legacy objects and belongings;
»
Long-term supports for language revitalization programs;
»
Long-term supports for revitalization of cultural activities; and
»
Establishing a cultural “trust”.
»
Providing socio-economic benefits to a community;
»
Housing development and programs;
»
Training and education programs;
»
Establishment of mental health supports and infrastructure; and
»
Construction of permanent infrastructure such as offices, medical sites, 
schools, etc.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
62
Step 5: 
Seek to answer the question, what resources are necessary in 
order to establish and maintain the restitution measure? Then 
proceed to Step 6.
Once the desired form of restoration/protection or offsetting is determined, the 
Nation can determine the resources necessary in order to establish and maintain 
the program or activity. The resources required will be dependent on the form 
of restitution chosen, as well as the existing context of the Nation (i.e., existing 
resources, infrastructure, personnel, etc.). Some key factors to consider when 
determining the resources necessary for restitution mechanisms are provided 
below, subdivided the type of measure chosen. 
Restoration Measures
1.	 Geographically situated restoration/protection measures:
•
Size: What is the size of the land to be protected/restored? Does this factor 
in cumulative effects and current and future context? 
•
Quality: What is the existing quality of the site or landscape? 
•
Degree of protection: What is being protected (i.e., a patch of land, a 
species, an ecosystem, etc.)? What is the degree of protection? What are 
the consequences for continued impacts to the protected area?
•
What are the criteria for determining whether restoration/protection 
objectives have been achieved?
2.	 Non-geographically situated restoration/protection measures:
•
Duration: Is the initiative a one-off event (i.e., the construction of a school), 
or a long-term program? If it is a long-term program, how long will the 
initiative take place? (i.e., months, years, in perpetuity, etc.)
•
Target community group: Who is the restitution activity engaging with? (i.e., 
youth, elders, women, etc.)
•
Staffing: What sort of staffing is required? (i.e., maintenance staff, 
administration, honoraria, etc.)
•
Space/location: Where will the restitution activity or program take place? Is 
a new location required? Are there existing places that can be utilized?
•
Trajectory of program: Will the program or activity remain the same size for 
its duration? Is this a pilot program that will be developed and will grow with 
time?
•
What are the criteria for determining whether restoration/protection 
objectives have been achieved?
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
63
Offsetting Mechanisms
1.	 Geographically situated offsetting measures:
•
Size: What is the size of the land to be offset? Does this factor in cumulative 
effects and current and future context? 
•
Quality: In the case of a land swap or return, what is the quality of the new 
land in comparison to that which was lost? 
•
What are the criteria for determining whether restoration/protection 
objectives have been achieved?
2.	 Non-geographically situated offsetting measures:
•
Duration: Is the initiative a one-off event (i.e., the construction of a school), 
or a long-term program? If it is a long-term program, how long will the 
initiative take place? (i.e., months, years, in perpetuity, etc.)
•
Target community group: Is the initiative engaging with a specific 
community demographic? (i.e., youth, elders, women, etc.)? 
•
Staffing/Employment: What sort of staffing needs will the offsetting activity 
require? (i.e., maintenance staff, administration, honoraria, etc.). Will there 
be a construction component (i.e., for infrastructure developments) that 
community members can participate in? 
•
Space/location: Where initiative take place? Is a new location/new 
infrastructure required? Are there existing places that can be utilized?
•
What are the criteria for determining whether restoration or offsetting 
objectives have been achieved?
Once the resources required for a restitution initiative are determined, the total cost of 
the initiative can be determined and communicated to the proponent/government.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
64
Step 6: 
Seek to answer the question, who is the target group(s) 
responsible for funding the restitution measure(s)? Then 
proceed to Step 7
Determine how funding for the restoration/offsetting measure will be provided. 
Indigenous Groups may wish full control over how cultural restitution activities and 
projects are planned and implemented.
Step 7: 
Negotiate the desired restitution measure(s) with the 
proponent and/or Crown.
The First Nation may issue its own consent conditions or other requirements for 
measures associated with impacts on cultural right. However, in the Canadian EA 
system, this does not guarantee that those measures will be adopted. As such, 
they may need to be negotiated with the proponent and/ or Crown who will put 
forward their own expectations and limitations. To help in these negotiations, it 
is encouraged that the Nation draw on the past identification of priority cultural 
rights and the results of the effects characterization to clearly articulate their 
desired forms of restitution.   
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
65
Summary
It is important to note that the decision to seek restitutions should 
only be taken after careful consideration as it may impact the Nation’s 
position in other realms (e.g., seeking protection of cultural rights in 
the Canadian court system). This Tool identified three primary options 
for restitution:
1.	 Restoration: any act that works to directly restore or return an impacted cultural right 
(or aspects of the cultural right) back to a desired condition (i.e., rebuilding a sacred 
site that has been destroyed).
2.	 Offsetting: an action that works indirectly to address the lost or diminished 
opportunity to receive benefit from, or to exercise, a cultural right (e.g., offsetting 
impacts to a sacred area by transferring lands located elsewhere in the Nation’s 
territory to the control of the Nation).
3.	 Compensation (discussed further in Tool #5)
These forms of restitution or not mutually exclusive and can be used in combination to 
best support the protection and promotion of the Nation’s cultural rights and related 
interests. 
This Tool provides a decision tree to help Indigenous Groups determine a desirable 
restitution mechanism or mechanisms for project-specific and cumulative effects on 
cultural rights identified in Tools 1 to 3. 
Once the desired form of restoration or offsetting is determined, this Tool provides 
some guiding questions to help Indigenous Groups determine the resources necessary 
in order to establish and maintain the program or activity. The Nation may then 
determine how funding for the measure will be provided. This will help set up the First 
Nation to negotiate the desired form of restitution with the proponent/Crown. 
 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
66
Appendix A: 
Restoration/Protection Initiatives
The following examples of restoration/protection initiatives have been implemented by Indigenous 
Groups across Canada. While each program would be specifically designed to address a Nation’s 
key requirements and cultural context, the following examples may serve as a starting point for the 
determination of possible restitution initiatives a Nation may wish to establish:
»
Syilx Okanagan Nation, Bringing the Salmon Home! Columbia River Salmon Restoration Initiative 
(CRSRI): A program that reintroduces salmon, a species of profound importance for Syilx Okanagan 
Nation, into their historical spawning grounds in the Canadian portion of the Columbia River. Part of 
an agreement to integrate Indigenous voices and needs into the existing Columbia River Treaty, the 
program addresses impacts to salmon populations due to hydroelectric dams, development, and 
habitat disruption. In recent years, the program has resulted in the return of annual runs of hundreds 
of thousands of sockeye salmon and has contributed to the restoration of the Nations’ relationships 
with salmon. 
»
West Moberly First Nations and Saulteau First Nations, Klinse-Za Mountain Caribou Protection 
Partnership Agreement: A co-management program involving the direct participation of Nation 
members in the stewardship of the Klinse-Za caribou herd in the South Peace region of BC, where 
industrial development and other human activities have resulted in a drastic decline in caribou 
numbers over the past 50 years. The program protects a range of Klinse-Za caribou habitat and 
provides funding to the Nations to begin restoring habitat in the region and buying out private 
resource tenures in the designated area. Part of a partnership agreement between the First Nations, 
BC, and Canada, the program has resulted in an increase in the Klinse-Za caribou herd from a low of 
38 individuals in 2013 to 114 individuals today. The program is actively working to restore the Nations’ 
ability to hunt caribou as they previously had for thousands of years.   
»
Kaska First Nations, Dene K’éh Kusān Protected Area: A large Indigenous Protected and Conserved 
Area (IPCA) in the core of Kaska traditional territory designed to act as a buffer against climate 
change and biodiversity loss. The plan includes the development of relationships with land users 
currently operating in the proposed area. The Kaska Land Guardians will co-manage the protected 
area, creating jobs grounded in Kaska culture, legal principles, and value systems. The plan is part of 
ongoing co-management and planning agreements Kaska First Nations have with the BC government. 
It is designed to protect against further losses to land and culture for Kaska First Nations, to revive 
caribou populations, and to provide economic opportunities for Indigenous communities. The Dene 
K’éh Kusān plan will restore Kaska stewardship over traditional lands and empower communities to 
manage their territories.  
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
67
»
Coastal First Nations, Coastal Guardian Watchmen Support: A guardian program whereby the 
Watchmen uphold and enforce traditional and contemporary Indigenous laws passed down over 
countless generations, and work together to monitor, protect, and restore the cultural and natural 
resources of coastal territories. The Watchmen facilitate monthly conference calls and organize 
annual gatherings and learning exchanges that bring Guardians together to build relationships and 
share information and experiences. Although Coastal Guardian Watchmen programs provide ongoing 
monitoring across the Central and North Coasts and Haida Gwaii, each Nation is responsible for its 
own specific territory. The Costal Guardian Watchmen network safeguards Coastal Nations’ territories 
by gathering and sharing detailed regional knowledge about lands and waters, animal populations 
and habitats, and impacts from human activities. This knowledge can then be used to inform 
Nations’ decision-making regarding uses of lands and waters. NOTE: while monitoring is not typically 
considered mitigation, the development of - or increased investment in an existing - evergreen, well-
funded, strongly mandated monitoring program, can be considered mitigation, in part because it 
empowers the Indigenous Group above and beyond simply monitoring the project.
Appendix B:  
Offsetting Initiatives
The following examples of offsetting initiatives have been implemented by Indigenous Groups across 
Canada. While each program will be specifically designed to address a Nation’s key requirements and 
cultural context, the following examples may serve as a starting point for the determination of possible 
restitution initiatives a Nation may wish to establish:
»
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, ITK IlikKuset-Ilingannet! Culture Connect!: Connecting youth and adult role 
models in order to facilitate knowledge transfer on hunting, trapping, sewing, art, carving, snowshoe 
making, music and wild food preparation. A pilot program took place in three communities in 
Nunatsiavut, Labrador, where the mental health of community members was found to be negatively 
affected by climate change and associated changes to wildlife, ice cover, and precipitation. By pairing 
youth with Elders to share knowledge about traditional activities, the program increased generational 
knowledge transfer, improved participants’ mental health, and built pride in Inuit identity. 
»
Haida Gwaii First Nation, Haida Rediscovery Camp: A youth-based culture camp on the islands 
of Swan Bay and Mount Moresby, that reconnect youth to their culture. Young people gain a set of 
skills based in traditional values that will support them through their lives. The program bridges gaps 
created by family disruption and other effects of colonialism that have caused a loss in young people’s 
ability to connect with their culture. Rediscovery Camps were founded in the 1970s and have since 
spread throughout Canada and the world.  
»
Tłįcho, Įmbè Program: An intensive cultural land-based learning program for senior high and post-
secondary students that connects young people with Elders to help ensure that Tłįcho language and 
culture are passed onto future generations. Participants share and learn traditional skills such as 
fishing and fish preparation, sewing and beading, plant gathering, language learning, and storytelling. 
The program addresses the loss of culture due to youth departure for schooling and has been shown 
to improve participants’ level of cultural knowledge, self-esteem, and sense of cultural identity. 
»
Singaqmiut, Culture Committee: A culture committee that engages the community with cultural/
traditional activities and practices including ice fishing, seal hunting, polar bear hunting, whaling, 
harvesting wild onions, berries, etc., cooking traditional foods, cultural history lessons, skin sewing, 
storage of subsistence foods, et building and root gathering. There are several culture committees 
like this one across Nunavik, each of which is specific to the community it serves. The committees 
seek to strengthen Inuit culture and ensure Inuit traditions are maintained.  
»
Dehcho First Nations, The Aboriginal Language Nest Program:  A program where Dene children 
(ages 0 to 5) are immersed in their traditional language to support language acquisition and 
generational transfer. Initiated as part of the Northwest Territories Aboriginal Languages Plan in 2010, 
the program aims to revitalize the Dene language, which has been declining in use over the past 
several decades. This early childhood program is based on the Maori language nest model. Funding 
is provided by the Northwest Territories government but is managed by Dehcho First Nations. 
»
Cheslatta Carrier Nation, Cheslatta Carrier Nation and British Columbia Settlement Agreement: 
Designed as a means of restitution for the impacts of the flooding of Cheslatta Territory and 
associated eviction of the Cheslatta t’en from their territory for the construction of the Nechako 
Reservoir. It was determined that 10,000 ha of Crown land would be transferred as Land Parcels to the 
Cheslatta Carrier Nation. Cheslatta had the opportunity to identify Crown lands within the Cheslatta 
Territory or Area of Interest for protection or for transfer as a tenure. This example is unique in that it 
involved restitution for past impacts, illustrating how the tools outlined above can be used in a variety 
of contexts. The Carrier Nation is a partner in the development of this Toolkit and their success in the 
Nechako Reservoir case demonstrates what can be achieved with such tools. 
68
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
69
Considering Financial  
Compensation for Residual 
Effects to Cultural Rights
Step 5 of Undertaking an Assessment  
of Impacts to Cultural Rights
Tool 5
Spirit of the Land
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
70
Prior to any discussion about compensation for residual effects to cultural rights, it is important to note that 
the intention of the Tool is not to provide a definable economic value for a cultural right, but rather explore 
possible systems that can be used in situations where compensation for an effect on a cultural right is 
required or desired. Therefore, the Tool does not seek to quantify the economic value of the cultural right, but 
rather explore various ways in which financial compensation (likely alongside other restitution and mitigation 
measures) for the loss of some portion of that cultural right, can be fairly calculated. As such, this Tool serves 
as a discussion on opportunities for the compensation of cultural impacts, as opposed to presenting a 
method for the calculation of an economic value.  
It is also important to note that, as identified in Tool #4: Addressing Residual Impacts to Cultural Rights, 
the three identified forms of restitution are not mutually exclusive. For example, some forms of financial 
compensation could be involved in cultural offsetting (e.g., funding that will be used to develop a cultural 
centre may be deemed to be part of an overall offsetting package that is needed to counterbalance the loss 
of an on-the-land teaching site). Hence, financial compensation can be viewed by different Nations as either 
a vehicle to achieve greater control over cultural restitution efforts, or a slippery slope that could pave the way 
for industry and government to gain “permission” to proceed with projects that will harm cultural rights. 
On a practical level, financial compensation can offer an impacted Nation greater flexibility and control over 
the final form that restitution assumes, for example by having full control over funds rather than having to 
jointly administer program funding that is provided by either the proponent or government.  Indigenous 
Groups can apply financial compensation to initiatives of their own choosing, such as the purchase of lands, 
or ongoing cultural or language revitalization programs, among many other options.  On the other hand, 
assigning a monetary value to impacts to cultural rights may be an ethically challenging, if not impossible 
way, to achieve a Nation’s restitution objectives. Trying to protect intangible cultural interests challenges 
conventional approaches to the assignment of monetary values to cultural impacts, and therefore requires 
more complex, collaborative evaluation and negotiation models that prioritize the perspectives and objectives 
of Indigenous Groups.  However, even with better conceptual models, some Nations may still deem impacts 
to their cultural rights to be “non-compensable” and therefore defy monetary evaluation. Hence, to achieve 
fair and just outcomes for addressing cultural impacts, some Nations may prefer to focus on offsetting and 
restoration approaches instead of financial compensation
Tool 5 is relevant to an Indigenous Group’s approach to restitution of impacts to cultural rights if the following 
three conditions are met:
1.	 The cultural impact assessment (undertaken in Tools 1-3) predicts a major project will result in 
residual impacts on cultural rights that cannot be avoided/fully mitigated;
2.	 The Indigenous Group recognizes that the major project may proceed in spite of potential 
residual impacts on cultural rights (with or without the Indigenous Group’s Free, Prior and 
Informed Consent, and the Indigenous Group has determined to seek restitution for the residual 
impacts to cultural rights; and
3.	 The conclusion of Tool 4 is that the preferred approach (or one of the preferred approaches) to 
restitution for residual impacts on cultural rights is financial compensation.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
71
For the sake of this Tool, we identify two primary approaches to determining financial compensation for 
impacts to cultural rights: 
1.	 A market-based approach where a value is assigned to a cultural right based on what that right 
would cost “on the market” (e.g., the loss of knowledge could be compared to how much it 
costs for an individual to attend school for a certain number of years); or
2.	 A community-based values approach, where the community that may suffer (or have already 
suffered and will continue to suffer) the impacts on its collective cultural rights are asked to 
determine a hypothetical financial value for such losses (e.g., a community is asked to assign a 
monetary value to a cultural right based on what the right means to them in terms of quality of life, 
psycho-social well-being, and socio-cultural well-being).30 
30	 For more information on market-based approaches and community-based values approaches, see the works by Timothy L. McDaniels and William Trousdale, “Resource  
	
Compensation and Negotiation Support in an Aboriginal Context: Using Community-Based Multi-Attribute Analysis to Evaluate Non-Market Losses,” Ecological 	 
	
Economics 55, no. 2 (November 1, 2005): 173–86, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2005.07.027; Robin Gregory and William Trousdale, “Compensating Aboriginal  
	
Cultural Losses: An Alternative Approach to Assessing Environmental Damages,” Journal of Environmental Management 90, no. 8 (June 2009): 2469–79, https://doi. 
	
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2008.12.019; Philippe Hanna et al., “The Importance of Cultural Aspects in Impact Assessment and Project Development: Reflections from a  
	
Case Study of a Hydroelectric Dam in Brazil,” Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal 34, no. 4 (October 1, 2016): 306–18, https://doi.org/10.1080/14615517.2016.11 
	
84501; Tobias Plieninger et al., “Assessing, Mapping, and Quantifying Cultural Ecosystem Services at Community Level,” Land Use Policy 33 (July 1, 2013): 118–29,  
	
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2012.12.013; Robin Gregory et al., “Compensating Indigenous Social and Cultural Losses: A Community-Based Multiple-Attribute  
	
Approach,” Ecology and Society 25, no. 4 (2020): 1–13, https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-12038-250404.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
72
Market-Based Approaches to Financial 
Compensation for Cultural Rights
The consideration of cultural rights in the determination of financial 
compensation for project impacts remains incredibly limited. However, 
Australia and New Zealand have developed policies and legislation that 
takes into consideration cultural losses when dealing with the uptake of 
Indigenous lands by the Crown. While the case studies below rely on a 
market-based approach, where cultural elements and losses are connected 
to a comparative market-based value, they represent steps forward for the 
consideration of cultural (and notably intangible culture) in determining 
compensation for impacts.
Australia
In 2022, the Australian government developed the Policy for Compensation for Cultural Loss Arising 
from Compulsory Acquisition. The policy states:31
Cultural loss is perhaps best approached by understanding the cultural value of country and 
what connection to the particular country impacted by the compensable activity means from 
a cultural perspective. A proper understanding of the laws and customs of the compensable 
group and how they are connected to country by those laws and customs is crucial to this.
An appreciation of the cultural value of country and the cultural value of the particular parcel 
of land can then turn to the question of how the compensable activities have impacted on or 
would impact on that cultural value. That impact may take many different forms and may 
31	 Valuer General NSW, “Compensation for Cultural Loss Arising from Compulsory Acquisition” (NSW Government, 2022), 1.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
73
include feelings of spiritual and emotional loss or distress as well as such impacts as the ability 
to learn and teach cultural knowledge on country or damage to sites of significance. 
The Policy outlines categories of cultural loss including access, residence, activities, practices, ecology, 
sites, trauma, and progressive impairment which are used to derive a market-based means of evaluating 
financial compensation.  The Policy includes novel principles for determining financial compensation, 
including:32
»
Compensation must reflect that losses will be felt by future generations. Compensation must 
therefore include not only loss at a single moment of time, but also the perpetuity of the loss (i.e. 
cultural losses are not frozen in time).
»
Compensation must consider the extent to which related and connected areas have been 
impacted (i.e., compensation must consider cumulative effects).
»
The significance of the cultural losses must be identified through engagement with those 
suffering loss (i.e., Indigenous communities must be allowed to identify the loss and determine 
its significance). 
While still limited and failing to address the controversial basis of compulsory land acquisition,33 the 
Policy explicitly indicates that cultural losses are compensable and represents a more inclusive process 
for considering cultural rights when determining financial compensation. 
New Zealand
In New Zealand, a series of settlements called the Waitangi Claims of Whakatöhea have been either 
signed or in the process of being actively negotiated. These settlements provide redress for the 
losses suffered by the Whakatöhea as a result of Crown confiscation and seizure of lands prior to 
1992. The seven most recent settlement packages (since 2021) include elements such as a Crown 
acknowledgement and apology, and financial, cultural, and commercial restitution. Of note, restitution/
redress is “intended to recognise the cultural, historical and traditional associations of Whakatöhea 
within their area of interest”34 and includes elements such as:
»
the funding for cultural purposes (including education and revitalization funds),
»
the transfer of land, natural resource arrangements, and
»
geographic name changes.
The settlements include clear compensation for cultural damages and losses occurred as a result of the 
Crown breeching Māori rights and title. Unfortunately, the settlements provide no explanation as to how 
the compensation figures were calculated. It is assumed, based on past historical settlements, that the 
Government of New Zealand has continued to employ a market-based approach to calculating cultural 
compensation amounts whereby the redress is based on a historical assessment of past value and 
equivalent present financial value of land.
32	 Valuer General NSW, 6–7.
33	 Compulsory acquisition is criticized as being fundamentally at odds with the right of Indigenous peoples to Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (Mia Stone, Dr Lisa Strelein,  
	
and Kieren Murray, “AIATSIS Submission: Review of Forms of Cultural Loss and the Process and Method for Quantifying Compensation for Compulsory Acquisition,” n.d., 19.)
34	 New Zealand Government, “Deed of Settlement between the Crown and Whakotōhea,” January 2022, 2.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
74
Canada
The Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in the Southwind v. Canada 2021 case represents the most 
recent reference to cultural impacts arising from the expropriation, or take-up, of reserve lands. The case 
determined that “equitable compensation must reflect the “highest value” of the land taken – including:
»
the land’s value to any public project they were used for,
»
the land’s value from the Indigenous people’s perspective, and
»
costs for impacts on the community. 
This court ruling therefore supports the notion that compensation for reserve lands must include 
a “cultural component linked to the land’s significance in the exercise of the culture.”35 Southwind, 
therefore, provides a legal model for compensation for impacts to Indigenous lands, taking into account 
cultural losses that are attached to the land. While the model does not deal specifically with cultural 
losses, it may point in a direction for restitution where a project’s impacts to Indigenous lands are 
accompanied by impacts to Indigenous culture. It is also important to note that while this positive 
decision has the possibility to be applied generally and support negotiations for impacts to cultural rights 
arising from major projects, the legal precedent created by the decision is specific to reserve lands.
Some strengths and weaknesses of a market-based values approach are provided below.
Strengths
»
Draws on readily available and  
pre-determined comparative 
market values.
»
Has been adopted in policy 
and legislation and is therefore 
represents a defendable and 
“tested” approach. 
Limitations
»	 Intangible cultural losses are difficult 
to measure and compare to a 
market-based equivalent.
»	 Doesn’t take into consideration 
associated factors such as 
spirituality and well-being. 
35	 Williams, “The Right to Compensation for Cultural Damage,” 2.
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
75
Community-Based Approaches  
to Financial Compensation for  
Cultural Rights 
As illustrated above, market-based approaches are the predominant method 
for determining financial compensation for cultural losses in Australia and 
New Zealand. Similarly, while Southwind represents a possible future avenue 
for the consideration of impacts to cultural rights, Canada has yet to fully 
implement a mechanism for compensating for cultural losses. 
Conversations with our partner First Nations readily identified the importance of First Nations take a, 
if not the, leading role in determining when, how, and how much compensation should be determined 
for impacts to their culture. In a community-based values approach, the values, beliefs, and 
experiences of those impacted by the loss are a central consideration. This approach can therefore be 
a more holistic, and arguably more accurate, method of costing cultural rights than that offered by a 
“market-based values” model.  A community-based values approach allows a First Nation to apply their 
own values and forms of measurement when determining what constitutes a substitute of comparable 
cultural value. For example, an Indigenous Group may determine that adequate compensation for loss 
of access to a preferred fishing site is the cost amount needed to acquire alternative waterfront land 
for a new fishing site of equal or higher cultural value. A community-based approach is catered to a 
specific Indigenous Group’s needs and grounded in a Nation’s existing values, laws, and rights. As a 
result, each approach taken by a First Nation will be unique and will directly reflect what matters most 
to the community.
When Indigenous communities can implement their own method for determining the financial value of 
a cultural right, intangible cultural elements that are commonly excluded from financial compensation 
approaches may be included. Such approaches do not rely on an ever changing “market value” which 
does not consider the complexities associated with culture. Therefore, the use of a community-based 
values approach allows a First Nation to take control of this compensation process and determine a 
value that accurately encompasses the cultural. Such an approach also allows for the consideration 
of both cultural impacts as well as related biophysical and non-cultural impacts if desired, though the 
Nation may choose to assess these separately.  
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
76
Some strengths and limitations of a community-based values approach are provided below:
Strengths
»
Draws on community Knowledge 
and experience to develop a robust 
understanding of the value of 
cultural rights.
»
Results in a flexible and 
personalized approach to 
evaluating cultural losses that is 
grounded in the unique context of 
the Nation.
»
Can allow for the joint consideration 
of cultural, biophysical, spiritual, 
social, and other impacts.
Limitations
»	 Has yet to be formalized in Canadian 
law and practice and may not be 
accepted by proponents and/or the 
government.
»	 Requires extensive community 
engagement, time, and resources.
»	 Assigning a financial value to 
cultural rights may be a traumatic 
and difficult process for community 
members.
 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
77
Principles
As opposed to the other Tools in this Toolkit, this Tool does not include a list of methods and options 
a Nation can implement to determine a financial value to compensate for impacts to cultural rights. 
This is purposeful for two reasons. First, a satisfactory method for determining financial compensation 
for impacts to cultural rights, has yet to be developed. As indicated above, examples of financial 
compensation for cultural losses based on the take-up of Indigenous lands in Canada, Australia, and 
New Zealand all rely on a market-based values approach. Second, our partner First Nations expressed a 
rejection with the idea of developing a method for assigning a financial value to impacts to cultural rights, 
stating that “you can’t put a price tag on the sacred”. 
However, we recognize the reality and prominence of financial compensation as an existing means of 
compensating for project impacts, often used by proponents and government. As such, we provide 
below a robust list of principles that may be considered by a First Nation wishing to develop a model for 
evaluating the financial value of cultural rights adversely impacted by a major project. These principles 
may also apply when a Nation is seeking to determine and negotiate a financial value for cultural 
restoration and/or cultural offsetting programs. 
»
The assessment of compensation for cultural loss should be conducted by the Indigenous 
community itself, or on the advice and direction of the Indigenous community.
»
Indigenous communities should be compensated for the time it takes to negotiate 
compensation.
»
All Knowledge holders, land users, and Elders engaged in negotiation and data gathering related 
processes should be appropriately compensated.
»
Indigenous communities should be provided with adequate time and resources (including 
capacity supports) to properly engage in the compensation negotiation process.
»
Compensation negotiations should be culturally sensitive and trauma-informed, considering 
relevant context and cultural sensitivities.
»
Compensation negotiations should account for the holistic nature of cultural losses.
»
Compensation values should be renegotiable as situations change with time, and subject to 
inflation calculations where they are paid out over time.
»
The method used to calculate compensation should follow a clear and logical process and 
should be transparent, repeatable, and meaningful.
»
Both tangible and intangible values should be included in the assessment of compensation. 
Impacts such as mental distress and psychological strain should be considered alongside effects 
such as the disruption of traditional practices.
»
While the determination of compensation should include expert information and documentation, 
the process should prioritize written and oral information sources that acknowledge the direct 
experiences of the community 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
78
Summary
Financial compensation for cultural losses is an inherently complex 
process, and one that many Nations may not wish to pursue. While 
financial compensation may serve as a vehicle to achieve greater 
control over cultural restitution efforts, it may also serve as a slippery 
slope that may serve as a “quick fix” used by industry and government 
for projects that harm cultural rights. Furthermore, a Nation may  
deem impacts to their cultural rights to be “non-compensable”  
and therefore defy monetary evaluation. Instead, the Nation may 
prefer to focus on offsetting and restoration approaches instead of 
financial compensation. 
However, for First Nations who wish to pursue financial compensation 
for impacts to cultural rights, a community-based values approach 
may allow for a more thorough, robust, and holistic approach for 
determining a financial value for cultural losses. By grounding the 
determination of financial compensation for cultural losses in a 
Nation’s context, values, rights, and laws, a more accurate economic 
figure can be developed. 
 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
79
Spirit of the Land
DISCLAIMER 
This Toolkit has been developed from the perspective of the First Nations Major Projects Coalition 
(FNMPC) and does not represent the perspectives of the federal government, provincial governments, and 
territories, or industry. Although it represents a general First Nations perspective, it does not represent the 
specific perspective any First Nation as every First Nation will have its own distinct perspective. 
The Toolkit is designed to provide support to First Nations that are engaging with project proponents in 
discussions about offsetting residual cumulative effects affecting cultural rights and values within their 
territories. The Toolkit is not to be viewed as prescriptive on how to assess impacts on cultural rights and 
each First Nation should determine its own method and process for assessing impacts on its cultural 
rights in accordance with its laws, methodologies, protocols, and processes. A First Nation that chooses 
to engage with a project proponent or the Crown in discussions regarding impacts on cultural rights may 
want to obtain legal advice prior to using this Toolkit in those discussions.
The Toolkit has not been agreed to or endorsed by the federal government, provincial or territorial 
governments, or by industry. Therefore, if a First Nation chooses to use any of the methodologies or 
processes in the Toolkit to assess impacts of a major project on its cultural rights, the results of the 
assessment are not legally binding on the other levels of government or project proponent. The First 
Nation will need to seek agreement with other levels of government and/or a project proponent on how to 
apply the results of the First Nation’s assessment. 
The Toolkit is designed to be a collaborative and led by Indigenous Groups. While collaborative 
implementation, coupled with capacity support, is an option to help foster relationships between 
proponents/government and Indigenous Nations, this Toolkit should not be unilaterally applied by industry 
or government. First and foremost, this Toolkit must be understood to be an Indigenous-led process, 
grounded in a community’s principles and leadership. 
Cultural rights and values must be viewed as sensitive information. The principles of First Nations 
ownership, control, access, and possession (OCAP) is included in the Toolkit, but we wish to make clear 
that this concept is not recognized as law or policy by other levels of government. A First Nation may 
take the position that OCAP protects their sensitive cultural information from public disclosure, but any 
information shared with the federal government and provincial or territorial governments may not remain 
confidential due to federal and provincial privacy laws and procedural fairness in regulatory processes. 
Therefore, a First Nation must continue to exercise caution when sharing information in such processes. 
SPIRIT of the LAND - The Indigenous Cultural Rights and Interests Toolkit 
80
