SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
1 
A Pocket of Connection – Green, Serene, and Working to Become a Net-Zero Neighbourhood 
Final Report 
June 2023 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The Pocket SNAP is a comprehensive action plan for advancing neighbourhood sustainability that integrates both 
hyper- local community interests and technical sustainability objectives. The Pocket SNAP supports the community’s 
vision of a future where net zero living is the norm, in part due to extensive energy retrofits and a shift to electric 
vehicles and active transportation as the primary modes of travel. In addition, The Pocket neighbourhood continues 
to build its community spirit, vibrant and ecologically functioning green spaces, sustainable stormwater management, 
and safe and beautiful streetscapes. This is a community that leads by example by showing leadership and motivating 
substantive action on climate change, and through expression of strong moral values focused on diversity, equity, 
inclusivity, accessibility, and Truth and Reconciliation.    
Thank you to the Project Management Team and other leaders who provided guidance and expertise on the 
development of this Action Plan. 
Adriana Gomez  
Senior Program Manager, Sustainable Neighbourhoods, TRCA  
Lisa Roberti  
Project Manager, Sustainable Neighbourhoods, TRCA 
Patricia Lewis  
Project Manager, Sustainable Neighbourhoods, TRCA 
Sonya Meek 
Senior Manager, Sustainable Neighbourhoods, TRCA 
Fernando Carou 
Manager, Public Energy Initiatives, City of Toronto 
Jack Bolland 
Program Manager, Asset Management, Planning and Capital Projects Unit, City of 
Toronto 
Jen-Sion Tan 
Project Lead, Green Streets, City of Toronto 
Kristina Hausmanis 
Senior Project Manager, Green Streets, City of Toronto 
Paul Farish 
Manager, Planning – Park Development and Capital Projects, City of Toronto 
Stewart Dutfield 
Program Manager, Public Energy Initiatives – Existing Building, Home Energy Loan 
Program, City of Toronto 
Tim Orichefsky 
Parks Supervisor, City of Toronto 
Audrey Egan 
Community Service Coordinator, Toronto Community Housing Corporation 
Gail Johnson 
Manager, Community Safety and Support, Toronto Community Housing Corporation 
David Langille  
Pocket Community Association and Chair, Pocket Change Project 
Eve Wyatt 
Pocket Community Association and Project Manager, Pocket Change Project 
Liisa Repo-Martell 
Pocket Community Association and Pocket Change Project Executive Member 
Michelle Kushnir 
Pocket Community Association  
Paul Dowsett 
 
Pocket Community Association and Retrofit Coach, Pocket Change Project  
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (TRCA) has authored this report with review by the project partners, the 
City of Toronto and the Pocket Community Association. Action Plan recommendations were identified through a co-
creation process involving residents and stakeholders, City, and TRCA staff. A special thank you to Councillor 
Fletcher, local stakeholders, and numerous staff groups that were extensively involved in collaborative 
engagement activities that have helped co-design the recommended initiatives.  
© 2023, The Corporation of the City of Toronto, Toronto and Region Conservation Authority. All Rights 
Reserved. 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................. 1 
2.0 The Pocket Neighbourhood ..................................................................................................................................... 2 
 
 
 
 
4.0 Community Sustainability Initiatives In The Pocket ............................................................................................... 10 
 
 
5.0 Neighbourhood Selection and Key Drivers ............................................................................................................ 12 
6.0 Shared Sustainability Themes ................................................................................................................................ 15 
7.0 The SNAP Governance Model ................................................................................................................................ 17 
8.0 The Action Plan Co-Design Process ........................................................................................................................ 18 
9.0 The Pocket SNAP Action Plan ................................................................................................................................ 20 
10.0 Action Area One: Greenspace Revitalization, Rainwater, and Biodiversity ......................................................... 22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.0 Action Area Two: Sustainable Buildings .............................................................................................................. 32 
 
 
11.1.2 Proposed Approaches to Help Homeowners Retrofit Their Homes ........................................................ 37 
 
 
 
11.2.1 Recommended Actions ............................................................................................................................ 46 
12.0 Action Area Three: Streetscape Improvements .................................................................................................. 48 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
 
12.1.1 Recommended Actions ............................................................................................................................ 50 
 
12.2.1 Recommended Actions ............................................................................................................................ 51 
 
12.3.1 Recommended Actions ............................................................................................................................ 52 
 
12.4.1 Recommended Actions ............................................................................................................................ 53 
13.0 Action Area Four: Community Enrichment .......................................................................................................... 55 
 
13.1.1 Recommended Actions ............................................................................................................................ 56 
 
13.2.1 Recommended Actions ............................................................................................................................ 57 
 
 
14.0 Measuring Success ............................................................................................................................................... 62 
15.0 Next Steps ............................................................................................................................................................ 65 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1 - The Pocket SNAP Neighbourhood, City of Toronto ...................................................................... 7 
Figure 2 - The Pocket SNAP Action Plan Sustainability Themes ................................................................. 15 
Figure 3 - Project Management and Governance Structure ....................................................................... 17 
Figure 4 - Action Plan Co-Design Process .................................................................................................... 18 
Figure 5 - Pocket SNAP Action Plan Map .................................................................................................... 21 
Figure 6 - Greenspace Revitalization, Rainwater and Biodiversity Action Area Map ................................. 31 
Figure 7- SNAP Home Retrofit Program Model .......................................................................................... 39 
Figure 8 - Sustainable Buildings Action Area Map ...................................................................................... 47 
Figure 9 - Streetscape Improvements Action Area ..................................................................................... 54 
Figure 10 - Community Enrichment Action Area Map ................................................................................ 60 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 - Green Living Behavioural Statistics for The Pocket Neighbourhood ............................................. 5 
Table 2 - Neighbourhood Profile ................................................................................................................... 8 
Table 3 - Sustainability Themes, Guiding Principles, and Indicators .......................................................... 16 
Table 4 - Target Outcomes (Longer-Term Observed Changes) ................................................................... 62 
Table 5 - Example Target Outputs (Shorter-Term Direct Actions) .............................................................. 64 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
 
1 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
The Pocket SNAP is a comprehensive action plan for advancing neighbourhood sustainability that 
integrates both hyperlocal community interests and technical sustainability objectives. The Pocket 
SNAP supports the community’s vision of a future where net zero living is the norm, in part due to 
extensive energy retrofits, and a shift to electric vehicles and active transportation as the primary 
modes of travel. In addition, The Pocket neighbourhood continues to build its community spirit, 
vibrant and ecologically functioning green spaces, sustainable stormwater management and safe and 
beautiful streetscapes. This is a community that leads by example by showing leadership and 
motivating substantive action on climate change, and through expression of strong moral values 
focused on diversity, equity, inclusivity, and Truth and Reconciliation.    
The development of the Pocket SNAP Action Plan has been led by Toronto and Region Conservation 
Authority (TRCA), in collaboration with the City of Toronto, Toronto Community Housing Corporation 
(TCHC), the Pocket Community Association (PCA), the Pocket Change Project and many other 
stakeholders. As one of over a dozen SNAP projects in the Toronto Region, the Pocket SNAP seeks to 
build on the Pocket Community Association and its Pocket Change Project’s initiatives to live sustainably, 
without reliance on fossil fuels, so The Pocket can become a net-zero community as soon as possible. 
The plan will also help the City achieve the targets and objectives identified in TransformTO. Through 
strategic initiatives, the Pocket SNAP will also foster actions and behaviours that will advance other 
strategic priorities, including but not limited to, TRCA watershed management objectives, the City’s 
urban forestry targets and the City’s Pollinator Protection, Heat Relief, Wet Weather Flow, Long Term 
Waste Management and Parkland Strategies.  
The activities of the PCA in promoting home energy efficiency and emissions reductions, in promoting 
use of electric vehicles over the past five years and in fostering a green community, have created a 
launching point for the SNAP which will complement and stimulate activities underway in the 
community. 
 
 
 
What is SNAP? 
The Sustainable Neighbourhood Action Program (SNAP) of TRCA is a collaborative, neighbourhood-
based approach for advancing urban renewal and climate action in older urban areas. SNAPs help 
municipalities and other community collaborators improve efficiencies, draw strong local support, 
and build innovative partnerships for the implementation of a broad range of initiatives in the public 
and private realms. More information is available at: trca.ca/conservation/sustainable-
neighbourhoods. 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
2 
2.0 THE POCKET NEIGHBOURHOOD 
Located in the east end of the City of Toronto, The Pocket neighbourhood is bounded by Danforth 
Avenue in the north, Jones Avenue and Greenwood Ave on the west and east sides respectively, and the 
CN Rail corridor at the south end. This area is home to approximately 3,500 people and 1,361 
households, with a diverse demographic, including 33% of residents who belong to a visible minority 
group, a wide range of household income levels, and a mix of housing tenure, including 69% 
homeowners and 31% renters. Approximately 30% of residents in The Pocket neighbourhood were born 
outside of Canada. 
As part of the proposed changes to the City’s updated Official Plan/Municipal Comprehensive Review, 
Greenwood Station is a designated Major Transit Station with a part of The Pocket neighborhood 
belonging to the proposed delineated Major Transit Station Area (MTSA). MTSAs near subway stations 
have a planned increase in density to 200 residents and jobs per hectare.   
The existing neighbourhood is primarily comprised of detached and semi-detached residential housing 
with one midrise condo at the southwest corner of Greenwood and Danforth. There is also a mix of 
retail establishments, primarily situated on the south side of Danforth Avenue and intermittently along 
Jones Avenue. There are also a number of institutional properties in the neighbourhood, including 
Kapapamahchakwew (Wandering Spirit School, formerly Eastern Commerce Collegiate), Madinah Masjid 
Mosque, former St. Catherine of Siena Catholic Church (currently proposed for redevelopment), Toronto 
Fire Station 323, Danforth Early Learning and Child Care Centre, École élémentaire catholique du Bon-
Berger, and the Greenwood TTC subway yard, which alone takes up approximately 27% of the land area 
in the neighbourhood. Toronto Community Housing also operates a social housing complex at 2 Phin 
Avenue along with other properties on Queen Victoria Street and Chatham Avenue. 
There are several well-loved greenspaces within the neighbourhood, including Phin Park, Oakvale Green 
Space, and the off-leash dog park, which is situated on City of Toronto land that runs north-south 
through the middle of the neighbourhood. These greenspaces are often bustling with activity and are 
frequently used to host local community events, which has helped to contribute to a true sense of 
camaraderie among residents.  
Residential housing stock is a mix of detached and semi-detached homes, 75% of which were constructed prior to 1961 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
3 
 
The neighbourhood is positioned in the east end of the City and provides for excellent accessibility to 
public transit, Danforth bike lanes, local shops and services on the Danforth, as well as being easily 
accessible to the Don Valley and Lake Ontario, which makes this a very well-connected community.   
The Pocket neighbourhood drains into Lake Ontario’s Ashbridge’s Bay on the Toronto Waterfront.  In 
1987, Toronto and Region was designated as one of 43 locations around the Great Lakes where local 
environmental degradation may be adversely affecting the broader Great Lakes system. These locations 
are referred to as Areas of Concern (AOC) and each is required to implement a Remedial Action Plan 
(RAP) that improves the safety, viability, and enjoyment of the water in their area. The Toronto AOC 
extends along the north shore of Lake Ontario from Etobicoke Creek in the west to the Rouge River in 
the east. Key issues in the Toronto AOC include protecting wildlife habitats and wetlands, ensuring 
swimmable beaches, improving nearshore water quality, enhancing stormwater and sewage 
infrastructure, and improving fish communities. Considerable progress has been made since the RAP 
was instituted. This includes banning of the use of certain chemicals (e.g., lead in gasoline and 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)), tighter restrictions on municipal and industrial sewage treatment 
plant discharges, efforts to reduce combined sewer overflows and sewage plant by-passes, better 
management and treatment of stormwater, and re-naturalization of river valleys and 
corridors. Protecting the environment in an ever-growing urban centre like Toronto is an on-going 
process and requires eternal vigilance by all levels of government, industry, and the public. 
 
Phin Park in the Pocket neighbourhood 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
4 
3.0 DEFINING BASELINE GREENHOUSE GASES (GHG) IN 
THE POCKET 
With a goal of becoming a net zero community, it is important to understand the baseline greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions that originate in this neighbourhood, particularly from the building, waste and 
transportation sectors. The following sections attempt to define the baseline conditions. The statistics 
presented herein are valid at the time of publishing this report but are subject to change.      
3.1 Residential Sector 
According to the City of Toronto, 58% of the City’s GHG emissions are generated from buildings, of 
which 56% come directly from residential buildings. Within the M4J postal code area, which includes 
The Pocket neighbourhood, the average GHG emissions per home is 8.34 tCO2e per year. Environics 
data, obtained specifically for The Pocket neighbourhood, reports that almost 67% of homes in the 
neighbourhood use natural gas to heat their homes, (which is the primary contributor of GHG 
emissions from this sector) followed by 10% which heat their home with electricity. The remaining 
homes use either oil, wood or alternative energy sources for heating. In addition, 75% of homes were 
constructed prior to 1961 which suggests that many homes do not meet the more stringent energy 
requirements in today’s building code. Approximately 10% of homeowners in the neighbourhood 
have completed a home energy audit but only 6% have implemented any of the recommendations 
received through the audit process. The City has determined that residents who completed the 
recommended home energy retrofits were able to reduce their emissions on average by 33.63%. 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
5 
The following baseline statistics from Environics (2020) provide insight into how homes in The Pocket 
neighbourhood are currently faring with regard to relevant behavioural actions, and how they compare 
to the rest of the City. As this data suggests, Pocket homeowners are generally above the City average in 
terms of home action, although there is still a long way to go to becoming net zero.  
Table 1 - Green Living Behavioural Statistics for The Pocket Neighbourhood 
Action 
% of Pocket Residents Who 
Have Implemented 
City-Wide Average 
Use LED bulbs 
27% 
21% 
Have a programmable 
thermostat 
60% 
40% 
Utilize the programmable 
settings 
51% 
29% 
Watered lawn in summer 
23% 
17% 
Watered flowerbeds, trees, 
shrubs and/or vegetables in 
summer 
44% 
24% 
Have low flow showerhead 
67% 
59% 
Have low flow toilet 
52% 
56% 
Use a rain barrel or cistern 
12% 
7% 
(Source: Environics, 2020) 
3.2 Transportation Sector 
The second largest contributor of GHG emissions within the City is the transportation sector which 
accounts for 36%. Of that 36%, 73% is generated by passenger vehicles. Within The Pocket 
neighbourhood, 36.7% of residents travel to work by car and 45.5% of residents rely on public 
transportation to get to work. There are currently three public on-street EV charging stations in the 
neighbourhood (two on Jones Avenue and one on Chatham Avenue) that each provide capacity for two 
vehicles to charge at a time. There are also several existing Bike Share stations close to The Pocket 
neighbourhood, including: on Blake Street, Danforth Avenue, Donlands Avenue, and Mount Joy Avenue, 
and bike lanes on Danforth, Greenwood, Chatham, and Jones Avenues. 
According to the 2016 Transportation Tomorrow Survey, conducted by the City of Toronto, 
approximately 36% of households in Ward 30, where The Pocket neighbourhood is located, do not own 
a car. Given this statistic and the fact that there are approximately 1361 households in The Pocket, that 
means there are at least 871 cars. Assuming all of these vehicles are gas-powered and given the City’s 
2030 target of achieving 30% of registered vehicles being electric, that means approximately 260 cars 
would need to be replaced with electric options in the next eight years. While there are a few 
households that already own electric vehicles, for the purposes of this exercise it is assumed that all of 
the vehicles are gas-powered.  
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
6 
 
3.3 Waste Sector 
The waste sector contributes about 7% of GHG emissions in the City of Toronto; this includes both 
organic and inorganic waste. Further details about waste practices by City Ward, or postal code, were 
not available at the time of writing this report. The Conference Board of Canada (CBC)1 calculated 
national and provincial waste generation estimates from 2006 to 2012 which could be used as a 
surrogate for The Pocket. According to the CBC, in 2012 Canadians generated 720 kg of waste per capita, 
with Ontario residents generating slightly less than the national average at 673.4 kg/capita, or 
approximately four pounds of waste per day per person.1 Environics data provides a range of statistics 
related to residential behaviours related to specific waste activities, including composting of kitchen and 
yard waste as well as disposal behaviours for a wide range of hazardous waste materials (e.g., medical 
waste, paints/solvents, batteries, electronics, etc.).  
With respect to composting habits, 69% of Pocket residents compost kitchen waste and 53% compost 
yard waste. 86% of residents who have access to municipal composting programs regularly use it. For 
the hazardous waste materials tracked by Environics, The Pocket neighbourhood performed the same, 
or better than the City-wide average when it comes to using proper disposal methods for batteries, 
medication, and paints/solvents. All efforts to minimize waste, and by association, consumption habits, 
will go a long way to help achieve net zero targets. 
 
 
 
 
1 1. Conference Board of Canada, https://www.conferenceboard.ca/hcp/provincial/environment /waste.aspx#: ~:text= 
On%20average%2C%20 Canada%20generates%20720%20kg%20of%20waste%20per%20capita 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
7 
 
Figure 1 - The Pocket SNAP Neighbourhood, City of Toronto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
8 
 
Table 2 - Neighbourhood Profile 
Area 
53.85 hectares  
Land Use 
Medium Density Residential – 50% (26.8 Ha) 
High Density Residential – 2% (0.9 Ha) 
Recreational/Open Space – 8% (4.6 Ha) 
Railway – 27% (14.4 Ha) 
Institutional – 6% (3.2 Ha) 
Commercial – 4% (2.1 Ha) 
Roads – 3% (1.8 Ha) 
Population 
3,466 
Diversity 
33.3% visible minorities  
29.8% immigrants  
Most common visible minorities - South Asian 12.0%, Chinese 11.4%, Black 
6.7% 
Housing 
1,361 total households  
Own 69.1% and Rent 30.9%   
Houses 56.8% (773)  
     Single-detached house 23.1% (315) 
     Semi-Detached house 27.8% (378) 
     Row House 5.9% (80) 
Apartments 42.8% (583) 
     Low-rise 37% (505) 
     Detached Duplex 5.7% (78) 
Median Age 
49 years 
Average Household Income 
$127, 809  
Employment Rate 
72.3%  
Top 3 occupations: Social Science, Business and Finance, Sales and Service 
Transportation 
% of residents who travel to work by: 
     Public Transit (45.5%) 
Car (36.7%) 
     Walk (4.92%) 
     Bicycle (7.69%) 
(Source: Environics 2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
A Look Back at the History of The Pocket Neighbourhood 
In the early 1900s, The Pocket neighbourhood was home to a substantial brick yard in the present-day 
location of the Greenwood TTC Yard. At that time the brick industry was changing, from small, family run 
businesses into large scale manufacturing operations involving multiple manufacturers simultaneously in 
one quarry. The Greenwood brickyards relied on blasting to remove blue clay and shale from deep pits 
and the residents in The Pocket neighbourhood were upset by the noise and the danger these activities 
posed.   
Other development activities in the early 1900s also helped to shape The Pocket neighbourhood.  
Construction of the streetcar line along Danforth Ave spurred new housing development and by 1911 the 
lands east of Jones and south of Danforth Ave were being subdivided and sold off to speculators. By 1912 
Ravina Crescent had been completely built out with typical brick homes being sold for around $2,400 with 
a $200.00 down payment. The Pocket neighbourhood was originally known at Eastmount subdivision, but 
over time use of that name gradually disappeared.  
In 1925, Eastern Commerce Collegiate Institute was built on Phin Avenue in The Pocket. The school was 
focused on training future entrepreneurs and business hopefuls. Eastern Commerce Collegiate closed in 
2015, and the school is now home to Kapapamahchakwew – Wandering Spirit School.  
During the Great Depression many of the homes in The Pocket were divided into flats or used as rooming 
houses to help the many homeowners who had lost their jobs, make ends meet.   
From the mid-1930s to around the early 1950s, the decommissioned brick quarry in The Pocket was being 
used as a large municipal dump, known as Harper’s Dump. Local residents complained of foul smells and 
excessive flies and rats that were attracted to the garbage. Property values fell as a result of the conditions 
and many residents moved out of the area.   
In the late 1990s the area began to transition as younger professionals started buying and fixing up 
properties in the neighbourhood. In the early 2000s, The Pocket name was established, and the first 
Pocket newsletter was circulated in 2003. The neighbourhood has continued to thrive over the last two 
decades and is now a close-knit community with a lively social scene, with neighbours who care deeply 
about one another and who share a deep interest in many social and environmental issues.         
Source: https://leslievillehistory.com/exploring-the-pocket-and-south-to-the-railway/ 
   
  
 
Ravina Crescent                                              Eastern Commerce Collegiate                      Harper’s Dump 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
10 
4.0 COMMUNITY SUSTAINABILITY INITIATIVES IN THE 
POCKET 
The Pocket neighbourhood has a very active Pocket Community Association (PCA) which has cultivated a 
strong and engaged neighbourhood since it was created in 2012. The PCA’s mission is to promote a 
strong, vibrant, walkable, livable and safe community; to empower residents of the neighbourhood 
through community involvement; and to liaise with local officials and organizations on behalf of The 
Pocket community. 
PCA Objectives: 
•
To increase community engagement and connections between neighbours
•
To be non-partisan and inclusive of diversity in The Pocket
•
To engage members of the community in issues specific to The Pocket and Toronto-wide
•
To participate in planning that affects the residents of The Pocket
•
To foster a safe, secure community
•
To enhance the beauty of the neighbourhood
•
To promote development that reflects the values and character of the neighbourhood
•
To be a credible, powerful, and representative voice for The Pocket
•
To promote and foster ecological sustainability
The PCA has conducted extensive engagement with the community over the years through resident 
surveys, personal discussions, and through feedback at the annual general meeting and other 
community events. The priorities and interests of the community have been identified and the PCA is 
now working with volunteers from the community to implement a number of these “Pocket Dreams”. 
At any given time, The Pocket has about 35 to 40 active volunteers, a small number of whom perform 
the bulk of the work of the Executive and its Committees, including the Pocket Change Project. The 
following sections describe several of the key initiatives being led by the PCA and its working groups as 
well as highlighting the City’s interest in the work this community is leading. 
4.1 Pocket Change Project 
The Pocket Change Project is a committee of the Pocket Community Association and involves 
neighbours working together to reduce the carbon footprint of individuals and the broader 
neighbourhood. The committee is undertaking the Pocket Change Project with an aim to becoming a 
“net zero” or carbon neutral community, with a focus on home retrofits, sustainable transportation, 
neighbourhood greening, and community engagement and awareness. 
With respect to home retrofits, the committee has launched the transformative Changemakers group 
and retrofit coordination service. The Changemakers are homeowners in The Pocket working together 
through the Pocket Change Project retrofit coordination service while they retrofit their houses to 
reduce energy consumption, reduce natural gas use, and significantly reduce carbon emissions. The 
Project brings Changemakers together to share information and experiences, raise questions, and solve 
problems. 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
11 
 
The Pocket Retrofit Coach and Registered Energy Advisors are available to guide homeowners through 
the retrofit process. Through development of a personalized Retrofit Roadmap and the community-
based support that the Pocket Change Project provides, homeowners receive expert advice and can 
move forward on their green renovation projects more quickly and with greater confidence. 
In 2022, the Project formed the Sustainable Transportation Working Group. It aims to cultivate a 
sustainable transportation ecology in The Pocket to make it easier, safer, and more enjoyable for people 
to choose lower carbon modes of transport in support of the City of Toronto's Net-Zero Transportation 
goals. It supports, promotes, and advocates for green transportation options in and close to The Pocket, 
including EVs, bikes and e-assist bikes, car shares/car rental programs (as an alternative to car 
ownership), transit and walking. The group works on new infrastructure in The Pocket to support 
sustainable transportation (e.g., bike parking, on-street EV charging stations), and monitors and 
participates in sustainable transportation advocacy issues and initiatives affecting The Pocket and 
surrounding area.  
The Pocket Change Project Committee is committed to sharing knowledge with Pocket residents, and 
other community groups in the City and beyond to help accelerate the transition to a low carbon future. 
The Committee organizes webinars and in-person educational sessions, an annual Eco Fun Fair, and 
other events. See the Residential Retrofits section for more information on the Pocket Change Project 
retrofit coordination service and Changemakers program.  
4.2 Phin Park and Greening Committee 
Greening The Pocket has been a common theme in the neighbourhood’s activities for many years, and 
this committee was formed even before the Pocket Community Association was established. Initiatives 
have included development of the pollinator garden in Phin Park, active promotion of trees for front 
yard planting, and a current focus on removal of invasive plants from The Pocket’s public green spaces 
and household yards. 
 
Phin Park garden clean up and pollinator garden planting event in June 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
12 
 
5.0 NEIGHBOURHOOD SELECTION AND KEY DRIVERS 
The Pocket neighbourhood was selected based on a screening process led by TRCA, in collaboration with 
a team of ten City of Toronto Divisions. In addition to identifying alignment of urban renewal priorities 
of the City and TRCA, the process also considered community readiness.   
To date, TRCA has received numerous requests from communities across its jurisdiction to develop a 
SNAP Action Plan for their respective neighbourhoods. The number of these requests has far exceeded 
TRCA’s capacity to lead. In response to this situation, TRCA decided to test a SNAP in a neighbourhood 
where an existing community group could take on some of the roles that TRCA would typically lead 
throughout the planning process, such as the robust public engagement component, and where the 
community group was already engaged in local action that aligns with SNAP objectives. The 
neighbourhood selection team identified The Pocket as a suitable pilot community because it has an 
active and enthusiastic community association with strong leadership, committed working groups, 
demonstrated ability to organize and implement projects and programming, and a strong track record of 
advocating on behalf of their community. Additionally, the community association has already identified 
and begun working on several key sustainability initiatives that TRCA could contribute to and help 
advance.  
The SNAP will contribute to the ongoing community activities by: 
• 
Conducting a thorough 360 community engagement process to support the understanding of 
community perceptions and priorities, and enriching the ideas for action 
• 
Recommending refinements and support for ongoing activities, based on community 
perceptions, ideas, and priorities 
• 
Identifying projects or programs not being addressed by the current neighbourhood activities as 
potential new initiatives 
The SNAP planning process is always community-focused, using both a top down and bottom-up 
approach, and always depends strongly on collaboration and co-design with the local community. 
However, the Pocket pilot was unique in that certain aspects of the planning process were led by 
community leaders from the Pocket Community Association and the Pocket Change committee. These 
volunteers were able to employ their connections to, and influence in the neighbourhood towards 
implementing significant components of the outreach strategy and in providing significant contributions 
to the preparation of this report.  
The rationale behind this pilot approach was to examine the possibility of expanding the reach of the 
SNAP program model to more neighbourhoods by drawing on the skills, expertise, and leadership of 
community representatives. 
A summary of key technical drivers that informed neighbourhood selection include: 
• 
Greenhouse gas emissions (GHG): With a mostly un-renovated building stock, developed in 
1910-1915, the neighbourhood offers significant potential to reduce GHGs from residential and 
institutional buildings. The many environmentally minded homeowners present an opportunity 
to try revolutionary approaches to achieve ambitious targets. 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
13 
 
• 
Suitable conditions for low-impact development (LID) for stormwater management: The 
neighbourhood soil permeability and depth to groundwater offer suitable conditions to manage 
stormwater on site through LID approaches on public and privately-owned land. Implementing 
LID in technically suitable areas across the city to infiltrate, retain and evapotranspirate 
rainwater, will support Lake Ontario’s Health and will help to prepare for the impacts of 
increased rainfall anticipated from climate change. It is expected that the maximum daily rainfall 
in Toronto will be 166 millimeters in 2040, compared to 66 millimeters in 2009. 
• 
Limited open space and urban forest: The neighbourhood has a low rate of green space per 
capita, compared to the rest of the city and a medium-low urban forest cover. The 
neighbourhood offers an opportunity to demonstrate innovative approaches to achieve open 
space, habitat, and urban forest goals within limited available space.  
• 
Heat stress: According to the City of Toronto’s ground surface temperature mapping, some areas 
of the neighbourhood are impacted by heat stress, which will be exacerbated with climate 
change. According to Toronto’s Future Weather and Climate Driver study (SENES, 2011), by the 
end of the century Toronto is expected to warm by 5°C, leading to more variable extreme 
weather. It is anticipated that by 2040 the maximum daily temperature will be 44°C (compared 
to 37°C in 2009). In 2040, the city will experience an estimated 66 days a year of temperatures 
above 30°C (compared to 20 days in 2009), and the number of extended heat waves in the year is 
expected to quadruple those experienced in 2009. 
 
 
TTC Oakvale Greenspace – Future home of the Pocket Tiny Forest 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
14 
 
 
Spotlight on the Climate Emergency and Need for Net Zero Emissions 
Source: Excerpts from Transform TO Net Zero Strategy, Attachment C Technical Report, November, 2021 
and TransformTO: Critical Steps for Net Zero by 2040, Staff Report, November, 2021 
Climate change is the greatest long-term global challenge that human society is facing. It is particularly 
complex because it occurs over a long time-scale, has variable impacts globally and spatially, and requires 
rapid and radical changes to our energy, society, and economic systems. Human-induced climate change 
poses risks to health, economic growth, public safety, infrastructure, livelihoods, and the world’s 
biodiversity and ecosystems. As local and global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions increase, the Earth 
continues to warm at an unprecedented rate. In December 2015, the Paris Agreement was adopted at 
the COP21 by 197 countries. This legally binding intergovernmental treaty on climate change set a goal 
to limit global warming to well below a 2°C, and preferably to a 1.5°C increase, above pre-industrial levels. 
However, current global GHG emissions are not on a trajectory to meet these goals.  
Given the urgency for immediate and deep cuts in GHG emissions…Mayor John Tory and the Toronto City 
Council voted unanimously in October 2019 to declare a Climate Emergency “for the purpose of naming, 
framing, and deepening our commitment to protecting our economy, our ecosystems, and our 
community from climate change.” The Climate Emergency Declaration endorsed a new target to achieve 
net zero GHG emissions before 2050, in efforts to align with limiting global average temperature rise to 
1.5°C. By declaring a climate emergency, governments at all levels are signaling that the situation is dire 
and urgent. In November 2021 the City revised its net zero strategy to be even more ambitious by 
adopting a new net zero target date of 2040 – 10 years earlier than originally planned.  
By 2050, cities are expected to comprise two-thirds of the global population. The manner in which land-
use, urban expansion, construction, buildings, and infrastructure are designed and built will be key 
determinants for reaching net zero and adapting to climate change. According to the International Panel 
on Climate Change, global GHG emissions from buildings will need to be 80 to 90% lower, energy use for 
transportation will need to be reduced by about 30%, and renewables will need to supply 70 to 85% of 
electricity. In addition, improvement of green urban infrastructure, the use of nature-based solutions, 
and effective land-use planning regulations and policies will be required. Cities will be key implementers 
of climate action strategies.  
Net zero means zero. Net zero emissions are achieved when decarbonization reduces GHG emissions to 
as close to zero as possible, and any remaining human-driven emissions are balanced out by an equivalent 
amount of carbon removals. Carbon removals are achieved through carbon sequestration, which focuses 
on restoring natural systems (including vegetation, land, soil) or direct air capture and storage technology. 
Achieving net zero emissions is also referred to as carbon neutrality.  
The Pocket SNAP Action Plan supports direction set out by municipal strategies regarding reduced 
greenhouse gas emissions and climate resilient, low-carbon solutions through integrated projects on 
public and private lands. The Action Plan recommendations will focus on mitigation and adaptation 
initiatives to help address climate change impacts on the neighbourhood, its buildings and infrastructure, 
as well as its natural systems.  
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
15 
 
6.0 SHARED SUSTAINABILITY THEMES 
Through the technical analysis and robust staff and community engagement that were completed as 
part of the action planning process, five sustainability themes that reflect the flavour of The Pocket 
community and the vision of the Action Plan were identified. These themes are based on local 
sustainability priorities, community interests, and technical objectives. Each theme characterizes a 
specific environmental or social focus. Within each theme, a set of guiding principles and indicators have 
been identified (see Table 3); collectively, these themes, principles, and indicators have guided the 
development of the Pocket SNAP Action Plan. These themes will also inform the design of specific 
projects and initiatives that are carried out under this plan moving forward, with each project or 
initiative striving to integrate as many themes as possible. Detailed theme descriptions are included in 
Appendix A. A series of key outcomes for each of the five themes has also been identified in Section 10.0 
of this report. These outcomes, or anticipated changes over time, will be used to measure impact and 
track success over the life of the Action Plan. 
 
                     
 
 
Figure 2 - The Pocket SNAP Action Plan Sustainability Themes                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
16 
 
Table 3 - Sustainability Themes, Guiding Principles, and Indicators 
Sustainability 
Themes 
Guiding Principles 
Indicators 
Ecological Health 
• Improve habitat & connectivity of greenspaces  
• Manage stormwater sustainably 
• Enhance/develop green streets and paths that 
connect and wrap around the community  
• Improve park infrastructure and create additional 
accessible greenspace, integrating human 
enjoyment with nature needs 
• Urban forest 
• Biodiversity, habitat 
• Stormwater 
management 
Environmental 
Consciousness 
• Support home and building retrofits 
• Support renewable energy, district energy 
• Develop accessible/communal EV charging 
• Manage waste sustainably 
• Develop opportunities for gardening, permaculture, 
food production and sharing 
• Develop and encourage sustainable transportation 
options, including bike lanes, walkability and transit 
use 
• GHG reduction / net 
zero 
• Water efficiency 
• Waste management 
• Transportation mode 
split (% 
walk/cycle/drive) 
Social 
Consciousness 
• Support community connections (neighbourly spirit, 
local artists shops and restaurants)  
• Support equity and inclusion (of all ages and 
abilities, cultural and religious, Truth and 
Reconciliation)  
• Support the spirit of sharing (local services, 
resources, expertise, spaces, food, etc.) 
• Support community events and gatherings 
(community-building events, such as eco fairs, street 
sales, parades and neighbourhood-wide parties) 
• Community cohesion 
and inclusion 
• Representative civic 
engagement 
• Hyper local movement 
Unique 
Character of The 
Pocket 
• Maintain the “Pocket Feel”, green and serene, an 
escape from the busy-ness of life 
• Support The Pocket’s sense of community 
togetherness 
• Maintain safe and quiet streets (no ‘through’ 
streets) 
• Enhance and celebrate Hastings Creek 
• Community ownership 
• Local identity and 
pride 
• Sense of place 
Arts and Culture 
• Implement more public art/murals 
• Support local artists  
• Support indigenous artists 
• Use local, public art to tell a story (history of The 
Pocket, natural features, Truth and Reconciliation)  
• Local art 
• Sharing culture 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
17 
7.0 THE SNAP GOVERNANCE MODEL 
The Pocket SNAP was initiated and developed using a highly collaborative approach to foster co-design 
and co-ownership of the Action Plan among key stakeholders and the community. Driven by a cross-
section of priorities, the SNAP governance model allows for the identification, exploration, and 
implementation of shared solutions.    
The project was guided by a Project Management Team (PMT) comprised of staff from TRCA, City of 
Toronto (Environment and Climate, Toronto Water, Parks Forestry and Recreation, and Transportation 
Services), and Toronto Community Housing Corporation. The Pocket Community Association and its 
Pocket Change Committee also played an integral role on the project management team given their 
knowledge of local issues, close connections with Pocket residents, and their ongoing focus on specific 
community initiatives that align with the Action Plan objectives. The Home Retrofit, Sustainable 
Transportation, and Pocket Plus working groups were established to coordinate the involvement of 
these project teams with the SNAP project. Figure 3 illustrates the project management and governance 
structure. 
Figure 3 - Project Management and Governance Structure 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
18 
 
8.0 THE ACTION PLAN CO-DESIGN PROCESS 
The SNAP planning process puts an emphasis on community engagement and co-creation of an Action 
Plan with shared outcomes, including measurable environmental improvements as well as community 
health and well-being benefits. The three-phased approach has been well-tested and proven through 
previous SNAP projects and is comprised of various elements, including achievement of adequate 
baseline understanding through rigorous technical analyses; incorporating meaningful engagement of 
local neighbourhood, government, and agency staff and implementation partners; identifying 
motivating themes and key projects to guide and anchor the plan; building community excitement 
through implementation of quick-start projects; and delivering a conceptual level Action Plan. Further 
details of the SNAP Action Planning Process are illustrated in Figure 4. 
Meaningful community and stakeholder engagement is central to the action planning co-design process. 
While the PCA has completed extensive engagement over the years, SNAP engagement activities aimed 
to refine, or identify new local top of mind issues and motivating interests, shared plan objectives and 
projects and to invite involvement in early on-the-ground projects, build longer-term relationships, and 
facilitate capacity building to help support the action plan implementation. Overall, the PCA has created 
a community that is receptive to the SNAP objectives, they provided integral support throughout the 
action planning process, and will help collaborate with the SNAP team to identify implementation 
priorities over time.   
Health restrictions related to the COVID 19 pandemic dictated the need for the majority of community 
engagement to take place in virtual and/or distanced events. Despite these restrictions, all engagement 
activities were very well attended with substantial participation from the community. A selection of the 
engagement highlights is presented below. Workshop summaries and detailed engagement results are 
available under separate cover.  
Figure 4 - Action Plan Co-Design Process 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
19 
 
Key Engagement Highlights 
The TRCA SNAP team, with immense support from the PCA, hosted extensive engagement throughout 
the action planning process. The PCA was instrumental in helping to promote and communicate SNAP 
activities to residents and stakeholders using their existing subscriber network, by assigning their street 
captains to deliver flyers, and through their marketing resources, including graphic design services, social 
media and website communications. Both the PCA Executive and its Pocket Change Project Committee 
provided content to support presentations, helped present information at the workshops and helped to 
moderate various group activities.  
Two multi-stakeholder workshops were designed and hosted by the TRCA SNAP team in May and 
November of 2021 to bring residents, City staff from multiple divisions, and local stakeholders together 
to co-design a shared Action Plan for The Pocket neighbourhood. The first workshop was attended by 
110 people and focused on exploring the past, present, and future of The Pocket, and identifying 
motivating themes and integrated project ideas. A total of 52 people attended the second workshop 
which was designed to confirm emerging directions, and receive input, gain alignment, and identify next 
steps for a number of key initiatives. Highlights of the creative co-design workshops included: 
•
What I Love/What I Wish – designed to have participants identify locations of importance in
the neighbourhood, both current gems as well as priorities and vulnerabilities.
•
WOW/2050 Cover Story – Designed to uncover what excites residents and stakeholders in The
Pocket and to inspire participants to imagine what the future of The Pocket could look like in
the year 2050 through top news stories and news makers. Outcomes helped reveal local values,
hopes and dreams for the future, as well as perspectives that might not have otherwise been
considered.
•
TCHC Engagement – The SNAP team met with TCHC staff, interviewed resident champions and
administered a resident survey to gain a better understanding of residents’ interests and
priorities with respect to energy efficiency, community programming, special projects and other
elements of their housing complex and surrounding grounds in order to help identify potential
actions and projects for implementation.
In addition to the two community workshops, the SNAP team held broad engagement over the course 
of project with the local Councillor, TCHC staff and tenants, and City staff from Environment and 
Climate, Water, Parks Forestry and Recreation, Transportation Services, StreetArt TO and the Circular 
Economy and Innovation Divisions. The SNAP team also communicated the public engagement results 
to the TTC, through the City’s point of contact for the Institutional Working Group and through the 
TTC’s Community Relations team. Several one-on-one meetings were also held with community 
stakeholders to identify organizational priorities, barriers, concerns and wishes.  
                              
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
20 
9.0 THE POCKET SNAP ACTION PLAN 
The Pocket SNAP is a comprehensive action plan for advancing neighbourhood sustainability that 
integrates local community interests and sustainability objectives under the overarching theme of 
“green, serene and working to become a net zero neighbourhood”. 
The Action Plan, as shown in Figure 5, is organized around four key action areas, including Greenspace 
Revitalization, Rainwater, and Biodiversity; Sustainable Buildings; Streetscape Improvements; and 
Community Enrichment. Each action area is associated with one or more signature projects which were 
identified throughout the planning process based on technical concerns, community feedback, and 
stakeholder priorities. Signature projects are designed to integrate the principles and objectives from 
several of the shared sustainability themes and will demonstrate how multiple co-benefits and diverse 
neighbourhood-wide objectives can be achieved. Each action area may also support other smaller-scale 
initiatives in addition to the signature projects.    
This report represents a high-level summary of the numerous recommended initiatives and actions that 
were identified during the action planning process with the intent that these recommendations be 
implemented over a 5 – 20-year time horizon. Each of the recommended initiatives will need to be 
scoped at a more detailed level to determine feasibility, costs, priority, etc., and further engagement 
with the community and local stakeholder groups will be encouraged to support idea refinement. A 
summary of all recommended actions is included in Appendix 2. 
Supporting COVID-19 Recovery Through a Greener, Healthier Neighbourhood 
The global COVID-19 pandemic has had far reaching impacts. The need to physically distance, and 
even isolate at times, underscores the value of local green space in helping to provide physical and 
mental relief and the importance of neighbourhood connections. The SNAP Action Plan supports 
neighbourhood health and resilience, and together with City and PCA, seeks to support COVID-19 
recovery through: 
•
Supporting physical and mental health through increased opportunity for active lifestyles
•
Increasing local high-quality greenspace and opportunities to connect with nature
•
Providing alternative outdoor transportation options through a safe and active transportation
network
•
Increasing opportunities for improved neighbourhood connections and relationships, check-
ins, extra help
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
21 
Figure 5 – The Pocket SNAP Action Plan Map 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
22 
10.0 ACTION AREA ONE: GREENSPACE REVITALIZATION, 
RAINWATER, AND BIODIVERSITY
Phin Park, the designated off-leash dog park, TTC Oakvale Green Space, and the Oakvale Green 
Community Gardens are much loved and well-used community spaces. Collectively, these areas 
comprise a well-connected green oasis in the neighbourhood. Residents and community groups use 
these spaces year-round to connect and celebrate with neighbours, exercise, walk their dogs, commute 
from A to B, experience nature, grow food, and partake in community programs. In addition to providing 
these social functions, these spaces are critical for supporting a diverse ecosystem and healthy green 
infrastructure. They can also contribute to reducing GHG emissions community-wide. The community’s 
interest is to enhance these assets through increased opportunities for social engagement and 
gatherings, by improving upon and expanding the level and quality of biodiversity, and by applying 
intentional placemaking techniques which facilitate meaningful interactions for visitors. The 
community’s vision for a healthy and thriving green neighbourhood begins with enhancements to these 
green spaces, combined with enhancements to personal green spaces (e.g., residential yards), which in 
turn will support a contiguous and highly functional system of green infrastructure throughout the 
neighbourhood. Figure 6 illustrates the broad range of recommended initiatives that support this action 
area.      
10.1 Phin Park and Community Greenspaces 
Phin Park, located in the heart of the neighbourhood, is approximately 0.5 ha in size and contains a 
basketball court, playground, wading pool, games table, herb garden, and volunteer-run outdoor skating 
rink. The Park is used by individuals throughout the year for informal recreational purposes, but also by 
the community for formal celebrations, events and for the annual art-in-the park summer program. 
Residents view the park as a central hub for activity in the community and a cherished space that is 
enjoyed by all. Through SNAP and PCA engagement activities, the community expressed their interest in 
new amenities and programming, as well as ideas for improving biodiversity within the park and other 
neighbourhood greenspaces.  
The lands immediately west of the Greenwood TTC Yard are formally known as the designated off-leash 
dog park and the TTC Oakvale Green Space. These lands are currently owned by the City of Toronto and 
managed by Parks, Forestry and Recreation. A separate MOU between the TTC and the PCA also exists 
which ensures that this “landscaped buffer” area is maintained for use by the community for 
recreational purposes. The dog park not only provides a space to exercise the family pet, but residents 
also view this space as a place to build friendships and connections with others in their community, and 
a place to appreciate nature.  
The PCA’s Phin Park and Greening Committee (PP&GC) is responsible for leading any greening initiatives 
in the community, for organizing nature-based, educational programming/installations, and for 
overseeing planning and implementation of projects that affect these greenspaces. The Committee has 
been very active and has a number of initiatives underway, including a native pollinator garden in Phin 
Park and ongoing seed distribution, development of a community herb garden, efforts to control 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
23 
invasive species, working with homeowners to encourage native tree and shrub planting, working with 
the City and TRCA to identify other planting opportunities, and organizing Park clean-ups and planting 
events.     
The Oakvale Green Space, which is located to the north and east of the dog park, is more of an area for 
passive recreational activities but also serves as an east-west throughfare for pedestrians travelling 
through the neighbourhood. The Oakvale Green Community Gardens, located at the east end of the 
Oakvale Green Space, is operated by a volunteer-based organization whose mission is to reimagine the 
use of a barren piece of land into a thriving, organic community garden and orchard which harken back 
to the land’s original roots as an agricultural field. The gardens currently comprise 40 garden plots and 
seven perennial beds within the garden and surrounding open space. In 2010, an orchard was added to 
the site which now grows a selection of native and domesticated fruit and nut trees, in addition to berry 
bushes. The garden project has become an oasis for the 30+ members and the surrounding community.  
The list of community inspired recommendations for the local greenspaces include: 
Phin Park Recommendations: 
•
Revitalize existing playground to improve accessibility, offer environmental educational play and
to modernize play experience
•
Investigate opportunity for repurposed shipping container to accommodate indoor programming
when needed, and to provide more storage for event and community supplies
•
Implement wading pool repairs and improvements
•
Assess the feasibility of implementing a fire pit or pizza oven to serve as a central social hub in
the park
•
Implement washroom facilities to support park users
•
Establish a local farmers' market to support access to fresh, healthy food
•
Implement additional seating and lighting for increased enjoyment and safety
General Greenspace Recommendations: 
•
Facilitate more events and programming in the green spaces to celebrate and encourage
community connections (e.g., music jams, youth workshops, open air concerts, sports
tournaments)
•
Expand the number of communal gardening plots beyond what is currently available at Oakvale
Green Community Gardens (e.g., fruit trees, edible shrubs, vegetable plots)
•
Establish a fitness circuit along/ throughout the green spaces to provide fun, accessible exercise
opportunities for all
•
Secure art installations throughout the green spaces to create interest and beauty and to
celebrate local Indigenous, natural, and cultural heritage
•
Plant/replant pollinator gardens, native plants and trees for improved habitat improved
biodiversity and better manage invasive species in both public and personal green spaces
•
Implement a tiny forest for improved biodiversity and educational programming
•
Create new green space with community amenities accessible to the public on roof of TTC yard
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
24 
10.1.1 Recommended Actions 
1.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to create a working group with
the City of Toronto, TCHC, and TTC, to advance the development of a comprehensive Greenspaces
Master Plan which includes Phin Park, TCHC transfer lands, off-leash dog park and Oakvale Green
Space.
•
Funding for the Master Plan development should be shared and/or fundraised by the affected
property owners, in collaboration with TRCA.
•
Master Plan should address guiding principles as stated in Table 3, and sustainability outcomes
discussed in Table 4 in Section 10 and should consider the layout of key existing and proposed
amenities and improvements (e.g., storage facility, farmers market, fire pit or pizza oven feature,
washroom facilities, art installations, interpretive signage and more lighting and seating, etc.)
should be considered while balancing community interests for open space to allow for
unstructured activities/play. Enhancements to overall connectivity and ensure key linkages to the
broader Danforth community and regional trail networks should be considered and should
address privacy and security for adjacent landowners where appropriate.
2.
City’s Parks, Forestry and Recreation division, informed by the Greenspaces Master Plan,
condition assessments and funding considerations, to consider advancing state of good repair
funding for Phin Park to advance:
•
Repairs/upgrades to the existing wading pool
•
Replacement/updating existing playground equipment
•
Enhancement of biodiversity and habitat and interpretative signage
•
Other recommendations from the community as listed above
3.
TRCA to work with PCA, institutional property owners and the City of Toronto to enhance habitat
connectivity and increase biodiversity across all neighbourhood open spaces (public and private)
including:
•
Tree and shrub plantings, creation of pollinator gardens and wildlife habitat improvements
(e.g., bird boxes, bee hotels, etc.)
•
Opportunities should be informed by and complement the Greenspaces Master Plan
identified in 10.1.1 above
4.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to explore the potential to
implement a Tiny Forest pilot project in The Pocket neighbourhood and to utilize the project to
achieve:
•
Increased awareness for the benefits of tree communities on watershed and human health
•
Educational opportunities through interpretive signage or as an outdoor classroom for local
school groups and community organizations. Proposed locations are identified in Figure 6
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
25 
5.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to support green infrastructure
and biodiversity through urban agriculture allowing for:
•
Broader access to fresh, healthy food
•
Increased community building through enhancement and expansion of Oakvale Green
Community Gardens (e.g., edible plants/bushes, garden plots, greenhouse, etc.)
6.
TRCA and PCA to explore opportunities to establish the greenspace system (public and private) as
an environmental education space though:
•
Implementation of attractive and engaging interpretive signage to educate and excite residents
about a Net Zero Vision for the neighbourhood and to inform visitors about the unique ecological
features and functions within these spaces
•
Development of educational programming/communications (e.g., webinars, hands-on
workshops) to develop skills and knowledge related to native gardening, urban agriculture,
invasive species management, fruit tree care, etc. and to encourage single family homeowners to
adopt natural lawns and lawn care practices, to use native plants when gardening, to identify and
control invasive species
7.
City to consider greenspace improvements that facilitate easier and expanded access to green
space and that will encourage both passive and active uses that are designed for people of all
abilities and ages (e.g., fitness stations, seating, etc.).
TTC Oakvale Greenspace community garden 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
26 
10.2 Celebration of Hastings Creek 
This image from a 1924 topographical map shows the presence of Hastings Creek in The Pocket 
neighbourhood. The Creek, which originated north of Danforth Avenue, flowed in a south easterly 
direction through present day Phin Park, continuing south and east through the existing off-leash dog 
park area, south under the CN rail tracks and ultimately draining to Ashbridge’s Bay on the Lake Ontario 
Waterfront. The aptly named Ravina Crescent, on the west side of the neighbourhood, follows the same 
historical alignment as the west branch of Hastings Creek.  
Resident reports suggest that sometime around the 1930s, the area was used as a local landfill (Harper’s 
Dump), and the Creek began being filled with garbage. Until at least the 1950s, the Creek still flowed 
through the neighbourhood. In around the 1960s, the Creek was “buried” or piped to accommodate 
new development in the area, including the Bloor-Danforth Subway line.  
The Creek’s alignment through this neighbourhood partly explains why today there are no east-west 
through streets, and why the neighbourhood has developed that “pocket” feeling. While there are 
several physical markers located throughout the community, including the canoe installation in Phin 
Park, the canoe art installation at Danforth and Donlands, and the small footbridge in the off-leash dog 
park, each of which suggests a nod to the previously flowing Creek, this aspect of the neighbourhood’s 
history is relatively unknown. Residents cherish the buried creek and want to learn more about its 
history. Many have expressed an interest in daylighting the Creek and bringing it back to its natural state 
although this initiative could prove to be physically challenging given the state of current development 
and infrastructure in the area. Having said that, the community would like to explore other 
opportunities to celebrate the Creek’s history and to implement some interpretive elements to serve as 
physical reminders of where the Creek once flowed.  
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
27 
10.2.1 Recommended Actions 
1.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to explore interpretive art and
placemaking ideas for key locations throughout the community to celebrate the history of
Hastings Creek (e.g., at Phin Park pollinator garden, along Ravina Ave, at south end of off-leash
dog park, at canoe sculpture at Donlands and Danforth).
2.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to investigate the potentia for
Hastings Creek to be added as a regular walk on the local Lost Rivers Tours.
10.3 Toronto Community Housing Corporation (TCHC) Grounds Revival 
TCHC housing is centrally located in The Pocket neighbourhood on Phin Avenue, Chatham Avenue and 
Queen Victoria Street. The Phin Avenue complex is comprised of one low rise apartment building and 
several row house units, for a total of 34 rental units. An additional 21 units on Chatham and Queen 
Victoria are also a mix of low-rise, multi-unit buildings, and row houses. The Phin Avenue community is 
comprised of a mix of single residents (mostly in the apartment complex) and families and first-
generation Canadians (as well as new Canadians) in the townhomes. While the complex, like many 
community housing developments, faces many challenges, TCHC residents share an overwhelming 
desire to implement initiatives that will foster a sense of community, safety, and inclusion for those 
living in the complex while also facilitating a stronger connection with the broader Pocket community. 
Residents are interested in seeing improvements made to their space, namely in the form of upgrades 
to the interiors (renovations, new appliances, paint, etc.) as well as improved security features (secure 
bike storage, secure windows, etc.).  While energy conservation was not a priority for its own sake, 
residents expressed some interest in more education on this topic and noted that upgrading to energy 
efficient features would be appreciated. 
Residents at 2 Phin Avenue have demonstrated an enthusiastic and collaborative spirit when coming 
together over shared interests, like the development and future fate of a community garden. The 
garden started out as an informal project by a few passionate residents. The garden has created an area 
of respite and peace for residents during the COVID pandemic and has helped to animate an otherwise 
under-utilized piece of land. Activity at the garden has also helped to deter some unwanted behaviour 
from occurring in this area. The garden’s fate was recently placed in jeopardy by discussion of a land 
transfer arrangement between TCHC and the City, but through determination and collaboration 
residents were able to present an alternative solution to the City and were able to save the garden. The 
garden has now received formal recognition under the City’s Community Garden program. The City has 
also agreed to provide some budget to residents to help support the future expansion of this much-
loved project.  
Through the SNAP engagement process, TCHC residents indicated a desire for revitalization of their 
outdoor spaces including an expansion to the existing community garden with opportunity for rainwater 
harvesting. Residents would love the opportunity to plant vegetables and grow food that is 
representative of their diverse cultures and would allow them access to safe, affordable, healthy food. 
Those interested in the garden also expressed interest in helping to take care of and maintain the 
garden. The sense was that it would be a valuable community asset, a place to connect with neighbours, 
and an opportunity to tend to one’s own food and spend time outdoors. 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
28 
Other suggestions noted by residents included creation of a meditation garden, the addition of a small 
orchard, increased benches for seating, more flowers, shrubs and trees, more spaces for wildlife, 
improved maintenance of community waste bins, parking lot re-surfacing and snow removal, provision 
of secure bike storage and programming for tenants, especially free classes or programs for families, 
adults or youth and those living with a disability, and free materials and training on how to grow food 
and flowers. Creating a greater sense of community, more connection and safe and enjoyable outdoor 
opportunities would greatly enhance the experience for the residents of 2 Phin Avenue.
10.3.1 Recommended Actions
1.
TCHC, in collaboration with TRCA, to develop a comprehensive Master Plan for the 2 Phin Avenue
complex which considers:
•
Resident suggestions for outdoor improvements and amenities
•
Expansion to existing community garden (e.g., vertical gardens, rainwater harvesting, community
orchard, etc.)
•
Safety considerations (lighting, etc.) to encourage safe use of the outdoor spaces (e.g., at existing
gazebo and community garden)
•
Proposed improvements in Phin Park and other green spaces
2.
TCHC, in collaboration with TRCA, to assess outdoor improvements, biodiversity enhancements,
and urban agriculture opportunities at other TCHC properties in the neighbourhood.
3.
TCHC, in collaboration with TRCA, to develop and deliver new educational programming related to
climate mitigation and skills training, including, but not limited to:
•
Orchard care
•
Urban agriculture
•
Horticulture
4.
City of Toronto to continue engagement with TCHC tenants as it relates to the transfer of TCHC
property to City of Toronto, to develop a long-term plan for this transferred land to ensure
community needs are met, including beautification, while not compromising TCHC tenant privacy
and security.
5.
TCHC, in collaboration with TRCA, to continue engagement with residents to develop a retrofit
plan to identify:
•
GHG reduction measures in the buildings
•
Interior upgrades that are needed to improve quality of life (renovations, new appliances, paint,
etc.)
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
29 
 Source: A rendering by a TCHC resident to capture the residents’ vision for an expanded 
community garden 
10.4 Stormwater Management Improvements 
Stormwater refers to rainwater and melted snow that flows over roads, parking lots, lawns, and other 
surfaces in urban areas. Under natural conditions, stormwater is intercepted by vegetation and then 
absorbed into the ground and filtered, and eventually replenishes aquifers or flows into streams and 
rivers. Later, part of this water is returned to the atmosphere in the form of evapotranspiration. In 
urbanized areas however, impervious surfaces such as roads and roofs prevent precipitation from 
naturally soaking into the ground. Instead, the water hits hard surfaces and runs off rapidly into storm 
drains, municipal sewers and drainage ditches which are diverted to local streams, rivers and lakes. As 
the runoff travels through these systems, pesticides, road salts, heavy metals, oils, bacteria, and other 
harmful pollutants are transported and end up in our streams, rivers and lakes. The sheer force and 
volume of polluted runoff causes increased downstream flooding risks, riverbank and bed erosion, 
increased turbidity, combined sewer overflows, destruction of aquatic habitat, infrastructure damage, 
and contaminated streams and rivers.  
In order to mitigate the undesirable impacts of urbanization on watercourses and associated 
infrastructure, a range of stormwater management practices need to be implemented. More 
specifically, low impact development (LID) practices, which are a type of stormwater management 
control practice, are designed to preserve the natural hydrologic balance in newly developing areas or 
replicate it, wherever possible, in already developed areas. They can protect and enhance the quality 
of stormwater discharged to lakes and streams and reduce the volume and frequency of combined 
sewer overflows in older urban areas. LID practices can complement traditional stormwater 
management infrastructure such as storm drains, conveyance, and end-of-pipe facilities.   
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
30 
Within The Pocket neighbourhood, residents shared many ideas for how to improve stormwater 
management from simple solutions individuals can implement on their own property, to more complex 
solutions that require municipal funding and input. To date, the neighbourhood has no innovative 
stormwater management practices in place, other than the existing storm sewer network. A number of 
suggestions we heard from residents include: 
•
Install more permeable surfaces and less paving where technically and financially feasible and
based on an assessment of community and environmental benefit (e.g., TTC parking lot, excess
tarmac at École élémentaire catholique du Bon-Berger)
•
Encourage more rainwater capture and retention where possible
•
Implement more green streets and strive for stormwater solutions that are also beautiful (e.g.,
bioswales)
•
Consider using rain gardens in areas that have flooding regularly
•
Discourage grassed or paved lawns and encourage natural lawns as an alternative
10.4.1 Recommended Actions
1.
City to apply appropriate Green Street standards for all new road reconstruction projects in the
neighbourhood where technically feasible and consider green infrastructure practices to improve
stormwater management.
2.
The City, in collaboration with TRCA to encourage institutional property owners to depave
impervious surfaces where possible or direct runoff to permeable areas or to LID practices.
3.
The Sustainable Neighbourhoods team should continue to generate awareness about the
mandatory downspout disconnection program to alleviate strain on the City’s stormwater
infrastructure and offer DIY workshops to educate homeowners about proper downspout
disconnection and rain barrel installation and maintenance techniques.
An example of permeable pavement (LID) in the Pocket neighbourhood 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
31 
Figure 6 - Greenspace Revitalization, Rainwater and Biodiversity Action Area Map 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
32 
11.0 ACTION AREA TWO: SUSTAINABLE BUILDINGS 
Within the City of Toronto, 57 per cent of GHG emissions come from buildings. Of that, 60% come from 
the residential building sector. Buildings represent the largest source of GHG emissions city-wide, and 
this is primarily because most buildings burn natural gas for space and water heating, accounting for 
approximately 8.2 MT CO₂e per year. 
TransformTO is the City’s strategy to reduce GHG emissions in Toronto to net zero by 2040. The strategy 
identifies actions and targets for key sectors, including buildings, and aligns with other City plans and 
strategies where applicable. TransformTO specifically identifies the following short-term milestones for 
buildings by 2030, which will support the achievement of 2040 Net Zero Goals, and which are applicable 
to The Pocket Neighbourhood:    
•
100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built (or redeveloped) to be near zero
greenhouse gas emissions
•
Greenhouse gas emissions from existing buildings will be cut in half, from 2008 levels
•
At least 50 per cent of energy used comes from renewable or low-carbon sources
The roofs and open spaces around buildings in the neighbourhood also offer an opportunity to achieve 
the City’s and TRCA’s goals for sustainable stormwater management, biodiversity and urban forest, plus 
socio-economic co-benefits. 
The Pocket SNAP Action Plan supports this direction through two initiatives geared to residential and 
institutional buildings in the neighbourhood. Areas of focus for each of these initiatives are illustrated in 
Figure 7.  
11.1 Residential Retrofits 
The Pocket Change Retrofit project has been addressing this segment and provided a clear 
understanding of the opportunities and challenges that a neighbourhood retrofit program encounters. 
The SNAP community engagement activities enriched this understanding with homeowner perspectives 
and experiences as they considered energy/emissions-reducing retrofits to their homes. This overview 
presents information from these two sources. 
Efforts to address GHG emissions from the single-family residential sector are critical given that 31% of 
the City’s GHG emissions from buildings are generated by the 422,000 single family homes across the 
City. It is estimated that on average, individual homes in the M4J area code generate 8.34 tonnes of 
GHG per year and The Pocket Change Project’s target of having 80% of homeowners undertake a retrofit 
and averaging a 55% reduction in GHG emissions by 2030, would require nine to ten homes in The 
Pocket, per month, to be retrofitted. The 1,100 single family homes in The Pocket also play a 
fundamental role in achieving the neighbourhood’s, and the City’s, stormwater, biodiversity, urban 
forest, and waste management goals. 
Despite the City’s aggressive targets, financing support, and their commitment to achieving net zero and 
urban forest cover targets, existing City incentives and support will not be enough to achieve these 
goals. Further work is needed to identify implementation barriers and to assist homeowners navigating 
the home retrofit process. 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
33 
Each of the Pocket SNAP engagement workshops generated feedback from participants related to 
residential building retrofits.  At Workshop 1, participants were asked to identify motivations, priorities, 
obstacles, and desired support with respect to undertaking renovation projects in their homes. At 
Workshop 2, further discussion about home retrofits explored potential solutions to address 
implementation barriers and to understand the best communication methods to reach people about the 
Pocket Change Project. Discussion questions for this portion of the workshop were conceived by Pocket 
Change Project executive members. Participants noted that the main motivations for undertaking 
retrofit work included the age of housing and fact that systems/materials were reaching end of life. 
Participants who noted they were planning to make aesthetic changes also noted that it made sense to 
consider sustainability as part of those decisions. Others noted they were motivated to undertake work 
to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. Projects that were top of mind for residents included window 
updates, insulation, other energy efficiency upgrades, and exterior landscaping projects.  
11.1.1 Barriers to Retrofitting Single Family Homes in The Pocket Neighbourhood and 
Beyond 
Existing programs and incentives from the various levels of government and utilities are proving to be 
insufficient to complete the levels of retrofits needed to achieve the net zero goals established by the 
City of Toronto and the Federal Government, and to achieve other neighbourhood, municipal and 
watershed sustainability goals. There are still several significant obstacles that need to be overcome, as 
was noted by many of The Pocket residents during the engagement sessions, and which are similar to 
those observed across the City of Toronto. These obstacles are summarized below.  
Baseline Housing Conditions 
•
Approximately 3,500 people living in 1,100 homes
•
90% of homes are 80 – 100 years old (constructed prior to 1940)
•
Mix of brick and wood construction
•
67% of homes heated with natural gas
•
53% of residents in M4J postal code reported feeling drafts around windows and 64%
around doors
•
On average, produce 8.34 tonnes of GHG emissions (tCO2e) per home per year (in M4J
postal code)
•
Average household income is $130,000, but is a mixed community with some households
being better equipped financially to afford home retrofits
•
10% of homeowners have had an energy audit completed at their home and 6% have
implemented some of the recommendations received through the audit process
•
Front and rear yards are small, landscaping is not manicured, and most homes don't have
automated irrigation
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
34 
Decision-Making and Process Complexity - In The Pocket community, “complexity” was the number one 
obstacle highlighted by residents during public engagement. The process of undertaking a home retrofit, 
to significantly reduce greenhouse gases, implement eco-landscaping, or manage stormwater 
sustainably is extremely complicated from the initial decision-making phase, through finding and 
managing the right contractors, to financing. Some of the factors that homeowners need to consider in 
the process, include: 
•
Understanding GHG generation from their home and learning and deciding about the most
appropriate bundle of GHG reduction actions for their specific case
•
Understanding most appropriate eco-landscaping and stormwater management solutions for
their specific property and life situation (from an environmental and technical perspective, but
also in terms of aesthetics, maintenance needs or usability of the outdoor spaces)
•
Prioritizing or phasing of the retrofit process, based on cost vs. value, as most homeowners
cannot implement all recommended actions at the same time. We heard from homeowners in
The Pocket that even after getting an energy audit, they did not have clarity on how to proceed
and their initial motivation to act “had frozen”
•
Coordinating with other desired improvements for their home, such as additions, kitchen
renovations, etc.
•
Potential compromises to the home and changes in aesthetics or character. Residents in The
Pocket were particularly concerned about losing space in small homes and about negatively
impacting the structural integrity of very old homes
•
Making financial decisions, including balancing energy/ eco-landscaping retrofits costs with other
renovation or financial priorities in their lives, and doing multi-year financial planning towards
home retrofits
•
Finding and managing a knowledgeable contractor that they can trust and could do the work
•
Disruption during the construction project
•
Navigating existing government and utilities programs and incentives
•
Having the time to go through the process, with busy family lifestyles and competing priorities
Residents in the Pocket, like other neighbourhoods in the City, feel overwhelmed by the process and are 
concerned about not having enough time or the knowledge to navigate it alone. 
Financial Obstacles - Deep retrofits towards significant GHG reduction and actions towards significant 
eco-landscaping and sustainable stormwater management represent a significant investment, especially 
for seniors with fixed income or lower income homeowners. Existing financing programs and incentives 
from government and utilities have increased in the last few years, which is encouraging, but, with the 
current landscape they are still not sufficient to make the business case to most homeowners. Some of 
the main challenges for the homeowner include: 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
35 
 
Inadequate Incentives: 
• 
Existing incentives are limited to certain product components and don’t cover some of the most 
practical ways of proceeding in certain homes, like for example hybrid air source heat pumps. 
• 
Incentives are small, in relation to the overall expenditure needed to achieve significant GHG 
reduction yet distort decisions of homeowners who are trying to take advantage of those 
incentives, as a priority. 
• 
There are very few incentives for meaningful sustainable stormwater management (like 
raingardens) or eco-landscaping for habitat generation or water efficiency. 
• 
There are no incentives or funding for retrofit coordination services which is one of the most 
needed services to move ahead with retrofits. 
• 
The homeowner needs to pay upfront. 
• 
The process of obtaining the incentives is daunting, starting with the selection of an energy 
auditor. 
Uncertainty:  
 
• 
Homeowners in the Pocket were concerned about making an investment in energy retrofits, 
without having any clarity on the return related to energy savings (with fluctuating energy costs 
and carbon pricing). 
• 
Homeowners in the early stages of the decision-making process are concerned about paying for 
an expensive energy audit, without having certainty that they will be able to go ahead with the 
retrofits necessary to recover the cost of the audit. 
Concerns About Increasing Debt: 
 
• 
Even though attractive financing has been made available through the Home Energy Loan 
Program (HELP) and future CMHC and City of Toronto zero interest loans, people still need to pay 
and are fearful about more debt competing with other financial pressures and priorities. 
Short Tenure: 
• 
Many homeowners will likely move out of their house before seeing a payback. Although HELP 
partially addresses this concern, by attaching the loan to the house instead of the homeowner, 
the homeowner who makes the investment will still not be able to enjoy the long-term financial 
benefits from doing the work. There are also concerns about whether a home with a loan 
attached to it could be harder to sell. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
36 
 
Lack of Capacity in the Industry - A third challenge for implementing home retrofits towards GHG 
reduction, and other sustainability actions, is lack of capacity of auditors and contractors, and shortage 
of supplies.  In terms of GHG reduction, through the engagement process in The Pocket, and other SNAP 
neighbourhoods, it was noted that residents that had already decided to move ahead with energy 
retrofits, found it extremely hard to find knowledgeable experts that they feel they could trust and there 
were issues with availability of supplies to move forward in the timelines that worked for them: 
• 
With the sudden boost in the demand for energy audits, there are many unexperienced auditors 
offering their services, generating low quality audits, in some cases with serious technical 
mistakes. 
• 
There is a lack of qualified contractors who have wholistic knowledge of GHG reduction and 
criteria for phasing or prioritization of actions, including customization for the uniqueness of 
each home. Many contractors discourage homeowners from emissions-reducing actions or 
provide incorrect information. 
• 
Even for contractors working in silos (e.g., only insulation/ windows or only HVAC), there is not 
enough capacity for the current demand. 
• 
Contractors show little interest in comprehensive, integrated deep retrofits. The financial returns 
are not great for them, the work needs to be high quality (it is hard to delegate to junior 
assistants); and requires investment of time in answering questions and concerns from 
homeowners. 
• 
There is limited supply of materials to do the work required for deep retrofits, especially 
windows, insulation with low embodied carbon and HVAC equipment components. 
In terms of other actions, like the implementation of low impact development solutions for stormwater 
management or the development of habitat, there are very few knowledgeable landscape contractors, 
and the supply of native beneficial plants is very limited in local, easily accessible nurseries. Also, 
landscaping contractors prefer to push hardscaping retrofits, as opposed to plantings or softscaping, as 
these generate more income. 
Many Homeowners with Unique Needs - For government and other agencies trying to advance building 
retrofits, the main obstacle is the many property owners to deal with (as opposed to new development, 
with one developer for many homes, or multi-unit residential buildings). Blanket, city wide, or Canada-
wide solutions have not been effective enough in responding to the conditions from diverse building 
stock in the City of Toronto, and the unique needs, priorities, and barriers of individual homeowners, 
and therefore uptake has been slow. 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
37 
11.1.2 Proposed Approaches to Help Homeowners Retrofit Their Homes 
The Pocket Change Project: Going a Step Further to Achieve a Net Zero Community 
The Pocket Change Project has developed a community-based home retrofit model that will continue to 
accelerate the rate of retrofits in The Pocket community with a focus on GHG reduction. The Project is a 
Committee of the Pocket Community Association, which represents the approximately 1,100 homes in 
the neighbourhood. Consistent with recommendations from the City of Toronto’s Existing Buildings 
Strategy (and based on the neighbourhood’s building stock and residents’ capacity and priorities), the 
Pocket Change Project has developed a robust program to help residents in the neighbourhood better 
understand, plan for, and execute GHG-reducing retrofits.  
The objective of the Pocket Change Project’s retrofit coordination service is to support homeowners 
who are undertaking residential retrofits by developing a customized Retrofit Roadmap for their home, 
assisting homeowners find qualified and knowledgeable contractors, providing oversight to ensure 
quality control, and measuring the actual energy and greenhouse gas reductions gained as a result of 
the retrofit work. The project also aims to promote neighbour-to-neighbor education and knowledge 
sharing and plans to organize bulk purchasing of climate-friendly home energy equipment to help 
reduce costs for homeowners. The overarching goal of the Project is to reduce both the individual and 
collective carbon footprint so that The Pocket can become a net zero or carbon neutral neighbourhood. 
The Pocket Change Project has been advising Pocket residents informally over the last few years. The 
Project has now assembled a team of building experts with decades of experience in building science, 
energy assessment and architecture to run a more formalized retrofit coordination service. The Project 
has now convened the first cohort of Changemakers - homeowners who have launched their retrofit 
journey. It is the intention that all Changemakers will begin by having an energy audit conducted on 
their home and they will then work with a registered energy advisor to develop a retrofit plan based on 
the results of the energy audit, renovation scope, and available budget. Results from Changemaker 
experiences are documented in case study summaries and shared on the Pocket Change Project 
website, and through information sharing webinars and at community events to motivate others to take 
action. More detailed information about the Pocket Change Project is provided in Appendix C.  
Home Retrofit Working Group (HRWG) 
In addition to the Pocket Change Project’s efforts, a home retrofit working group (HRWG) was 
established to help guide discussions related to home retrofit initiatives during the development of the 
Action Plan. This working group consisted of representatives from the City’s Environment and Energy 
Division, TRCA, and the Pocket Change Project. The HRWG focused on energy efficiency initiatives but 
also considered fostering support for a broader range of environmental benefits, including stormwater 
management, urban forestation and ecological integrity, water conservation, and urban agriculture. The 
City and TRCA supported the Pocket Change Project by sharing information on baseline GHG data and 
the latest City strategies, and by providing insights on community engagement and potential governance 
structures, based on previous experiences. The City and TRCA also supported the initiative by giving 
exposure to the project with organizations such as FCM, by supporting multiple grant applications led by 
the Pocket Change Project and including Pocket Change Project as partners in grant applications led by 
TRCA. 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
38 
 
SNAP’s Home Retrofit Program Model 
The SNAP program has developed a home retrofit program model that has been successful in 
accelerating implementation of basic sustainability actions in single family homes, by taking advantage 
of the neighbourhood-based approach. The SNAP model has five main elements that have proven to 
drive action, including locally targeted marketing that is customized to the specific building stock and 
unique concerns of the homeowners; face-to-face home consultations with trusted advisors that help 
homeowners initiate decision making and which offer guidance on a range of topics (e.g., energy 
efficiency, water efficiency, eco-landscaping, etc.); guidance for homeowners related to available 
government and/or SNAP incentives; on-going support for homeowners to ensure retrofit process is not 
delayed or stalled, goals are achieved and to help track success; and, cross-promotional opportunities to 
improve resident engagement outcomes.  
As per the SNAP model and philosophy, TRCA recommends that key sustainability actions, beyond GHG 
reduction, be advanced in the neighbourhood homes. Ideally, support and incentives should be offered 
to help homeowners implement these actions, using a one window, one stop approach (e.g., while 
promoting GHG reduction, also discussing water saving measures). A multi-objective, one window 
approach will achieve efficiencies and socio-economic co-benefits, for example health and well-being, 
while also helping to achieve municipal and TRCA objectives. This one window approach allows staff to 
develop trust and build connections with residents while discussing areas of interest that are a priority 
for residents. This approach also allows staff an opportunity to introduce other topics of concern that 
may not be top of mind for some residents.  
During the SNAP engagement process homeowners in The Pocket showed significant interest in the 
following actions: 
• 
Eco-landscaping, especially adding pollinator plants, and replacing lawn or paved areas with 
native gardens, to generate habitat and beauty. 
• 
Rainwater harvesting and re-use will help to conserve water and reduce runoff. 
• 
Urban agriculture, to support healthy living, while reducing GHGs from transportation of goods. 
• 
Waste reduction through sharing and circular practices. One initiative that was recommended by 
several residents was to reinstate a tool library. Other recommended actions included surplus 
harvest sharing (from urban agriculture) and sharing of electric vehicles. More detail on this 
initiative is found in Section 12.2. 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
39 
From a technical perspective, the following actions need to be advanced to achieve the neighbourhood’s 
sustainability goals and support the City of Toronto and TRCA goals: 
•
Stormwater retention and infiltration through low impact development for stormwater
management, such as rain gardens, to help improve water quality and reduce erosion potential
along the Toronto waterfront. The neighbourhood soils and groundwater table offer suitable
conditions for these practices.
•
Tree planting in neighbourhood homes is key to achieving the neighbourhood’s urban forest
cover goal of 40%. TRCA’s GIS Tree Planting Opportunity Analysis showed that there is available
space to plant up to 117 trees in back yards and 385 trees in front yards, not counting the road
right-of-way in front of the homes.
Not-for-profit groups, social enterprise businesses, and agencies with expertise in eco-landscaping and 
urban agriculture, including TRCA, can lead the advancement of implementation of these actions 
including the logistics of delivery, education, and incentives. It is recommended that these actions are 
cross-promoted and coordinated alongside the Pocket Change Project’s Home Retrofit Coordination 
Service to avoid confusion and marketing burn-out, and to take advantage of the benefits of the one 
window, one stop shop approach. 
The SNAP Home Retrofit Program model has been highly effective in accelerating the implementation of 
basic sustainability actions, across multiple environmental themes, and in increasing uptake of 
government incentives. Where applicable, it is recommended that elements of the SNAP model be 
adopted and used to support the work of the Pocket Change Project. Further details about the SNAP 
Home Retrofit Program Model can be found in Appendix D.   
Figure 7 - SNAP Home Retrofit Program Model 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
40 
11.1.3 Other Opportunities to Reduce GHG Emissions from the Residential Sector 
District Energy: An Effective Solution, But Not an Immediate Solution 
District Energy is an approach for local energy production matched to local use, not only at a building 
level, but at a neighbourhood level. It is an approach to applying technologies that coordinate the 
production and supply of heating, cooling, domestic hot water, and power to optimize energy efficiency 
and local resource use. District Energy systems have been widely implemented in existing urban areas in 
Europe and are starting to be piloted in Canada, mostly in new development and redevelopment 
scenarios. From a technical perspective, climate-resilient and low-carbon district energy systems have 
shown to be one of the most efficient solutions in reducing emissions and primary energy demand. 
 In looking at the built environment in The Pocket neighbourhood, there could be opportunities for solar 
energy generation on the extensive roof area of the Greenwood TTC yards and geothermal energy 
generation in Phin Park and adjacent open spaces. This energy could theoretically be shared to satisfy 
the demand in the neighbourhood homes.  
While the cost to society of implementing a district energy system to get the neighbourhood to net zero 
could be lower than the added cost of retrofitting the 1,100 homes (including the cost to homeowner, 
plus government incentives and costs), the logistics of implementing the system in an existing urbanized 
area like The Pocket neighbourhood are extremely complicated. Some of the tasks that would need to 
be addressed include recruiting hundreds of homeowners to switch to the new system, reconstructing 
streets and parks to install piping and other transmission infrastructure, updating legislation and 
developing an entity to operate the system. Through exploratory discussions with the City of Toronto, 
energy utilities and other experts in the field, it was understood that based on the current landscape, in 
a neighbourhood like The Pocket, it could take decades to get a District Energy system up and running.  
The Canadian District Energy Association estimates that 60% of the costs of implementing a community-
scale geothermal system in an existing urban area are related to reconstructing streets to accommodate 
new infrastructure. It recommends that District Energy systems are timed with planned road 
reconstruction projects. The Pocket neighbourhood does not have major road reconstruction plans for 
the next 5-10 years.
What residents are saying about district energy - The Pocket community, with its progressive, 
environmentally conscious residents, supports District Energy solutions and has expressed a desire to 
offer its neighbourhood as a pilot site that could demonstrate how to implement and operate a system 
in older residential neighbourhoods in the city. However, residents have also expressed their concern 
about waiting too long for a system to be built, and the risks and consequences of not acting 
immediately in the fight to reduce GHGs to the levels required. Therefore, the Pocket Change Project 
has focused on advancing deep home retrofits as a first step to reducing GHGs immediately, while 
preparing the homes for a potential future district energy system. 
Electricity Grid 
Upgrades to the Toronto Hydro electricity supply, including storage, increased line capacity, distributed 
energy management, resilience, etc., are needed to accommodate the growing number of ASHP and PV 
installations in the residential sector as well as the growing demand for EVs.   
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
41 
11.1.4 Recommended Actions
Neighbourhood-Scale Recommendations: 
1.
Government agencies should continue to support the important work of the Pocket Change
Project within the neighbourhood and beyond.  These supports include:
Financial Support (or support in fundraising) to: 
•
Continue engaging, recruiting and supporting a higher number of homeowners within The Pocket
neighbourhood, to implement deep retrofits
•
Continue seeking bulk purchasing opportunities to reduce the cost of retrofits
•
Continue developing and formalizing the Home Retrofit Coordination Service Model
•
Train other community organizations and leaders to scale the program to other neighbourhoods
across the city
•
Document the process of deep retrofits and the program model and share lessons learned.
•
In-kind support for technical advice, exchange of learnings, and assurance that the Pocket
Change Home Retrofit Coordination Service Model is in line with government initiatives and
plans.
•
Improving the visibility and profile of the Pocket Change Project.
2.
The Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, and Pocket Community
Association) to design and advance initiatives to help homeowners implement other sustainability
and resilience actions at their homes (beyond GHGs), including:
•
Low impact development for stormwater management (such as rain gardens, etc.)
•
Tree-planting in front and back yards and in road right of ways to increase the forest cover
•
Eco-landscaping for habitat generation and to improve outdoor water conservation
•
Rainwater harvesting
•
Urban agriculture
•
Waste management
Support to homeowners should include incentives, education (through workshops and other resources) 
and logistical support for the installation or implementation of actions.  
The Pocket Change Project should remain focused on encouraging home retrofits to reduce GHGs 
though other initiatives may be coordinated and cross-promoted. These other initiatives can be 
advanced through partnerships with organizations or businesses with an expertise in the specific areas 
mentioned above. 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
42 
 
3. The Sustainable Neighbourhoods team to identify synergies with sharing and circular economy 
initiatives in the neighbourhood. For example: 
 
• 
Consider the development of a tool library to support do-it-yourself actions 
• 
Encourage harvest sharing from urban agriculture including the neighbourhood homes 
• 
Encourage sharing of native plant seedlings to support propagation in front and back yards 
• 
Encourage household item sharing or circular use of household items to reduce waste. 
4. The Sustainable Neighbourhoods team to explore opportunities and partnerships to train and hire 
equity-deserving groups to advance home retrofits across all sustainability themes.  
5. The City of Toronto and local utilities should continue to consider the feasibility of district energy 
in The Pocket Neighbourhood as a longer-term solution towards the achievement of the 
neighbourhood’s and the City’s Net Zero goals. The implementation of a district energy system in 
The Pocket should be coordinated with road reconstruction and significant park redevelopment 
plans. The Pocket neighbourhood has great potential for a pilot or demonstration project on how to 
advance district energy in this neighbourhood typology, which is common across the City. As the 
neighbourhood homes are retrofitted, they will be prepared for an easier connection with the 
system. In addition, this progressive environmentally minded community has expressed its support 
for this type of system and will likely be more open than other communities to sign up and bear the 
inconvenience during the construction process. 
6. In the longer term, the City of Toronto and local utilities to consider grid upgrades and the role of 
the neighbourhood in order to implement energy storage as a means of transitioning to net zero. 
Energy storage should be considered for institutional properties as well as homes.  
System-Change Recommendations 
While this report is focused on actions within The Pocket neighbourhood, the following system-level 
recommendations were confirmed during the planning process and are fundamental to achieve these 
sustainability goals in this neighbourhood and others: 
1. Better and more convenient financial support will be necessary. This includes: 
• 
Increasing the amount of financial support for home retrofits 
• 
Allowing for more flexibility to cover a broader range of actions that respond to diverse housing 
conditions 
• 
Covering the costs of retrofit coordination services to facilitate home retrofits 
• 
Making the process to get the financial supports easier 
 
2. More government regulations (from all levels of government) will be required. For example, a net 
zero building code and requirements for on-site stormwater management for existing 
development.  
3. Increased industry capacity of energy advisors, HVAC and insulation installation contractors, and 
landscape professionals, as well as material supply issues will need to be addressed.  
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
43 
4.
Streamlined process to undertake feasibility analysis, as well as implementation and operation of
district energy and energy storage systems needs to be facilitated to ensure faster and more
efficient adoption.
11.2 Pocket Plus Institutional Greening Project (PPIGP) 
The PPIGP initiative was prompted in response to a Council request in February 2021 to convene 
relevant Division Heads, Corporation Officials, and School Boards to continue the work of the Pocket 
Change Project by creating an institutional roundtable to explore opportunities to leverage institutional 
assets and expertise to ‘green’ the neighbourhood and maximize opportunities for environmental 
transformation. Together with the Pocket Change Project, described above, these two initiatives are 
collectively known as the Pocket Change Plus Project which is understood to be a pilot project to test 
neighbourhood scale implementation of TransformTO. To date, Councillor Fletcher has exerted 
tremendous effort to support this initiative. 
PPIGP is being led by the Director, Environment and Climate Division and will be used to pilot a 
neighbourhood scale implementation of TransformTO. Results of this initiative will be documented in a 
comprehensive Net-Zero Community Energy Implementation Strategy, along with identification of a 
project delivery pathway including budgetary and capital expenditures. Institutional assets being 
considered as part of this initiative include Phin Park, TTC Greenwood Yard, TCHC facilities, TDSB 
properties and Toronto Fire Services (Fire Station 323). 
To date, the PPIGP team has coordinated institutional stakeholders to undertake capital budget reviews, 
evaluate asset conditions (including building inventories and energy use, demand and GHG emission 
estimates) and identify potential sustainability initiatives in an effort to identify a series of community-
wide energy solutions. Solutions being explored as part of this initiative include conservation measures, 
public transit improvements, network of EV charging stations and renewable energy generation and 
storage (e.g., solar photovoltaics, air source heat pumps, wastewater heat recovery, geo-exchange). 
Several quick start institutional projects were identified as part of this work, including but not limited to: 
•
Net-Zero pathway for Toronto Community Housing and other City buildings
•
Neighbourhood-based home retrofit efforts through the Pocket Change Project (see Section 4
above)
•
Greening TTC Fleet, as a model for sustainability and innovation (opportunity to pilot and
replicate as part of TTC's Innovation & Sustainability Program)
•
EV Charging Infrastructure opportunities on institutional property, including TTC employee
charging stations (see also Section 6.4 below)
•
Installation of three new public charging facilities in the neighbourhood
•
2MW of roof top PV (largest in Ontario) for TTC Greenwood Yard, and potential energy storage
opportunities
•
Geothermal systems in City and private lands
•
Wastewater energy recovery
•
Fire station resilience opportunities
•
Design competition to synthesize the architectural, communal and environmental components of
sustainable neighborhoods.
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
44 
 
The technical assessments and identification of opportunities to maximize GHG reduction are being 
undertaken by a team of technical experts from various institutions. Through the SNAP public 
engagement process, residents in The Pocket neighbourhood were able to provide additional insights, 
sharing many innovative ideas for how they would like to see the institutional properties in the 
neighbourhood transformed. These not only include GHG reduction opportunities, but also community 
enrichment and social prosperity opportunities. The following are the community inspired suggestions 
recorded by the SNAP team:  
TTC Greenwood Yard – The community has long been interested in exploring options for the conversion 
of the TTC roof deck, to make better use of a space that is currently being underutilized. Two ideas for 
the facility have been raised by the community, including: 
• 
Rail deck park – open to the public, rooftop garden with vegetables, trees and flowers and 
stormwater management capabilities, public amenities, and attractive fencing around the 
perimeter of the yard and interpretive signage/beautification and seating at train viewing 
location on Oakvale Avenue. Development of a rail deck park would fall under the responsibility 
of CreateTO 
• 
Renewable Energy Hub - solar energy generation through rooftop solar panels as well as energy 
storage options that would offset consumption by TTC trains and the facilities on site and/or 
export excess energy to the grid and/or homes in The Pocket neighbourhood 
TCHC Property (2 Phin Ave) – As noted in Section 9.1.1, residents of 2 Phin Avenue recommended 
improvements in four key areas, including: 
• 
Outdoor improvements (urban agriculture, eco-landscaping, and community amenities) 
• 
Building retrofits to improve water and energy efficiency and to improve overall comfort 
• 
Programming opportunities to help build community connections, build environmental 
awareness, and teach new skills 
• 
Security upgrades to minimize unwanted behaviours and to improve resident experience and 
sense of security 
Kapapamahchakwew: Wandering Spirit School – Several recommendations were suggested for both 
the building and property of the Wandering Spirit School, including: 
• 
Physical renovations needed to transform building into a modern facility which no longer reflects 
residential school architecture 
• 
Exterior improvements including reclaiming full use of the running track which has been 
compromised over the last few years to accommodate a temporary access way for residents to 
access Danforth Avenue, landscaping improvements to expand the pollinator garden and other 
native plantings based on Indigenous knowledge and traditions 
• 
Incorporation of local and/or Indigenous art murals on the school fencing which faces Chatham 
Avenue as a tool for Indigenous education and storytelling and to help beautify the 
neighbourhood 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
45 
 
Community Meeting Space – As an active community with lots of local events and programs being 
offered, the limited community meeting space was raised. More meeting space would be appreciated to 
accommodate events during inclement weather, and to provide an additional option that will allow for 
more community programming to take place.     
EV Charging Stations – The community is recommending that that a plan be developed to support EV 
updates consistent with TransformTO objectives. This may include charging stations being installed at 
institutional properties in the neighbourhood. Stations could be used by staff during business hours, but 
also available for residents to use on evenings and weekends. Additional charging locations were also 
recommended by the community and are outlined in Section 6.4 below. At present, there is an appetite 
for EVs, but a lack of charging facilities is a barrier for many.   
Phin Park and Green Spaces – The community treasures the park and provided recommendations for 
numerous enhancements (see Section 9.1.1). However, being an environmentally minded community, 
residents also brought up the opportunity of using the park for geothermal district energy which could 
both produce and supply energy to the community and reduce the community’s reliance on natural gas, 
which is a significant contributor of GHG emissions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Madinah Masjid     
                                       
 
The Madinah Masjid is one of the oldest and largest mosques in Toronto. The Mosque caters to the 
culturally diverse Muslim population in Toronto through way of daily prayers, Friday and Eid Prayers and 
by offering an Islamic school and other Islamic programs and activities. The Mosque is active within The 
Pocket community and supports local organizations through leftover food donations and volunteer 
assistance with planning and implementation of projects. The Mosque has also been working to 
incorporate various sustainability improvements at the facility including efforts to reduce waste and 
lower water and energy consumption and are looking at the feasibility of installing solar panels on the 
roof. In order to garner support for these projects, the Mosque is educating and building awareness 
within their congregation about the financial and environmental benefits of undertaking these types of 
retrofits. While the Mosque is not within the scope of the Institutional Working Group, the TRCA, 
through SNAP, is exploring opportunities with the Mosque for partnerships and projects that could help 
achieve neighbourhood objectives.  
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
46 
 
11.2.1 Recommended Actions 
1. Pocket Plus team, led by City of Toronto to finalize the Net-Zero Community Energy 
Implementation Strategy 
2. SNAP team and TTC to engage CreateTO to determine the feasibility of incorporating, where 
possible, residents’ recommendations listed above for integrated projects that incorporate, in 
addition to GHG reduction, other sustainability and quality of life elements, and to formalize a 
community engagement process to communicate the recommendations from this assessment. 
3. City to study the feasibility of district energy systems, while working to raise awareness and 
offering education to residents to encourage buy-in when the City is ready to implement. 
 
Wandering Spirit School – Open space with potential for pollinator garden implementation 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
47 
 
Figure 8 - Sustainable Buildings Action Area Map 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
48 
 
12.0 ACTION AREA THREE: STREETSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS 
The streets in The Pocket neighbourhood provide a great opportunity to showcase the ‘streets as places’ 
philosophy, given the existing high quality of the streetscape. The streets are already beautiful from an 
aesthetic perspective with mature trees and historic homes, and thanks to the low traffic volumes 
throughout the neighbourhood, the streets are also alive with social activity.   
Residents in the neighbourhood appreciate having beautiful, safe streets and they see the potential that 
local streets provide beyond transportation. Through the SNAP engagement process, residents 
suggested a wide range of actions to help maximize use of these spaces while creating a pleasant and 
safe user experience.  Many of the suggestions related to safety and access improvements for 
pedestrians and cyclists, as well as actions to address traffic calming in the few key locations where 
traffic volume and speed continues to be a problem. Residents also indicated their desire for green 
streets with more trees and gardens, and less paving to help manage stormwater by reducing the 
volume of runoff and removing pollutants. Lastly, residents want to create engaging and lively 
streetscapes to help showcase the neighbourhood’s unique character and to use these spaces as a 
canvas to educate people about both Indigenous history and environmental issues, both of which are 
fundamental to The Pocket community.  
The potential to use the local road network to help reduce GHG emissions is also significant. Streets 
provide a viable option for locating EV charging infrastructure, particularly in neighbourhoods like The 
Pocket where the majority of homeowners rely on on-street parking. Streets that are repurposed with 
inviting, convenient and safe cycling and pedestrian infrastructure will encourage more residents to 
choose active transportation as their preferred mode of travel, especially for short trips under 5km, 
which has been identified as a critical step to achieve the City’s short term 2030 targets.       
The following sections outline the key initiatives that will help transform the streetscapes in The Pocket 
neighbourhood.  Specific locations and general recommendations are highlighted in Figure 9, 
Streetscape Improvements Action Area.  
12.1 Laneway Project 
The East Jones, South Chatham Laneway in The Pocket neighbourhood has been the subject of much 
attention from PCA members. The existing laneway services residents along Ravina Crescent who access 
their garages and driveways via the laneway. While there is a temporary walking path in Phin Park, 
running parallel to the laneway, many pedestrians and cyclists continue to use the laneway to access the 
neighbourhood, often because the temporary walkway is not well maintained in winter, but also as a 
matter of convenience. Residents have noted several safety and drainage issues which need to be 
addressed, including a rusty and broken guardrail, localized ponding during rainfall events, failing 
pavement and inadequate lighting. As more and more people use the laneway, it is imperative that this 
area be improved for safety and utility. 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
49 
 
 
Source: TRCA 
 
The PCA has developed a comprehensive plan and an inspiring vision which includes transforming the 
alleyway into a space for environmental engagement, creative inspiration, and reconciliation. The 
community would like to see the laneway brought to life with vertical gardens, planter boxes, 
permeable pavement, an integrated pedestrian/cycling path, and a series of beautiful art murals. With 
permission from residents on Ravina Crescent, many of whom have already expressed interest in 
participating, the murals would be painted on the fences and garage doors lining the laneway and they 
would be designed to portray climate action and the many environmental initiatives of the 
neighbourhood. Additionally, the project aims to connect with the Indigenous heritage of this area and 
to build on the community connection between the Kapapamahchakwew - Wandering Spirit School and 
the broader Pocket community. This would include exploring ideas for meaningful engagement with the 
school community and local Indigenous artists.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
50 
 
The inclusion of an integrated pedestrian/cycling path into the revitalized laneway would improve the 
current situation, which entails using a portion of Wandering Spirit School’s sports track as a temporary 
walking path for the community. Provision of a new pathway would allow the school to regain full use of 
its playing field and track and would eliminate the problems associated with the poor winter 
maintenance. If implemented, the revitalized laneway would be a significant focal feature and a source 
of community pride in the neighbourhood.   
 
Inspirational image of a beautiful Toronto Laneway (Source: PCA) 
 
12.1.1 Recommended Actions 
1. City of Toronto and TRCA to continue to support the PCA and the Kapapamahchakwew - 
Wandering Spirit School to implement the community’s vision for the revitalized laneway, 
including: 
• 
Explore the feasibility of various pedestrian safety opportunities 
• 
Improve grading and drainage, ideally with low impact development practices where technically 
feasible 
• 
Return full use of track back to Wandering Spirit School for school use 
• 
Implement Indigenous art project 
2. TRCA, the City and PCA to explore opportunities for external funding sources to help facilitate 
implementation of the Laneway Project elements, including improvements on the public realm 
and repairs to existing private fences and garage doors.  
3. PCA to continue to engage Ravina Crescent homeowners to build support for the project and to 
explore capacity for resident funded contributions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
51 
 
12.2 Pedestrian and Cycling Improvements  
The Pocket neighbourhood is an established community which was developed in the early 1900s. Today, 
the neighbourhood is full of character with older homes, quiet streets lined with mature trees, kids 
playing outdoors, and limited traffic, primarily because of the number of dead-end streets and the lack 
of through streets running from Jones to Greenwood. Many residents expressed that it is a joy to walk 
or cycle through the neighbourhood where they run into neighbours, see kids playing, and where they 
can enjoy connecting with nature. Residents are extremely interested in reducing motor vehicle traffic 
even further and providing more opportunity for recreational activities and active transportation, not 
only to help reduce transportation-induced GHG emissions, but also to improve quality of life and to 
ensure the quiet character of the neighbourhood is maintained. The Pocket Change Project has a 
Sustainable Transportation Working Group, which works to improve pedestrian, cycling and other 
sustainable transportation infrastructure. Through the SNAP engagement activities, residents shared 
locations and ideas to expand the cycling network and suggested improvements that could help make 
walking and cycling safer and more enjoyable for everyone. 
12.2.1 Recommended Actions 
1. City to consider intersection improvements at Chatham and Euston (e.g., curb bump out to 
shorten cross walk making it easier for pedestrians to cross safely). 
2. City to investigate opportunities to create a new pedestrian crossing at Oakvale and Greenwood, 
and at suggested locations along Jones Avenue (see Figure 9). 
3. City and TTC to explore the potential to create a new pedestrian accessway south of TTC yard to 
Greenwood Avenue.  
4. City to investigate potential to incorporate improvements to Jones Avenue bike lanes when the 
street is next resurfaced, including protected bike lanes integrated with on-street EV charging. 
5. City to explore creating a dedicated east-west cycle trail through the neighbourhood (in addition 
to the existing pedestrian walkway) to encourage active transportation. 
6. City to investigate opportunities for a new Bike Share (or other) station within The Pocket 
neighbourhood and provide for more secure bike parking in Phin Park and other key locations 
throughout the neighbourhood. 
7. The Sustainable Neighbourhoods team to develop and promote an educational campaign which 
explains the environmental and health benefits of active transportation and encourage residents 
to walk or cycle for trips under five kilometers. 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
52 
12.3 Traffic Improvements 
In addition to the above noted pedestrian and cycling improvements, several recommendations were 
also suggested by residents which would further help to manage traffic in the neighbourhood and/or 
would help to reduce GHG emissions from the transportation sector. 
12.3.1 Recommended Actions 
1.
City to implement traffic calming, and where technically feasible integrate with LID (e.g., green 
bump outs) and/or green infrastructure at the following locations:
•
Shudell, Chatham, Boultbee, Hunter, Baird, and Ravina
2.
City to explore the feasibility of installing new traffic lights in the following locations:
•
Strathcona/Baird/Jones
•
Chatham and Euston intersections
3.
City to explore potential for an alley to connect east end of Chatham to the Danforth.
4.
The Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City and PCA) to explore opportunities to 
encourage residents to use transit, carpool or telework as part of their regular routine.
5.
City to consider installing “No Idling” signs in strategic locations throughout the 
neighbourhood. 
12.4 EV Charging Network 
Transportation is the second leading contributor of GHG in the City accounting for 36% of emissions, 
most of which (73%) comes from personal vehicles. The City’s Net Zero strategy identifies that mode 
switching – swapping your car for walking, taking transit, or carpooling – should be the priority for 
reducing emissions, followed by vehicle electrification. In addition to GHG reductions, proliferation of 
electric vehicles will also bring about other benefits for residents, including improved air quality, 
reduced noise pollution and reduced urban heat island effect.   
Within The Pocket neighbourhood, 45.5 % of residents take transit to work which is higher than average 
for Toronto and 36.7 % of residents rely on their personal vehicle to commute to work, which is below 
the City’s average, meaning fewer people in The Pocket commute by car and more people use transit. 
The Pocket community is strongly focused on becoming a net zero community and residents understand 
that changes to driving habits is a major pathway to net zero. Given the neighbourhood’s proximity to, 
and convenience of accessing public transit, it would be possible to further influence commuting 
behaviours through a robust education and awareness campaign. In addition, residents have been 
advocating for communal EV charging stations to be installed in the neighbourhood. Despite the fact 
that there are many residents living in the neighbourhood who wish to switch to an electric vehicle, 
many homeowners do not have a private driveway or garage where they can install an EV charger.  As 
such, communal stations are integral to EV uptake. 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
53 
 
The City has recently completed a successful on-street EV charging station pilot program and is now 
planning for further expansion city-wide. The Pocket Change Sustainable Transportation Working Group 
also considers EVs and charging station needs in its scope. Residents in the neighbourhood have 
suggested a number of specific locations, as illustrated in Figure 8, for EV charging stations.  
12.4.1 Recommended Actions 
1. City to continue working with Toronto Hydro, Toronto Parking Authority and institutional 
properties to implement a total of six confirmed charging stations (four on Jones Ave and two on 
Chatham – three of which have been installed) and to study technical feasibility of shared EV 
charging stations at other locations identified by the community. 
2. Pocket Change Sustainable Transportation Working Group to explore opportunities to consider 
advancing neighbour-to-neighbour EV car and charging station sharing. 
3. City to work with institutional properties to explore feasibility for EV charging stations, that could 
be used by residents after business hours, at the following institutional properties:  
• 
TCHC and TDSB properties, Toronto Fire Station 323, and TTC Greenwood Yard  
 
4. At a system level, City to explore potential to provide EV purchasing incentives to augment 
Provincial and Federal incentives. 
5. TRCA and PCA to use community engagement opportunities to educate residents about the 
benefits of EV or hybrid vehicle ownership to encourage greater uptake.  
6. City to develop a plan for the roll out of EV charging to meet TransformTO objectives.  
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
54 
Figure 9 - Streetscape Improvements Action Area 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
55 
13.0 ACTION AREA FOUR: COMMUNITY ENRICHMENT 
The Pocket neighbourhood has developed a strong sense of community among its residents and is 
already rich from a social engagement perspective. Many residents in the neighbourhood are engaged 
and socially conscious and are committed to creating the best place to live in the City. As one resident 
noted during an interview with the Toronto Star in March 2009, The Pocket is “the kind of place you 
move to and discover quickly that you never want to leave.” The community association has a highly 
active membership base, several sub-committees led by dedicated residents, and they host a wide 
variety of community events each year which appeal to a broad range of interests and ages. All of these 
aspects help to enrich the lives of residents and improve their quality of life by connecting them with 
others, by sharing knowledge and experiences, by tapping into peoples’ interests, by uniting people in 
the community, and by building capacity to tackle issues and affect change in the neighbourhood.      
Responding to residents’ input, SNAP Action Plan supports community enrichment by focusing on 
priority areas of interest and by providing recommendations that will ultimately result in creating 
meaningful experiences, memorable spaces and that will lead to increased enjoyment and appreciation 
for the community and for one another.  Figure 10 illustrates many of the recommendations for 
community enrichment. 
13.1 Art 
Art, whether intentional or fortuitous, has a way of transforming neighbourhoods from the banal to the 
extraordinary. Art contributes to a sense of place and identity through its subject matter, by engaging 
local artists and crafts people, and by following a collaborative implementation process which fosters 
resident engagement and community building. Public art is a reflection of community expression and 
can be used to communicate values and culture, history and aspirations. It can be used to add beauty or 
hide imperfections, to tell a story and to educate. 
Source: Google Streetview 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
56 
There are numerous examples of public art in The Pocket neighbourhood, from the canoe sculpture at 
Danforth and Donlands, to the street mural near Phin Park, to the colourful mural on a garage door, to 
the secret installations, including tree carvings and bowling pins on hydro poles. Residents in The Pocket 
neighbourhood have a clear understanding of the transformative power of art and they have expressed 
a strong desire to use public art not only to create a unique identify for the area and to add beauty and 
interest to the neighbourhood, but also as an educational tool, a community building tool and an 
opportunity to support Truth and Reconciliation.  Figure 10, Community Enrichment Action Area Map 
identifies the ideas and suggestions for art that were presented by the community.    
13.1.1 Recommended Actions 
1.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to work with local artists, art-
based NGOs, and Foundations to facilitate more community-focused art initiatives across the
neighbourhood, including visual and performing arts.
2.
TRCA and PCA to consider developing a self-guided art walk tour for the neighbourhood (e.g.,
through a mobile app and/or interpretative signage).
3.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to support implementation of
the community’s vision for the Laneway Project, including involvement of local and Indigenous
artists and infrastructure improvements (see Section 11.1 for more details).
4.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to support art projects that
celebrate or advocate for environmental action, Indigenous Reconciliation, and the
neighbourhood’s history.
5.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to support art initiatives that
generate awareness on the buried Hastings Creek (see section 9.2 for more details).
13.2 Sharing Economy 
The sharing economy is defined as “a peer-to-peer activity of acquiring, providing, or sharing access to 
goods and services often facilitated by a community-based online platform” (Investopedia.com). Within 
the City of Toronto there are already many businesses in all sectors, who are supporting a sharing, or 
circular, economy, including Repair Café, Communauto and Feed it Forward. The benefits of adopting a 
sharing economy are plentiful, including environmental benefits, like GHG emission reductions which 
occur as a result of reducing waste and transportation, income and affordability benefits, knowledge 
and skill sharing, convenience, and improved social prosperity.  
The City’s Circular Economy & Innovation Unit, within the Solid Waste Management Services Division, 
conducts research and planning to help the City incorporate circular economy principles into its 
programs, policies, and processes. The overarching goal of the unit is to make Toronto the first 
municipality in Ontario with a circular economy which will help to achieve social and environmental 
outcomes, improve economic performance and profitability, reduce reliance on raw materials, and 
increase resiliency of City services and infrastructure. 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
57 
The Pocket SNAP Action plan supports initiatives that encourage a sharing economy in The Pocket 
neighbourhood as a means of promoting the three Rs of reduce, reuse, recycle and to leverage these 
opportunities to help raise awareness about environmental issues, to help improve access to services 
and goods, and to encourage increased social connections and community building. During the action 
planning process, participants were asked to share what they currently love about The Pocket 
neighbourhood. Many of the responses related to sharing activities that are already happening in the 
neighbourhood, including the community garden, growing food for sharing, the former tool library that 
used to lend out tools, and social gatherings. When participants were asked what they would wish for in 
their neighbourhood, there was overwhelming feedback suggesting that residents would love more 
opportunities to increase sharing in the community. 
Several suggestions identified by residents included: 
•
Bring back the tool library
•
Garden sharing and/or plant exchange
•
Shared food production
•
Sharing of public spaces (e.g., school)
•
Communal EV car charging stations
•
Repair fairs
•
Sharing experience and information to reduce GHG in homes
•
Bike sharing
•
Music sharing at Phin Park and Oakvale Green Space
•
Inter-community commerce
•
Communal compost
•
Green powered neighbourhood-wide high-speed internet
13.2.1 Recommended Actions 
1.
City’s Solid Waste Management Services Division, in collaboration with the SNAP team, to explore
circular economy initiatives that could be piloted or implemented in The Pocket neighbourhood.
2.
TRCA and PCA to investigate opportunities to operationalize a local tool lending library in
conjunction with Repair Cafes in The Pocket neighbourhood.
3.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, Pocket Change Project Sustainable
Transportation Working Group and Phin Park and Greening Committee) to explore technical
feasibility, implementation partners, and locations to facilitate a bike sharing program, communal
EV charging (see also Section 11.4) and garden exchange program to trade native plants and
harvest.
4.
TRCA and PCA to increase capacity for both personal and communal gardening and composting,
either through Oakvale Green Space or other implementation partners.
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
58 
5.
TRCA and PCA to create a ‘sharing map’ for The Pocket neighbourhood which highlights locations
where sharing takes place (e.g., tools, herbs, bikes, lawn mowers, repair locations for cell phones,
tablets, iPads, etc.).
6.
TRCA to encourage businesses and organizations in The Pocket neighbourhood to register with
TRCA’s Partners in Project Green’s Material Exchange program which diverts millions of tons of
otherwise waste materials by connecting businesses generating useful waste with receivers.
7.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to utilize community events as
opportunities to facilitate sharing or circular economy initiatives, and educate residents about the
circular economy, sustainable consumption, and the City’s goal of zero waste.
13.3 Community Programming 
The Pocket community is very well-connected and community oriented. The PCA is already very active in 
programming, hosting a wide variety of events every year, including street parties, community street 
sales, art in the park, music festivals, porch parties, Pride Day festivities, winter skating parties and 
more. Residents have overwhelmingly noted that the sense of community and variety of social events 
are two of their favourite things about living in this neighbourhood.  
Source: PCA 
Fostering social connections and building social capital helps expand social networks and build trust and 
mutual support among residents, while offering both mental and physical health benefits. These 
characteristics ultimately help to build more resilient communities that are better equipped to self-
organize, result in better rates of cooperation and collaboration, civic engagement, and an improved 
ability to take action in response to acute shocks, incidents and disasters.   
Through the various SNAP engagement initiatives, residents indicated a strong desire for even more 
opportunities to connect with neighbours through events like repair fairs, forest therapy walks, plant 
exchanges, garden committee, Adopt-a-Tree program, skill building workshops, or other opportunities 
to engage youth and seniors in the community. A poll identified the community’s level of interest in 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
59 
participating and volunteering in a variety of potential programs or projects with The Pocket. 
Approximately one third of workshop participants indicated they would most like to participate in DIY 
workshops, parks and greenspace plantings/activities and community social events. There was also a 
high interest in volunteer activities with approximately 25% of participants indicating that they would 
like to volunteer at community social events.  
The Pocket SNAP Action Plan supports community programming and recommends leveraging 
established opportunities, in addition to offering new educational programming to help raise awareness 
for environmental and sustainability issues to ultimately help enhance physical, social, and ecological 
connections within the community over time.  
13.3.1 Recommended Actions 
1.
TRCA and PCA to support innovative community programming initiatives that foster
neighbourhood connections and that help advance the objectives of the Sustainable
Neighbourhood Action Plan.
2.
TRCA and PCA to support volunteer recruitment in the neighbourhood to help identify and
build capacity for community leaders.
3.
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to investigate
opportunities to build a community programming/meeting space or examine partnership
arrangements that would facilitate broader community use of existing public or private
facilities in the community (e.g., at Kapapamahchakwew - Wandering Spirit School, École
élémentaire catholique du Bon-Berger, the Mosque, TTC yards, local businesses and other
institutions).
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
60 
 
Figure 10 - Community Enrichment Action Area Map 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transforming Action into Results: How Action Area Recommendations will Contribute to GHG 
Reductions 
Greenspace Revitalization, Rainwater and Biodiversity 
• 
Increasing canopy cover and biodiversity through tree and shrub planting helps build natural 
system resilience, increases carbon sequestration, and reduces urban heat island effect which 
in turn lowers demand for air conditioning. 
• 
Planting 989 trees will equate to a reduction of approximately 2,983 lbs/1353 kg C02 
equivalent of carbon per year. 
• 
Using green space networks to locate convenient, safe, and inviting active transportation 
infrastructure throughout the neighbourhood will encourage more walking and cycling, 
especially for trips under 5km, resulting in reductions in car use for local trips. 
• 
Improving opportunities for urban agriculture, including local food production and farmers’ 
market, will help decrease overall food mileage.   
• 
Installing interpretive signage to educate visitors about climate change and the role natural 
systems have in reducing GHG emissions and the vision for a Net Zero Community will build 
community awareness and inspire action. 
• 
Increased participation in rainwater harvesting and naturalized landscaping initiatives can 
help reduce demand on municipal water supply. 
Sustainable Buildings  
• 
Encouraging homeowners to electrify their homes for heating, cooking and hot water will 
significantly reduce GHG emissions and will ensure homes are ready to connect to potential 
future district energy systems. 
• 
Supporting homeowners to undertake sustainable retrofits will help reduce GHG emissions 
by lowering heating and cooling energy demand. 
• 
Investigating long-term potential for district energy solutions either through solar power at 
the TTC Greenwood Yard, or geothermal in Phin Park, could help capture significant GHG 
reductions while addressing energy demand.  
• 
Sharing lessons learned from residential retrofits will help to scale actions across the City and 
other geographical areas with associated reductions in GHG emissions. 
• 
Development and implementation of a retrofit strategy for institutional properties in the 
neighbourhood will reduce GHG emissions through building upgrades and technology 
conversions. 
Streetscape Improvements 
• 
Implementation of EV charging network within the neighbourhood provides the necessary 
infrastructure to support/encourage EV ownership and usage. 
• 
Improved cycling and pedestrian infrastructure will help to encourage more people choosing 
active transportation as their preferred mode of travel, helping to reduce the overall number 
of car trips. 
• 
Educational signage related to anti-idling will help reduce GHG emissions from parked cars. 
Community Enrichment 
• 
Offering educational programming opportunities will build awareness about climate change 
issues and the benefits of low carbon living. 
• 
Fostering and supporting a sharing economy will help to reduce waste, encourage reuse and 
build community connections.  
• 
Encouraging local, urban agriculture initiatives will help to reduce food miles and will support 
healthy lifestyles. 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
62 
 
14.0 MEASURING SUCCESS 
 
The Pocket SNAP has been designed to address core environmental and socioeconomic priorities, which 
support numerous municipal and conservation authority plans and strategies. To measure impact and 
success over time, a framework of long-term neighbourhood-scale target outcomes has been identified 
based on the action plan’s shared objectives. These are outlined in Table 4. ‘Outcomes’ are defined as 
observed changes anticipated over the long term (by 2040).  
 
Table 4 - Target Outcomes (Longer-Term Observed Changes) 
SUSTAINABILITY 
OBJECTIVE 
KEY OUTCOME 
Ecological Health  
How we allow the 
environment to 
function here 
• Achieve the City of Toronto’s urban forest targets by increasing cover within the 
neighbourhood from 26% to 40% by 2040. This can be achieved by planting trees 
across all land use types in the neighbourhood (see Enhancing the Urban Forest 
above).  
• Increase biodiversity, including % of native species and habitat, to improve urban 
forest resilience and respond to climate change. 
• Reduce stormwater runoff through on-site retention, infiltration, and 
evapotranspiration, in order to improve water quality and reduce erosion along 
the Lake Ontario waterfront. 
• Increase awareness and promote stewardship towards sustainable stormwater 
management and the neighbourhood’s natural resources and build collaborative 
partnerships for improving them.  
Spotlight: Enhancing the Urban Forest  
The neighbourhood urban forest canopy can be 
increased by 15% through planting an 
estimated 1131 trees across public and private 
properties: 
• 
385 in residential front yards 
• 
117 in residential back yards  
• 
268 along local streets 
• 
24 at multi-unit residential buildings 
• 
57 in parking lots (e.g., retrofits) 
• 
63 on institutional properties 
• 
32 on commercial properties 
• 
43 in Phin Park 
• 
7 TTC Yard Extension 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
63 
 
Environmental 
Consciousness  
How we act and 
demonstrate 
sustainable behaviour 
in the built 
environment 
• Through actions within the neighbourhood, support the City of Toronto’s target of 
reducing 65 per cent emissions, from 1990 levels by 2030 and becoming Net Zero 
by 2040.  As per Transform TO’s Net Zero Strategy, in order to accomplish the 
2040 targets, the following 2030 milestones should be reached: 
1. GHG emissions from existing buildings are cut in half, from 2008 levels 
2. At least 50 per cent of energy used comes from renewable or low-carbon 
sources  
3. 100 per cent of redevelopment in the neighbourhood is designed and built to 
be near zero greenhouse gas emissions  
• Through actions in the neighbourhood’s single-family homes, support The Pocket 
Change Project’s targets for 2030, including:   
1. 80% of homeowners will have undertaken a GHG-reducing retrofit 
2. 55% reduction in GHG emissions in single-family homes from 2008 levels 
• Through actions in the neighbourhood, support the City of Toronto’s waste target 
of diverting 70% of residential waste from the City’s waste management system. 
• Increase percentage of permeable surfaces in the neighbourhood. 
• Increase percentage of people walking or cycling to work and/or everyday 
destinations. 
• Increase percentage of bike share users and ridership within and near the 
neighbourhood. 
Social Consciousness 
How we live together 
here, our code of 
conduct 
• Maintain existing community cohesion in the neighbourhood by supporting 
community events and activities that encourage social interaction. 
• Increase, through programing and neighbourhood improvements, equity and 
inclusivity of all ages and abilities, incomes, and cultural and religious views.  
Support truth and reconciliation activities. 
• Increase civic engagement, including:  
o 
increase partnerships and collaboration towards neighbourhood 
improvements 
o 
increase volunteerism and participation in neighbourhood programming 
o 
increase fundraising by community members, for community causes. 
• Grow the hyper-local movement through:  
o 
Increase involvement of local artists and use of local services 
o 
Grow sharing practices between community members  
Unique Character of 
The Pocket  
How we honour and 
respect the sense of 
place 
• Maintain existing community ownership, identity, and pride by supporting 
residents’ involvement in local action and implementing programming that 
reflects residents’ priorities. 
• Improve sense of place by advancing neighbourhood actions, especially in the 
public realm. 
• Maintain the “Pocket Feel”, green and serene, an escape from the busyness of life.  
Arts and Culture  
How we celebrate 
culture, living, and the 
compelling role of art in 
communicating/sharing 
our messages 
• Increase neighbourhood art installations and cultural programming. 
• Increase awareness about existing art in the neighbourhood. 
• Increase local and Indigenous artist engagement. 
*Note: As noted in the City of Toronto’s Existing Buildings Strategy, achieving the GHG goals will take a concerted 
and coordinated effort involving multiple actors, including federal, provincial and municipal governments, as well 
as industry associations, financial institutions, trade unions, the real estate sector, and of course,-home and 
building owners. These targets cannot be achieved, unless the provincial electricity grid is decarbonized. 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
64 
 
In support of the long-term target outcomes above, additional shorter-term indicators can be used to 
track progress in the right direction. These are referred to as ‘outputs’ and represent direct results of 
project or program activities.  
Table 5 illustrates a selection of examples, or possible, measurable outputs for each action plan theme 
as well as a summary of the multiple objectives they collectively support. This table is not intended to 
suggest that all indicators listed will be tracked. The SNAP team, in consultation with PCA and 
appropriate project partners, will determine on a project-by- project basis which indicators are most 
appropriate and which there is capacity to track.   
A Performance Monitoring Plan will be developed to confirm specific monitoring and evaluation 
strategies for the outputs and outcomes identified. A baseline is available for many of the indicators, 
and where not available will be obtained prior to work being undertaken. 
Table 5 - Example Target Outputs (Shorter-Term Direct Actions) 
ACTION AREA 
 
EXAMPLE OUTPUT INDICATORS 
SUSTAINABILITY 
THEMES ADDRESSED 
Greenspace 
Revitalization, 
Rainwater and 
Biodiversity 
• Area of improved habitat through restoration or enhancement 
• # of native trees, pollinator plants and shrubs planted  
• # of low impact development projects implemented to manage 
stormwater 
• # of urban agriculture projects implemented  
• # of actions implemented to improve user experience in parks and 
open spaces 
• % of residents that say the experience in the park and open spaces has 
improved 
• Ecological health 
• Environmental 
Consciousness 
• Social 
Consciousness 
• Unique 
character of The 
Pocket 
• Arts and Culture 
Streetscape 
Improvements 
• # of shared EV charging stations implemented in the neighbourhood 
• # of actions to improve pedestrian cycling conditions 
• # of actions to beautify and animate streets using art and landscape 
opportunities 
• # of actions to improve sustainable stormwater management in streets 
• % residents shifting from car to walk/cycle for everyday trips (decrease 
in car ridership, increase in walking and cycling as primary mode of 
transport) 
• Reduction in vehicular speeds due to traffic calming measures (data 
collected through speed cameras) 
• % decrease in crashes and other traffic incidents due to traffic calming 
and traffic safety measures 
• Ecological Health 
• Environmental 
Consciousness 
• Social 
Consciousness 
• Unique 
Character of The 
Pocket 
• Arts and Culture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
65 
 
Sustainable 
Buildings 
• # of ‘Changemakers’ – residents participating in The Pocket Change’s 
Retrofit Coordination Service 
• # of participants in home retrofit workshops 
• # of homes implementing GHG reduction, stormwater management, 
eco-landscaping, waste or tree planting 
•  # of sustainability/resilience actions implemented in homes (i.e., install 
a rain barrel, complete air sealing, install new windows, plant a shade 
tree, etc.)  
• # of institutional properties implementing deep retrofits 
• # of partnerships developed to advance sustainable retrofits in 
buildings 
• Ecological Health 
• Environmental 
Consciousness 
• Social 
Consciousness 
• Unique 
Character of The 
Pocket 
• Arts and Culture 
Community 
Enrichment 
• # of programs to support community building and connections, 
enjoyment and sustainable action 
• # of participants in environmental education programs 
• # of volunteers/ volunteer hours to advance sustainability and improve 
community life. 
• # of art installations and art programs 
• # of reconciliation initiatives in partnership with members from 
Indigenous communities 
• # of sharing or circular economy initiatives that help to reduce waste 
while building community connections 
• Ecological Health 
• Environmental 
Consciousness 
• Social 
Consciousness 
• Unique 
Character of The 
Pocket 
• Arts and Culture 
15.0 NEXT STEPS 
This shared Pocket SNAP Action Plan was co-developed with a focus on collaborative implementation. 
Next steps include: 
 
1. Develop Annual Work Plans – The SNAP team (including PCA, TRCA and City staff, as applicable) will 
meet annually to develop annual work plans based on community, TRCA and City priorities. Work 
plan initiatives will reflect consideration for volunteer and staff capacity as well as available funding 
and/or resources.  
2. Establish Implementation Teams – The SNAP team (including PCA, TRCA and City staff as applicable) 
to establish implementation teams where needed to focus on individual initiatives.  Implementation 
teams will be led by lead individuals from PCA, TRCA and the City where applicable. Implementation 
teams will identify the process for having projects implemented, including required approvals, 
funding availability, potential partners and roles, volunteer needs, timing, phasing, etc. The 
Implementation teams will also identify a performance monitoring plan for their respective initiative 
including an evaluation framework of key short and long-term output and outcome indicators, data 
sources and timelines for tracking their respective initiative(s). Monitoring plans should be reflective 
of volunteer/staff capacity and available resources. 
3. Seek External Funding Opportunities in Support of Community-Based Projects – TRCA and PCA to 
explore with City and other community stakeholders to identify internal resources and program 
alignments that could help support advancement of neighbourhood objectives. TRCA will also 
support the community to pursue external funding, opportunities that leverage public funding, and 
to help augment available resources for implementation.   
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
66 
Appendix A - Action Plan Sustainability Themes Descriptions 
Sustainability Theme 
Description 
Ecological Health 
The community’s natural heritage and urban forest is enjoyed, well cared for, and 
expanded to support diverse local habitat and connections. This green 
infrastructure system is resilient to climate change impacts, provides many health 
and environmental benefits, and supports the natural water cycle and 
improved stormwater management throughout the neighbourhood. 
Environmental 
Consciousness 
The community is well educated about local climate-related risks and is committed 
to becoming Canada’s first, net-zero community with a focus on reducing GHG 
emissions through extensive building retrofits and implementation of infrastructure 
to facilitate EV use or other forms of active transportation. The community is also 
focused on improving waste management through a sharing economy framework, 
and on reducing water consumption by practicing indoor and outdoor water 
conservation, making use of high efficiency appliances and fixtures, and using 
alternative water sources such as rainwater where possible. 
Social Consciousness 
Residents exhibit strong values focused on equity, inclusion, diversity, accessibility 
and Truth and Reconciliation. Residents are active and connected in their 
community and feel a strong sense of belonging. They practice courtesy and 
respect for all people and environments. There are opportunities for local 
leadership and for collective decision-making and action toward shared goals. 
Unique Character of 
The Pocket 
Residents take great pride in their community, and they value the unique character 
and lifestyle their community offers. Residents are civic-minded and take great 
pleasure in being part of a close-knit, highly engaged community that places strong 
value on community connectedness, celebrating and welcoming diversity in the 
community, and acknowledging the area’s Indigenous, cultural and ecological 
history.  
Arts and Culture 
Residents enjoy vibrant spaces, programs, and events that support understanding 
and local history, celebration of local talent, strengthening of community identity 
and sense of place. This includes local events and celebrations, and wayfinding and 
art in the public realm. 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca  
 
 
 
67 
Appendix B - Summary of Action Plan Recommendations 
ACTION AREA 
KEY PROJECT 
RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 
EENSPACE 
REVITALIZATION, 
RAINWATER AND 
BIODIVERSITY 
PHIN PARK AND 
COMMUNITY 
GREENSPACES 
 
 
1. Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to create a working group with The City of 
Toronto, TCHC, and TTC, to advance the development of a comprehensive Greenspaces Master Plan which 
includes Phin Park, TCHC transfer lands, off-leash dog park and Oakvale Green Space. Funding for the 
Master Plan development should be shared and/or fundraised by the affected property owners, in 
collaboration with TRCA. Master Plan should address guiding principles and sustainability outcomes and 
should consider: 
• 
Layout of key existing and proposed amenities and improvements (e.g., storage facility, farmers market, 
fire pit or pizza oven feature, washroom facilities, art installations, interpretive signage and more lighting 
and seating, etc.) should be considered while balancing community interests for open space to allow for 
unstructured activities/play. 
• 
Enhancements to overall connectivity and ensure key linkages to the broader Danforth community and 
regional trail networks should be considered and should address privacy and security for adjacent 
landowners where appropriate.  
2. City’s Parks, Forestry and Recreation division, informed by the Greenspaces Master Plan, condition 
assessments and funding considerations, to consider advancing state of good repair funding for Phin Park 
to advance repairs/upgrades to the existing wading pool, replacement/updating existing playground 
equipment, enhancement of biodiversity and habitat and interpretative signage, other recommendations 
from the community. 
3. TRCA to work with community groups, institutional property owners and the City of Toronto to enhance 
habitat connectivity, increase biodiversity, and improve stormwater management across all 
neighbourhood open spaces (public and private) including: 
• 
Tree and shrub plantings, creation of pollinator gardens and wildlife habitat improvements (e.g., bird 
boxes, bee hotels, etc.), low impact development for stormwater management and other green 
infrastructure projects. 
• 
Opportunities should be informed by and complement the Greenspaces Master Plan 
4. Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to explore the potential to implement a 
Tiny Forest pilot project in The Pocket neighbourhood and to utilize the project to achieve: 
• 
Increased awareness for the benefits of tree communities on watershed and human health 
• 
Educational opportunities through interpretive signage or as an outdoor classroom for local school 
groups and community organizations. Proposed locations are identified in Figure 6.  
5. Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to support green infrastructure and 
biodiversity through urban agriculture allowing for:  
• 
Broader access to fresh, healthy food  
• 
Increased community building through enhancement and expansion of Oakvale Green Community 
Gardens (e.g., edible plants/bushes, garden plots, greenhouse, etc.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
 
6. TRCA to explore opportunities to establish the greenspace system (public and private) as an 
environmental education space though: 
• 
Implementation of attractive and engaging interpretive signage to educate and excite residents about a 
Net Zero Vision for the neighbourhood and to inform visitors about the unique ecological features and 
functions within these spaces.  
• 
Development of educational programming (e.g., webinars, hands-on workshops) to develop skills and 
knowledge related to native gardening, urban agriculture, invasive species management, fruit tree care, 
etc.  
7. City to consider greenspace improvements that will encourage both passive and active uses that are 
designed for people of all abilities and ages (e.g., fitness stations, seating, etc.). 
CELEBRATION OF 
HASTINGS CREEK 
 
1. Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to explore interpretive art and 
placemaking ideas for key locations throughout the community to celebrate the history of Hastings Creek 
(e.g., at Phin Park pollinator garden, along Ravina Ave, at south end of off-leash dog park, at canoe 
sculpture at Donlands and Danforth). 
2. Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to investigate the potential for Hastings 
Creek to be added as a regular walk on the local Lost Rivers Tours. 
 
 
 
 
69 
 
TCHC GROUNDS 
REVIVAL 
 
 
1. TCHC, in collaboration with TRCA, to develop a comprehensive master plan for the 2 Phin Avenue complex 
which considers: 
• 
Resident suggestions for outdoor improvements and amenities 
• 
Expansion to existing community garden (e.g., vertical gardens, rainwater harvesting, community 
orchard, etc.) 
• 
Safety considerations (lighting, security cameras) to encourage safe use of the outdoor spaces (e.g., at 
existing gazebo and community garden) 
• 
Proposed improvements in Phin Park and other green spaces 
2. TCHC, in collaboration with TRCA, to assess outdoor improvements, biodiversity enhancements, urban 
agriculture opportunities at other TCHC properties in the neighbourhood. 
3. TCHC, in collaboration with TRCA, to develop and deliver new educational programming related to climate 
mitigation and skills training, including, but not limited to: 
• 
Orchard care 
• 
Urban agriculture 
• 
Horticulture  
4. City of Toronto to continue engagement with TCHC tenants as it relates to the transfer of TCHC property to 
City of Toronto, to develop a long-term plan for this transferred land to ensure community needs are met, 
including beautification, while not compromising TCHC tenant privacy and security. 
5. TCHC, in collaboration with TRCA, to continue engagement with residents to develop a retrofit plan to 
identify: 
• 
GHG reduction measures in the buildings 
• 
Interior upgrades that are needed to improve quality of life (renovations, new appliances, paint, etc.) 
 
STORMWATER 
MANAGEMENT 
IMPROVEMENTS 
1. City to apply appropriate Green Street standards for all new road reconstruction projects in the 
neighbourhood where technically feasible, and consider green infrastructure practices to improve 
stormwater management.  
2. The City, in collaboration with TRCA to support institutional property owners to depave impervious 
surfaces where possible or direct runoff to permeable areas or to LID practices. 
3. TRCA to offer DIY workshops to educate homeowners about proper rain barrel installation and 
maintenance techniques. 
4. Single family homeowners should be encouraged to adopt natural lawns and lawn care practices and to 
use native plants to reduce demand on municipal water supply. 
5. The Sustainable Neighbourhoods team should continue to generate awareness about the mandatory 
downspout disconnection program to alleviate strain on the City’s stormwater infrastructure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
 
SUSTAINABLE 
BUILDINGS 
RESIDENTIAL 
RETROFITS 
1. Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to create a working group with the City 
of Toronto, TCHC, and TTC, to advance the development of a comprehensive Greenspaces Master Plan 
which includes Phin Park, TCHC transfer lands, off-leash dog park and Oakvale Green Space. 
• Funding for the Master Plan development should be shared and/or fundraised by the affected 
property owners, in collaboration with TRCA.  
• Master Plan should address guiding principles as stated in Table 3, and sustainability outcomes and 
should consider: 
o Layout of key existing and proposed amenities and improvements (e.g., storage facility, 
farmers market, fire pit or pizza oven feature, washroom facilities, art installations, 
interpretive signage and more lighting and seating, etc.) should be considered while balancing 
community interests for open space to allow for unstructured activities/play. 
o Enhancements to overall connectivity and ensure key linkages to the broader Danforth 
community and regional trail networks should be considered and should address privacy and 
security for adjacent landowners where appropriate.  
2. City’s Parks, Forestry and Recreation division, informed by the Greenspaces Master Plan, condition 
assessments and funding considerations, to consider advancing state of good repair funding for Phin 
Park to advance:  
• 
Repairs/upgrades to the existing wading pool 
• 
Replacement/updating existing playground equipment  
• 
Enhancement of biodiversity and habitat and interpretative signage 
• 
Other recommendations from the community as listed above 
3. TRCA to work with PCA, institutional property owners and the City of Toronto to enhance habitat 
connectivity and increase biodiversity across all neighbourhood open spaces (public and private) 
including: 
• 
Tree and shrub plantings, creation of pollinator gardens and wildlife habitat improvements (e.g., bird 
boxes, bee hotels, etc.) 
• 
Opportunities should be informed by and complement the Greenspaces Master Plan 
4. Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to explore the potential to implement a 
Tiny Forest pilot project in The Pocket neighbourhood and to utilize the project to achieve: 
• 
Increased awareness for the benefits of tree communities on watershed and human health 
• 
Educational opportunities through interpretive signage or as an outdoor classroom for local school 
groups and community organizations.  
5. Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto, PCA) to support green infrastructure and 
biodiversity through urban agriculture allowing for: 
• 
Broader access to fresh, healthy food  
• 
Increased community building through enhancement and expansion of Oakvale Green Community 
Gardens (e.g., edible plants/bushes, garden plots, greenhouse, etc.) 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
 
6. TRCA and PCA to explore opportunities to establish the greenspace system (public and private) as an 
environmental education space though: 
• 
Implementation of attractive and engaging interpretive signage to educate and excite 
residents about a Net Zero Vision for the neighbourhood and to inform visitors about the 
unique ecological features and functions within these spaces  
• 
Development of educational programming/communications (e.g., webinars, hands-on 
workshops) to develop skills and knowledge related to native gardening, urban agriculture, 
invasive species management, fruit tree care, etc. and to encourage single family 
homeowners to adopt natural lawns and lawn care practices, to use native plants when 
gardening, to identify and control invasive species 
7. City to consider greenspace improvements that facilitate easier and expanded access to green space 
and that will encourage both passive and active uses that are designed for people of all abilities and 
ages (e.g., fitness stations, seating, etc.). 
POCKET PLUS 
INSTITUTIONAL 
GREENING 
PROJECT 
1. Pocket Plus team, led by City of Toronto to finalize the Net-Zero Community Energy Implementation 
Strategy. 
2. SNAP team and TTC to engage CreateTO to determine the feasibility of incorporating, where possible, 
residents’ recommendations listed above for integrated projects that incorporate, in addition to GHG 
reduction, other sustainability and quality of life elements, and to formalize a community engagement 
process to communicate the recommendations from this assessment. 
3. City to work with the PCA to develop a communications campaign related to geo-exchange systems and 
to gather community feedback to establish demand/willingness to connect to a shared system, 
property rights, feasibility studies and business case development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
STREETSCAPE 
IMPROVEMENTS 
LANEWAY 
PROJECT 
1. City of Toronto and TRCA to continue to support the PCA and the Wandering Spirit School to implement 
the community’s vision for the revitalized laneway, including: 
• 
Explore the feasibility of various pedestrian safety opportunities 
• 
Improve grading and drainage, ideally with low impact development practices where technically 
feasible 
• 
Return full use of track back to Wandering Spirit School for school use 
• 
Implement Indigenous art project 
2. TRCA, the City and PCA to explore opportunities for external funding sources to help facilitate 
implementation of the Laneway Project elements, including: 
• 
Improvements on the public realm and repairs to existing private fences and garage doors.  
3. PCA to continue to engage Ravina Crescent homeowners to build support for the project and to 
explore capacity for resident funded contributions.  
 
 
PEDESTRIAN 
SAFETY 
1. City to consider intersection improvements at Chatham and Euston (e.g., curb 
bump out to shorten cross walk making it easier for pedestrians to cross safely). 
2. City to investigate opportunities to create a new pedestrian crossing at Oakvale and Greenwood, and 
also along suggested locations along Jones Street (see Figure 9). 
3. City and TTC to explore potential to create a new pedestrian accessway south of TTC yard to 
Greenwood Avenue.  
4. City to investigate potential to make improvements to Jones Avenue bike lanes, including better 
protected lanes and surface improvements. 
5. City to explore creating a dedicated east-west cycle trail through the neighbourhood (in addition to the 
existing pedestrian walkway) to encourage active transportation. 
6. City to investigate opportunities for a new Bike Share (or other) station within the Pocket 
neighbourhood and provide for more secure bike parking in Phin Park and other key locations 
throughout the neighbourhood. 
7. The Sustainable Neighbourhoods team to develop and promote an educational campaign which 
explains the environmental and health benefits of active transportation and encourage residents to 
walk or cycle for trips under five kilometers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
 
 
TRAFFIC 
IMPROVEMENTS 
1. City to implement traffic calming, and where technically feasible integrate with LID (e.g., green bump 
outs) and/or green infrastructure at Shudell, Chatham, Boultree, Hunter, Baird Ave and Ravina 
Crescent.  
2.  City to explore the feasibility of installing new traffic lights at Strathcona/Baird/Jones and Chatham 
and Euston intersections 
3. City to explore potential for an alley to connect east end of Chatham to the Danforth. 
4. The Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City and PCA) to explore opportunities to encourage 
residents to use transit, carpool or telework as part of their regular routine. 
5. City to consider installing “No Idling” signs in strategic locations throughout the neighbourhood. 
EV CHARGING 
NETWORK 
1. City to continue working with Toronto Hydro, Toronto Parking Authority and institutional properties to 
study technical feasibility of shared EV charging station locations identified by the community.  
2. City to continue working with Toronto Hydro, Toronto Parking Authority and institutional properties to 
implement multiple, shared EV charging stations within the Pocket neighbourhood. 
3. PCA to explore opportunities to consider advancing neighbour-to-neighbour EV car and charging station 
sharing. 
4. City to work with institutional properties to explore feasibility for EV charging stations, that could be 
used by residents after business hours, at the following institutional properties: TCHC and TDSB 
properties, Toronto Fire Station 323 and TTC Greenwood Yard  
5. At a system level, City to explore potential to provide EV purchasing incentives to augment 
Provincial and Federal incentives. 
6. TRCA and PCA to use community engagement opportunities to educate residents about the 
benefits of EV or hybrid vehicle ownership to encourage greater uptake.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
 
COMMUNITY 
ENRICHMENT 
ART 
1. 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to work with local artists, art-based NGOs, 
and Foundations to facilitate more community-focused art initiatives across the neighbourhood, including 
visual and performing arts. 
2. 
TRCA and PCA to consider developing a self-guided art walk tour for the neighbourhood (e.g., through a mobile 
app and/or interpretative signage). 
3. 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to support implementation of the 
community’s vision for the Laneway Project, including involvement of local and Indigenous artists and 
infrastructure improvements (see Section 11.1 for more details). 
4. 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to support art projects that celebrate or 
advocate for environmental action, Indigenous Reconciliation, and the neighbourhood’s history. 
5. 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to support art initiatives that generate 
awareness on the buried Hastings Creek (see section 9.2 for more details). 
SHARING 
ECONOMY 
1. 
City’s Solid Waste Management Services Division, in collaboration with the SNAP team, to explore circular 
economy initiatives that could be piloted or implemented in the Pocket neighbourhood. 
2. 
TRCA and PCA to investigate opportunities to operationalize a local tool lending library in conjunction with 
Repair Cafes in the Pocket neighbourhood.   
3. 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to explore technical feasibility, 
implementation partners, and locations to facilitate a bike sharing program, communal EV charging (see also 
Section 11.4) and garden exchange program to trade native plants and harvest. 
4. 
TRCA and PCA to increase capacity for both personal and communal gardening and composting, either through 
Oakvale Green Community Gardens or other implementation partners.  
5. 
TRCA and PCA to create a ‘sharing map’ for the Pocket neighbourhood which highlights locations where sharing 
takes place (e.g., tools, herbs, bikes, lawn movers, repair locations for cell phones, tablets, iPads, etc.). 
6. 
TRCA to encourage businesses and organizations in the Pocket neighbourhood to register with TRCA’s Partners 
in Project Green’s Material Exchange program which diverts millions of tons of otherwise waste materials by 
connecting businesses generating useful waste with receivers. 
7. 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to utilize community events as 
opportunities to facilitate sharing or circular economy initiatives, and educate residents about the circular 
economy, sustainable consumption, and the City’s goal of zero waste.  
COMMUNITY 
PROGRAMMING 
1. 
TRCA and PCA to support innovative community programming initiatives that foster neighbourhood 
connections and that help advance the objectives of the Sustainable Neighbourhood Action Plan. 
2. 
TRCA and PCA to support volunteer recruitment in the neighbourhood to help identify and build capacity for 
community leaders. 
3. 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods team (TRCA, City of Toronto and PCA) to investigate opportunities to build a 
community programming/meeting space or examine partnership arrangements that would facilitate broader 
community use of existing public or private facilities in the community (e.g., at Wandering Spirit School, École 
élémentaire catholique du Bon-Berger, the Mosque, TTC yards, local businesses and other institutions). 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
 
75 
 
Appendix C - Pocket Change Project 
The main elements from the SNAP Home Retrofit model are very much in line with the work that The 
Pocket Change Project has undertaken in the neighbourhood during the last four years. The Pocket 
Change Committee believes in the benefits of using a community-based approach and has proven the 
effectiveness of face-to-face support from trusted sources within the community. It has also supported a 
variety of sustainability actions including GHG reduction and other actions, like tree planting. Since 2018, 
it has been canvassing homeowners and organizing educational events and activities, and Eco-Fun Fairs, 
mobilizing and generating awareness and excitement towards environmental action in a significant 
segment of the community. 
 
More recently, the Pocket Change Project developed, and is piloting, an innovative Home Retrofit 
Coordination Service to overcome challenges and barriers towards the implementation of deeper 
retrofits for GHG reduction. This approach is being supported by TRCA and the City of Toronto through 
the Home Retrofit Working Group, which is also exploring opportunities to scale successes within The 
Pocket Neighborhood and to other communities in Toronto. 
Similar to the SNAP model, leaders of the Pocket Change Home Retrofit Coordination Service recognize 
that mass blanket programs have limited effectiveness in overcoming barriers towards deep retrofits. 
However, at the same time, they recognize that retrofitting one home at a time is not fast or efficient 
enough. 
The Home Retrofit Coordination Service works towards accelerating the rate at which homes are 
retrofitted by recognizing that each home (and homeowner) has a unique situation, and unique needs 
and desires that need to be considered and addressed. The model will generate volumes of retrofits that 
should stimulate the supply of contractors and possible efficiencies in acquiring materials. 
In the current landscape (e.g., energy cost, retrofit costs and existing government incentives) there is not 
a business case for deep GHG reduction retrofits in homes. Homeowners without the means will not be 
able to undertake the retrofits and for mainstream homeowners, GHG reduction is still not top of mind. 
But even without a business case, there is currently significant demand for deep retrofits among climate-
conscious homeowners who can finance them, but have not done so, due to the complexity of the 
process.   
The Pocket Change Home Retrofit Coordination Service: how it works and how it helps homeowners to 
overcome deep retrofit barriers 
The Pocket Change Home Retrofit Coordination Service is a personalized retrofit advisory service, 
working in collaboration with the Pocket Change Committee to recruit homeowners and guide them 
through the complex retrofit process. 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
 
76 
 
Engagement Strategy 
The coordination service is cross-promoted through community events, webinars, the Pocket Change 
website, newsletters, lawn signs, social media and other communications. Those residents who show a 
commitment to retrofit join a group of Changemakers; some of them have chosen to retain a Registered 
Energy Advisor to provide personalized advice and coaching. Current participants are helping to recruit 
others in the community through word of mouth. 
Supporting the homeowner step by step throughout the complex decision-making process 
The Retrofit Coordination Service uses the following stepwise process:  
• 
The homeowner arranges for an energy audit by a qualified energy advisor 
• 
The homeowner pays for a customized Retrofit Roadmap, which is developed by a Registered Energy Advisor. 
• 
The homeowner receives a customized Roadmap based on the results of the energy audit, and developed 
specifically for their particular home and family situation. The Roadmap considers the current 
condition/performance of the house and its systems, the owner’s priorities, budget, willingness to take risk 
and desired outcomes, and considers the best approach to reducing GHGs through deep home retrofit. The 
Roadmap also considers any other improvements that the homeowner may want to undertake to their house 
(e.g., an extension, a new kitchen).   
• 
The Roadmap provides a comparison of options, considering technical and financial aspects. 
• 
Homeowners may also enlist the services of their Registered Energy Advisor to help secure qualified 
contractors/installers, to get help securing and reviewing quotes, to arrange and review contracts, to provide 
oversight and make sure the quality of the work is optimal. These services are charged on an hourly basis and 
fees change from home to home due to the unique conditions of the home and homeowner priorities.  
• 
The homeowner is matched with a neighbourhood Changemaker Coordinator who will check in on their 
progress as they execute the steps in their Retrofit Roadmap and help address issues. The homeowner is 
enlisted by the Changemaker Coordinator in a peer group of retrofitting homeowners to participate in 
webinars, meet-and-greet gatherings, and other mutual support activities.  
• 
The last stage of the coordination service is to calculate GHG emission reductions based on the pre- and post-
retrofit performance of the house. 
• 
Addressing Financial Barriers: 
• 
The Roadmap offers a plan to invest budget where the greatest value will be achieved. 
• 
The Roadmap recommends prioritization and project phasing, based on the specific financial situation of the 
homeowner. 
• 
The service provides assistance with accessing financing and incentives and identifies the optimal way of 
applying to them. 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
 
77 
 
From Individual to Collective: Exchanging learnings and community support: 
• 
Two of the Changemakers are designated Changemaker Coordinators and they liaise with other 
Changemakers, stay in touch with the group, flag issues back to the technical team and share lessons learned.  
They schedule meetings to bring the whole group of Changemakers together and keep the group moving 
along. A key role of the coordinators is to make other program participants feel that they are part of larger 
community working together towards a shared goal.  
• 
The collective also plays the role of “group therapy”, in helping to alleviate the anxiety that comes from going 
through the complex retrofit the process, by sharing experiences with others who have similar homes. 
Technical Team 
• 
The service includes both project management and building science expertise. 
• 
At the time this report was written, the leads of the technical team included a passive house and building 
science specialist and an independent Registered Energy Advisor.  
Making it Attractive for Suppliers and Contractors 
In order to make it attractive to suppliers and contractors to be part of the net zero movement, the 
Pocket Change Retrofit Coordination Service: 
• 
Offers contractors packaged/defined, committed projects (saves time to contractor). Contractors don’t have 
to do the upfront work. Homeowners are ready to go when contractors are available. 
• 
Amasses projects (purchasing of materials and various projects for contractor) and coordinating demand to 
produce cost savings and buying power. 
Communication, Awareness and Knowledge Sharing 
The team is implementing a number of communication, education and awareness tools, to recruit more 
program participants, but also to document the process and lessons learned, and encourage replication 
across the city and beyond. 
• 
The Changemakers (e.g., homeowners who have launched their retrofit journey) receive a lawn sign after 
starting to implement their Roadmap. Once they have completed changes that are projected to reduce GHGs 
by at least 35%, they receive an updated sign which highlights this important progress.  
• 
A website and monthly newsletters encourage participation in the program and provide updates on the 
progress of the initiative, as a community effort. 
• 
The Changemaker Initiative is cross-promoted through other neighbourhood events and activities. 
• 
The home retrofit process that Changemakers undergo is documented and case studies are being developed 
for other homeowners to understand the process and address uncertainties. 
• 
Community leaders, as well as the technical team, deliver presentations on a regular basis to share their 
experiences with other groups, government agencies and organizations. 
Although the homeowner pays for some aspects of the Home Retrofit Service, the Pocket Change 
resident leaders, and the technical team, have dedicated hundreds of volunteer hours to the pilot phase 
of the program. In the longer run, it will be imperative to include financial supports beyond the 
homeowner paid fees in order to operationalize the model, increase homeowner participation, and avoid 
leader burnout. 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
 
78 
 
Findings to date 
Some of the key findings to date, from the Pocket Change Home Retrofit Coordination Service include: 
• 
There is a market of committed people eager to reduce their homes’ GHG emissions within The Pocket 
neighbourhood (as part of the Changemakers group) and there is also demand outside of The Pocket.  
• 
With the growing number of Changemakers, providing advice has become faster, as experience is gained and 
situations are repeated; however supply chain issues are anticipated which could slow the implementation 
process. 
• 
At present, government programs are not funding retrofit coordination services, which are fundamental to 
scaling up the pace of retrofits overall. 
• 
With the new government incentives, and lack of capacity in the industry, inexperienced energy auditors have 
emerged, resulting in incorrect audits, offering recommendations that are not usable by the homeowner. 
• 
Even highly educated homeowners tend to stall after receiving their energy audit, not knowing where to start. 
• 
The personalized Retrofit Roadmap is key: it answers technical questions, sets priorities, guides decisions and 
equips homeowners for installation at the pace that suits them.  
• 
While governments are advising homeowners to get advice from their contractors, traditional contractors are 
generally not well suited to provide GHG advice. Many don’t have the knowledge or are not interested in 
thinking about GHG. Many will advise the homeowner to go ahead with the easiest retrofit to install, that may 
give the contractor the highest profit, but not the highest GHG reduction. 
• 
There is, however, a small and growing supply of contractors able to meet retrofit needs (especially when it 
comes to ASHPs), but these contractors are difficult for homeowners to find. 
• 
While it is expected that a significant number of homes will be retrofitted through the Pocket Change Retrofit 
Coordination Service, in the absence of significant subsidies, the cost of deep retrofits will be a barrier to 
many/most homeowners and to getting to the net zero neighbourhood and City goals. To achieve these goals, 
more government funding will be required. 
The Future of the Pocket Change Retrofit Coordination Services 
Near Term Plan: 
The Pocket Change Home Retrofit Coordination Team is working hard to continue to accelerate deep 
home retrofits in the neighbourhood homes: 
• 
The engagement strategy is being strengthened to increase the flow of new projects and to sign up new 
Changemakers. 
• 
The team is preparing to launch a new cohort of homeowners.  
• 
It is expected that, as more projects are completed, the idea of home retrofits will be popularized. Completed 
projects will demonstrate the benefits/ comfort/GHGs and feasibility of home retrofits and will streamline the 
process.
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
79 
Scaling beyond The Pocket: 
The Pocket Change Home Retrofit Coordination initiative will not only help accelerate home retrofits 
within The Pocket neighbourhood, it will also provide insight for scaling to other communities and 
overcoming current barriers to retrofits across the City of Toronto. 
Working with Community Groups in Other Neighbourhoods: 
The next goal is to develop a retrofit coordination service and Changemakers program that can serve as 
an independent, non-profit organization that will work with other community groups to engage new 
Changemakers and support the process. The Pocket Change Project has already started to coordinate and 
share ideas with other neighbourhood leaders and community associations that are interested in scaling 
the model to their own neighbourhoods. Some of these groups include The Harbord Village Residents 
Association, Ward 11 Home Retrofit Forum Facebook Group, and Green Neighbours Network Retrofit 
group.  
Building a Pool of Qualified Contractors 
With a vision of scaling, the Pocket Change Home Retrofit Coordination Service is building a pool of 
qualified contractors and auditors. The idea is to develop partnerships and share communications on the 
quality and methods being used, and to try to make it an attractive proposition for participating 
contractors.  
Working with Marginalized Groups 
The Pocket Change team is also exploring the possibility of working to build capaCity of marginalized 
groups to work as qualified contractors/service providers, through a partnership with an established 
organization with expertise in recruitment, training and social supports.
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
80 
Appendix D - SNAP Home Retrofit Program Model 
The SNAP program has developed a home retrofit program model that has been successful in 
accelerating implementation of basic sustainability actions in single family homes, by taking advantage 
the neighbourhood-based approach. The SNAP model has five main elements that have proven to drive 
action. 
Locally Targeted Marketing - The program customizes a marketing strategy to respond to the specific 
needs and characteristics of the neighbourhood where it is working, responding to residents’ priorities 
and values for their homes and lives, and also addressing the requirements of the specific building stock 
in the community. 
Face-to-Face, One Window Home Consultations - The program uses face-to-face one window home 
consultations to help homeowners initiate the decision-making process on how to make their home more 
sustainable. In the SNAP approach these home consultations do not only focus on GHG reduction but also 
other themes like eco-landscaping, water efficiency, sustainable stormwater management, flood 
prevention, urban agriculture, and waste management. The multi-objective model has proven to be a 
great strategy to engage homeowners that may be interested in one theme but not in others. Addressing 
the residents’ priorities first opens the door for additional deeper actions. The face-to-face approach 
leads to meaningful human connections that are more likely to result in action. Ideally, home consultants 
should be trusted members of the community and also have technical knowledge on sustainability 
actions or be accompanied by another home consultant with more technical expertise. Consistently, 
marketing studies have shown that people are mostly influenced by people they know in their personal 
lives, like neighbours, family and friends.
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
 
81 
 
1. Referrals and Incentives - Homeowners are informed about existing incentives from government and 
utilities to help them undertake key actions and are guided through the application process. Where 
there is a gap, the SNAP program has offered additional incentive to homeowners to encourage 
participation. 
2. On-Going Supports and Follow Ups - The journey towards the achievement of significant 
sustainability benefits through home retrofits is long and complex, with many questions and 
complexities arising through the process. Offering long term support helps with decision making 
throughout the lengthy renovation process and also helps build relationships with homeowners. It is 
important to offer on-going support to ensure residents achieve the desired goals. Follow-ups are 
also important to track success and to gather input from homeowners and to adapt the program in a 
way that responds to their needs. 
3. Cross-Promotional Events and Activities - By having a presence in the neighbourhood, working 
towards the implementation of a range of integrated projects and programs, beyond home 
consultations, SNAP cross-promotes and encourages home retrofits through a variety of fun events 
and activities in the community. 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOURHOOD ACTION PROGRAM | www.trca.ca 
 
82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
