TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
i
DECEMBER 2020
TIP OF THE 
ICEBERG
NAVIGATING THE KNOWN AND 
UNKNOWN COSTS OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE FOR CANADA
ii
CONTENTS
Introduction
1
The looming costs of 
climate change
4
Disasters on the rise: 
Catastrophic losses 
and disaster costs
8
Executive summary
iii
Recommendations
32
Climate costs are 
far-reaching and 
piling up
18

The need to adapt and 
build resilience to 
climate change 
25

Glossary and References
35, 38
The Canadian Institute for Climate Choices is an unparalleled collaboration of experts from a diverse range of disciplines 
and organizations across the country. 
As an independent, non-partisan and publicly funded organization, we undertake rigorous and independent research, 
conduct insightful analysis, and engage a diverse range of stakeholders and rightsholders to bring clarity to the climate 
challenges and transformative policy choices ahead for Canada. Learn more at climatechoices.ca.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
iii
The combined losses per weather-related 
disaster have also ballooned—rising from an 
average of $8.3 million per event in the 1970s to 
an average of $112 million between 2010–2019, 
including public and private costs. This change 
represents a staggering 1250 per cent increase.
As climate change makes weather patterns 
more extreme and volatile, disasters are becom­
ing more frequent and more expensive. In 
previous decades, the cost of weather-related 
disasters was roughly equivalent to one per cent 
of Canada’s annual gross domestic product 
(GDP) growth. In the last decade, disaster costs 
have climbed to between five and six per cent of 
annual GDP growth. 
These examples offer a snapshot of the ways 
climate change is threatening economic growth 
and prosperity across the country today. Yet for 
everything we know about the current and likely 
future costs of weather-related disasters in 
Canada, the risks arising from what we don’t yet 
know—outcomes that depend on too many 
other variables, or costs we can’t fully calculate 
today—are even more profound. 
It’s time for a comprehensive reckoning with the 
costs of climate change in Canada. To that end, 
the Canadian Institute for Climate Choices (the 
Institute) is undertaking a multi-year research 
program to identify and quantify key effects of a 
changing climate on prosperity in Canada and 
analyze the benefits of making adaptation and 
resilience a priority for policy and investment. 
If we think of the costs of climate change as an 
iceberg ahead, this introductory paper aims to 
zoom in on the tip of the iceberg—the known 
and measurable hazards—as well as the 
contours of what lies below the water. As policy 
makers, business leaders, communities and 
individuals cope with the current impacts of 
climate change and prepare for a future defined 
by climate disruption, both parts of the iceberg 
should be top-of-mind in risk assessments, 
investment planning, and policy decisions. 
Our analysis of existing data and research finds 
that climate change is already having noticeable 
impacts throughout our economy and our 
society, and those impacts are poised to grow 
dramatically. The full impacts of climate change 
will affect Canada in ways that have not yet been 
properly assessed or considered. Moreover, many 
climate-related impacts are difficult to quantify in 
dollar terms but have huge significance for the 
well-being of Canadians and Indigenous peoples.
Over the past five decades, the costs of weather-related disasters like floods, storms,  
and wildfires have risen from tens of millions of dollars to billions of dollars annually in 
Canada. Insured losses for catastrophic weather events totalled over $18 billlion 
between 2010 and 2019, and the number of catastrophic events was over three times 
higher than in the 1980s.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
iv
INSIGHTS
The risk of weather-related disasters in Canada is growing, and climate change is a central 
force behind increasing damages.
While there have always been weather-related damages and disasters, changing climatic 
conditions are shifting hazards, driving damages above what we have seen in the past. 
Decades of insurance payouts and disaster spending by governments, prominent indica­
tors of the cost of weather-related disasters, show a noteworthy rise in both the number of 
catastrophic events and their costs. Storm and disaster damages are growing faster than 
the rate of economic or population growth.
A changing climate is impairing prosperity and well-being in Canada through economic, social, 
and environmental impacts. Yet governments, businesses, and communities are overlooking 
many damages and are not focusing on how to navigate vulnerabilities.
Weather-related disasters and storms are big and visible sources of climate change risk, but 
these are just the tip of the iceberg. The damages from drawn-out impacts, such as sea-level 
rise, ocean acidification and permafrost thaw, are equally concerning. The literature signals 
that climate damages are beginning to grow, affecting the lives and health of people in this 
country, stretching government resources, exacerbating inequity, and disrupting business 
operations. Furthermore, many Indigenous communities have articulated damages to ways 
of life associated with shifting ecosystems, changing wildfire patterns, permafrost thaw, and 
floods. While there is evidence of growing climate damages and risks to Indigenous rights,1 
and to prosperity and well-being more broadly, there are much larger gaps in knowledge 
about how best to adapt to a changing climate. Numerous and often overlapping climate 
change hazards present a major challenge for charting a course to prosperity. 
Costs that are difficult to quantify in economic terms must not be overlooked.
Not all climate costs are easy or appropriate to measure in economic terms. In particular, 
emerging economic risks and vulnerabilities will need to be addressed and prioritized 
for action, even if they can not yet be assigned a monetary value. Further, risks that 
cannot be given a price tag, such as risks to lands and ecosystems that are integrated 
into the spiritual lives and identities of Indigenous peoples, must be given at least equal 
consideration alongside monetary impacts. Our approach to identifying climate-related 
risks to prosperity and well-being highlights the broad range of impacts to what people 
and communities across Canada value and then seeks to monetize what is feasible and 
credible. To provide a comprehensive picture of what a changing climate in Canada 
may mean, our ongoing work includes quantitative analysis of economic, social, and 
environmental damages and costs but also highlights a broader scope of impacts beyond 
what can be quantified in monetary terms. 
1
2
3
1As Canada is a full supporter of the United Nations Declaration of Indigenous People, it is imperative that Canada ensure Indigenous people partic­
ipate in decision-making matters that would affect their lands, territories, and resources (Article 18), especially in the context of these risks.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
v
Prevention pays off, and governments, businesses, and communities across Canada need to 
invest more thoughtfully to reduce future climate change damages.
While costs associated with climate change are not fully understood, evidence shows 
the impacts are getting worse. Approaches that could help manage these risks—from 
private actions to public policy—remain broadly under-used. Yet experience suggests 
that prevention pays off, with small investments to reduce vulnerability to climate 
risks potentially delivering broad-based social, economic, and environmental benefits. 
Still, damages continue to mount as the changes in extremes and drawn-out climate 
impacts reduce asset values, impair natural and produced wealth, and increase social 
vulnerabilities and inequalities. This cycle needs to change. It will pay to continually ask: 
are risks to household, business, and community value understood? Is planning and 
investment oriented to build resilience at a scope and scale that is aligned with the 
evolving climate risks? 
A successful pathway to climate change resilience requires embracing incomplete information.
All orders of government, all sectors, and all communities need to take action to prioritize 
resilience to the emerging impacts of climate change. Building resilience requires moving 
forward with addressing vulnerabilities and investing in solutions despite imperfect 
information about the impending climate change costs. The debate about whether 
and how to prioritize adaptive responses to climate change is not informed by reliable 
information. It’s essential to transition from a state of ad hoc responses to a changing 
climate and weather-related disasters to one of building resilience. This includes continual 
learning about what works, what doesn’t, and how to plan for uncertainty. Instead of waiting 
for more information, the uncertainty inherent in climate change requires acting decisively 
on what we already know while also developing improved foresight. 
4
5
The imperative to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions tends to dominate the debate over 
Canada’s progress in addressing climate change. 
Yet, as a climate solution, adaptation—ensuring 
human and natural systems can adjust to 
the spectrum of effects of climate change—
will have a critical impact on the well-being 
and prosperity of all who live in Canada in the 
decades ahead. 
Current adaptation policies and investments 
in Canada fall far short of what is needed to 
address the known risks of climate change, let 
alone those that are still unclear and unknown. 
This has to change. 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
vi
RECOMMENDATIONS
Governments, businesses and communities must get serious about putting adaptation policies and 
practices into place now, while better identifying the physical and social climate risks threatening 
well-being and future prosperity. The following policy recommendations provide a starting point: 
All orders of government should significantly scale up public funding for implementing adaptation.
A lack of foresight on climate change risks should not be a barrier to significantly scaling up 
adaptation investment. Addressing climate-related risk and building resilience implicates 
many, if not most, government activities and programs. Successful implementation 
therefore requires not only dedicated government capacity and expertise on adaptation, 
but mechanisms to integrate and fund adaptation in existing government programs and 
public investments, including infrastructure, health care, Indigenous affairs, Northern 
programs, economic development, energy, public safety, natural resource management, 
and environmental protection. To drive this change, government programs and investments 
should transparently evaluate their effects on current and future climate risks, and the costs 
and benefits of incorporating adaptation and resilience. As our analysis shows, adaptation faces 
barriers to implementation, but returns multiple benefits.
The federal government should convene provincial, territorial, Indigenous and municipal 
governments to co-develop a more coordinated approach to governing adaptation. 
The need to deploy adaptation at the scale and speed that Canada requires transcends 
administrative, geographic, and sectoral boundaries. Adaptation must be tailored and 
implemented at a local level to reflect local context. Yet coordination can reduce overlap, 
inconsistencies, and gaps. A coordinated, collaborative approach could set adaptation priorities, 
goals, and measures of progress, establish roles and responsibilities, identify policies that are 
essential for driving adaptation at all scales, and coordinate and leverage finance.
Governments and financial regulators should systematically enhance public disclosure and 
transparency of the economic and social implications of climate change risks across both the 
public and private sectors. 
As the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures and Canada’s Expert Panel on 
Sustainable Finance have highlighted, transparency about climate change risks is essential for 
allocating investment away from risk and towards resilience. This extends beyond disclosure 
rules for large, publicly traded companies; it also includes increased transparency around the 
climate risks that governments, communities, and individuals face. Whether incorporated 
into government credit ratings or real estate home inspections, this information will help 
governments, firms, and individuals better prepare for a changing climate. It will also shift 
investments toward resilient solutions, galvanizing a range of adaptation actions.
1
2
3
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
vii
The Institute’s ongoing research into the costs 
of climate change aims to bring clarity to both 
what we know about the changes ahead and 
what we don’t. Our analysis will highlight the 
need to plan and design for a changing climate 
in how Canadians build, work, and live—even in 
the midst of uncertainty and imperfect infor­
mation. And we will provide practical advice 
to governments regarding policies and invest­
ments that can mobilize smart adaptation 
across our economy and across the country. 
Policy and investment decisions need to account 
for today’s known costs that form the tip of the 
iceberg, as well as the less clear hazards that lurk 
below the surface. While the sheer scale of the 
threats ahead is daunting, improving foresight 
while also acting on the knowledge available today 
provides the chance to course correct en route to a 
resilient and prosperous future. 
Over the next two years, our research into the 
costs of climate change will expand on and 
support these recommendations. 
© Pacific Northwest Regional Architecture
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
viii
Three ways governments should make 
climate change a national priority: 
Dramatically scale up public 
investment in adaptation, given 
economic and other benefits. 
Work with other governments 
in Canada to improve efficiency 
and coordination. 
Systematically enhance 
disclosure of physical climate 
risks to mobilize planning and 
investment decisions. 
The uncertainty inherent in climate change requires acting decisively on 
what we already know while also developing improved foresight.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
1
Public and private-sector decision-making has 
yet to fully reflect climate-related risks. Multiple 
factors underpin that failure, but here’s one 
important one: the scale and urgency of action 
on climate change adaptation in Canada is 
limited by the absence of a current and compre­
hensive understanding of the future costs and 
risks associated with climate change.
The Institute’s ongoing research into the costs 
of climate change aims to bring clarity to both 
what we know about the changes ahead and 
what we don’t. Our analysis will highlight the 
need to plan and design for a changing climate 
in how we build, work, and live—even in the 
midst of uncertainty and imperfect information. 
And we will provide practical advice to govern­
ments regarding policies and investments that 
can mobilize smart adaptation across our econ­
omy and across the country. 
Policy and investment decisions need to account 
for today’s known costs that form the tip of the 
iceberg, as well as the less clear hazards that lurk 
below the surface. While the sheer scale of the 
threats ahead is daunting, improving foresight 
while also acting on the knowledge we have 
today provides the chance to course correct en 
route to a resilient and prosperous future. 
Over the next two years, research under­
taken by the Canadian Institute for Climate 
Choices (the Institute) into the costs of climate 
change will expand on and support these 
recommendations. 
This report is the Institute’s first step toward fill­
ing that information gap. If the costs of climate 
change represent an iceberg on the horizon, 
there is value in assessing how big the iceberg 
is and how big a risk it poses. That exercise can 
inform planning and investment priorities for 
households, businesses, and governments. It can 
guide private decisions and policy action to help 
manage climate risks. And it can identify uncer­
tainties that need more attention, such as how 
weather and climate are changing in unpredict­
able and increasingly destructive ways.
At the same time, we recognize that a lack of 
information is not the main reason Canada—
along with the rest of the world—remains on 
a collision course with the iceberg. There are 
already  extensive evidence and warning signs. 
Canada’s immediate priority must be to course 
correct to reduce damage from the profound 
costs ahead, irrespective of exactly how large they 
might be or their root cause, while continuing to 
improve the accuracy of medium- and long-term 
predictions. 
Governments and researchers around the world 
are actively developing national-scale estimates of 
the economic and social costs of climate change. 
INTRODUCTION
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
2
Indigenous peoples in Canada, including First 
Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples, have long been 
adapting to changing environmental conditions. 
Indigenous knowledge systems and Western 
research can provide significant insights into the 
potential costs of climate change in Canada.
Yet Canada lacks up-to-date evidence on the 
potential economic impacts of climate change. 
In 2011, the National Round Table on the 
Environment and the Economy developed the 
report Paying the Price: The Economic Impacts 
of Climate Change for Canada.2 Since then, no 
other studies have built on this initial effort to 
examine a broad range of costs at a national 
scale. 
To fill this gap, the Institute is analyzing the 
economic implications of climate change for 
Canada. This research series aims to contrib­
ute substantially to quantifying foreseeable 
climate-related impacts and their potential 
costs. It will also illustrate how adaptation at a 
national scale can help to reduce these costs. 
However, given the current gaps in knowledge, 
data and analytical tools, our results should be 
considered a lower-bound or conservative esti­
mate of the anticipated future costs of climate 
change. The full scope of economic implications 
of climate change in Canada is even larger. 
This fact has two big implications: first, that a 
major investment is required to fill the consid­
erable gaps in the understanding of climate 
change risks in Canada and social, economic, 
and environmental vulnerabilities. And second, 
that the challenge looms so large that Canada 
needs to move adaptation to the top of the 
agenda and immediately scale up efforts to 
reduce climate-related risk and build resilience. 
Reducing emissions alone isn’t enough to put 
governments, businesses, and communities 
in Canada on track to address climate change 
while building a more equitable and prosperous 
future. Adaptation is the critical missing link. 
This first report offers an introduction to the signif­
icance of the costs of climate change in Canada, 
as a foundation for the rest of the research series. 
Data on the history of weather-related disasters 
in Canada illustrates the scale, speed, and perva­
siveness with which climate change and a lack 
of climate adaptation are impacting—and will 
continue to impact—national, regional, and local 
economies. Surveying existing literature and 
analysis provides a more comprehensive over­
view of the types of climate change costs that can 
be expected in the future in Canada. We consider 
how an array of choices can affect the nature of 
these risks and how adaptation investments can 
improve resilience. Finally, we explore key steps to 
move toward a resilient, prosperous future. 
We recommend that governments should make 
climate change adaptation a national priority by: 
1.	
Dramatically scaling up public investment 
in adaptation, given the economic and 
other benefits it offers; 
2.	 Working with other orders of govern­
ment in Canada to improve the efficiency 
and coordination of adaptation policies and 
implementation; and 
3.	 Systematically enhancing disclosure of 
physical climate risks to mobilize planning 
and investment decisions across govern­
ments, firms, and individuals.
2Some staff and advisors of the Canadian Institute for Climate Choices contributed to the development of the National Round Table on the Envi­
ronment and the Economy’s 2011 report Paying the Price.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
3
Our research into the costs of climate change over the next two years will expand on 
and support these recommendations. That research includes the following reports: 
HEALTH REPORT 
SPRING 2021
A closer look at health costs and adap­
tation opportunities, built around our 
analysis of the costs of climate-driven 
heat-linked health burdens, Lyme disease 
and air quality changes. The report 
will also include case studies on health 
impacts related to forest fires and a 
discussion of mental health impacts.
NORTHERN REPORT 
FALL 2021
Taking a deeper dive into how climate 
change is affecting Northern infrastruc­
ture and buildings, this report will explore 
the breadth and scale of impacts on 
communities and the land across the 
North—impacts that economic studies 
often underemphasize or leave out.
MACROECONOMIC REPORT
LATE 2021–EARLY 2022
Using national macroeconomic modelling 
of potential climate change impacts to 
vulnerable sectors and assets, this report 
will outline the implications of a chang­
ing climate on economic productivity and 
well-being.
INFRASTRUCTURE REPORT 
SUMMER 2021
A focused report on infrastructure costs 
and adaptation opportunities, built 
around our analysis of climate-induced 
impacts to flooding, transportation infra­
structure, electricity systems, to flooding, 
transportation infrastructure, and 
electricity systems. 
2021
2022
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
4
THE LOOMING COSTS 
OF CLIMATE CHANGE 
A comprehensive view of the costs and benefits of 
climate change must consider projected changes 
in climate hazards—both extreme events and 
slow-onset changes—and evaluate their impact 
on social, economic, and environmental systems 
that are vulnerable to change. Climate change risk 
isn’t static over time; it can increase or decrease 
along with the changing exposure and vulnerabil­
ity of households, communities, and industries to 
climate hazards. Many non-climate factors, such 
as decisions to build in areas susceptible to flood­
ing or wildfires, also contribute to risk.
Climate change costs can manifest directly—for 
example, as expenditures made to fix or replace 
infrastructure that is damaged. Weather-related 
disasters are another direct and very visible 
climate change cost, triggering catastrophic 
losses to property and reducing income. Less 
visible climate change costs can occur indi­
rectly through, for example, business interrup­
tion costs associated with transportation delays 
when highways are impassable after a flood. 
There are still other less tangible but important 
costs—such as impacts on human health and 
quality of life, loss of spiritually and culturally 
important lands, and destruction of ecosystems 
and their function. 
Not all aspects of climate change will necessar­
ily result in economic costs and losses. Benefits 
may stem from changes in climate that trig­
ger, for example, longer growing seasons or 
reductions in the need to heat buildings in 
cold seasons. However, forecasts of potential 
economic benefits of climate change in Canada 
need to be treated with caution, as they are 
often based on highly simplified information. 
For example, projections of the benefits to the 
agricultural sector of longer growing seasons 
in a changing climate may not consider the 
impacts of more frequent spring floods and 
summer droughts that will also occur (Climate 
Atlas of Canada, 2020). 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
5
Canada is lagging significantly behind 
the U.S. and other OECD countries in 
these assessments and thus lacks an 
understanding of the economic implications 
that are essential to setting climate 
action priorities.
Research by governments and scholars provide a 
broad body of knowledge on climate hazards in 
Canada and the physical and monetary risks to 
the country’s economic, social, and environmen­
tal systems. However, comprehensive informa­
tion about Canadian costs is limited. A thorough 
assessment of costs and benefits of climate 
change requires the identification and monetiza­
tion of the positive and negative impacts of a full 
range of climate change impacts on economic, 
environmental, and social systems. Canada is 
lagging significantly behind the U.S. and other 
OECD countries in these assessments and thus 
lacks an understanding of the economic implica­
tions that are essential to setting climate action 
priorities. Our research on the costs of climate 
change in Canada will begin to fill this gap. 
To identify climate change risks with major 
economic implications that would be the focus 
of the research, we analyzed a range of climate 
hazards to which Canada could be exposed in 
the coming decades, drawing on national and 
regional climate science syntheses and risk 
studies (e.g., CCA, 2019; ECCC, 2019; Palko and 
Lemmen, 2017; Warren and Lemmen, 2016). At 
the same time, we analyzed the literature on 
the economic implications of climate change, 
often drawing on studies from peer countries, to 
map the state of knowledge on climate change 
costs and understand what can and can’t be 
practically and credibly quantified in mone­
tary terms. The result is a picture of the costs of 
climate change in Canada and a clearer idea of 
potentially catastrophic impacts lurking below 
the waterline. Figure 1 shows examples of the 
current spectrum of understanding, from risks 
that are well understood and for which we can 
credibly predict costs, to those that are possi­
ble but whose scale and timing is impossible to 
predict, let alone monetize. 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
6
Three key insights emerge from our survey of 
existing research: 
	
▶No region or sector seems to be immune 
to the damages of climate change.
Climate change risks are pervasive, with 
multiple climate hazards that could 
trigger a broad spectrum of economic, 
environmental, and social costs. Some 
regions are more susceptible to particular 
types of hazards that will be exacerbated 
by climate change—notably Northern 
communities impacted by the rapid 
degradation of infrastructure due to 
permafrost thaw. 
	
▶Risks are cross-cutting and compounding  
and more acute for vulnerable groups. 
Climate change risks are exacerbated 
by policies and programs that make 
people, economies, and ecosystems more 
vulnerable. Cross-cutting climate change 
risks interact with one another and are 
compounding existing vulnerabilities. For 
example, Northern communities are also 
predominantly Indigenous communities, 
and are thus at greater risk from the 
combination of drastic Northern climate 
change and socio-economic vulnerability 
that is the legacy of racist colonial policies. 
	
▶Available knowledge only reflects the 
tip of the iceberg. There are important 
gaps in our knowledge about potential 
damages that exacerbate climate-related 
risks. Some costs we can see­—notably the 
costs of weather-related disasters. Yet, 
cost estimates and methods to monetize 
associated damages are not available for a 
wide range of risks to Canadian prosperity. 
Any estimates of damages using currently 
available data and tools will inevitably be 
incomplete and likely represent the lower 
bound of expected impacts. 
The next section explores the most visible cate­
gory of climate change costs: weather-related 
disasters. The subsequent section surveys the 
literature on the costs of climate change in 
Canada, providing an overview of the types of 
costs Canada has experienced so far, and a snap­
shot of what we can expect in the future.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
7
THE CLIMATE COSTS ICEBERG 
Impacts on human health and wellbeing 
from wildfires
Disruption to business and critical supply 
chains from severe weather events and 
disasters
Impacts of climate-change-related 
damages on investment returns and 
household finances
International conflict and migration 
influenced by climate impacts on global 
geopolitical and economic stability
Interactions of multiple hazards that 
occur simultaneously or in rapid 
succession, such as sea-level rise and 
permafrost thaw impacts to Northern 
coastal communities
Cascading impacts from damage to 
critical systems, such as loss of electricity 
and communications systems at the 
same time as a wildfire evacuation
Climate change is bringing new threats onto Canada’s horizon while amplifying existing 
hazards. A small number of the risks that Canadian households, communities, and businesses 
face are well understood. Many other risks are looming under the surface—researchers don’t 
know yet how the risks will change over time or how they may interact with other social, 
environmental, and economic systems. Faced with this uncertainty, decision makers—and 
individuals—need to avoid the trap of inaction and instead adaptively manage these risks.
Destruction to homes and communities 
from floods and sea level rise
Worsening Northern housing shortages 
due to damage from permafrost thaw
Increase in the number of deaths and 
hospital visits due to heatwaves
RISKS IN OUR PATH 
for which we can start 
to calculate the scale 
of impact and cost
CLIMATE IMPACTS WE 
SUSPECT WILL AFFECT CANADA 
but whose scope and scale 
we don’t yet have the tools 
to understand
RISKS THAT MAY HAVE 
MAJOR IMPACTS through 
complex interactions and 
processes and that are 
very challenging 
to predict
FIGURE 1
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
8
Climate-related disasters and the associated 
damages are among the most visible indicators 
of the costs of climate change. Yet, these costs 
provide an incomplete picture since they do not 
represent the full range of social, economic, and 
environmental damages of climate change. Still, 
ongoing catastrophic losses and disaster costs 
in Canada are the very visible tip of the climate 
costs iceberg. 
The private sector covers some catastrophic losses 
to property through insurance, while the public 
sector, at all levels, spends on weather-related 
disaster response and recovery. These costs are 
reasonably easy to calculate, reflecting the sum 
of market transactions by private insurers and 
governments. Adding to these weather-related 
disaster costs are uninsured losses to property and 
lost income for households and businesses. 
There are also less tangible weather-related 
costs stemming from impacts on ecosys­
tem function and mental health, for example. 
Currently, it is the insured losses and govern­
ment payments that are typically reported for 
weather-related disasters, with little account­
ing and reporting of other losses. The data on 
weather-related disaster costs, therefore, provide 
a highly incomplete view of the total costs. 
Still, historical data since the 1970s points to a 
growing threat that disaster costs and cata­
strophic losses are becoming larger and more 
frequent relative to past events. Notably, as we 
explore in this section, catastrophic insured losses 
and disaster costs have risen from tens of millions 
of dollars to billions of dollars annually, even when 
correcting for an expanding economy, more valu­
able assets, and a growing population. 
DISASTERS ON THE RISE:
CATASTROPHIC LOSSES AND COSTS
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
9
Not all weather-related disaster costs should be 
attributed to a changing climate, but evidence 
suggests that climate change is increasingly 
altering weather and climate patterns, resulting 
in higher damages than historically observed. 
Other major contributors to growing disas­
ter costs include an expanding economy, an 
expanding population pushing into areas more 
exposed to weather disasters, loss of natural 
infrastructure, and aging municipal infrastruc­
ture and housing. 
In a sense, the extent to which climate change 
has contributed to the total weather-related 
disaster costs does not matter. Trends indicate 
that vulnerability in Canada to weather-related 
disasters is climbing due to several compound­
ing factors, including climate change. We return 
to this discussion later in this chapter.  
Weather-related disasters and costs 
on the rise
While weather-related disasters have always 
occurred in Canada, it is clear from data that 
something is going on with respect to their 
number and costs. This section uses two separate 
datasets to assess trends in the number of disas­
ters and their costs:
	
▶The Canadian Disaster Database (CDD).
Since 1970, the federal government’s Disaster 
Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) 
program has backstopped provinces, 
territories, and individuals in covering the 
costs of disasters. As part of the program, the 
CDD tracks the most significant weather-
related hazards, in terms of frequency, cost, 
and people evacuated. Costs include include 
some insured and uninsured catastrophic 
losses. Disaster costs totalled $35 billion3 for 
300 of the 645 weather-related disasters 
recorded since 1970. The most frequently 
reported weather-related disasters include 
floods, with 40 per cent of the total number, 
followed by severe thunderstorms (18 per 
cent), wildfires (15 per cent), and winter 
storms (nine per cent).4 Hail, wind, and ice 
events are included in these categories. 
	
▶Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) 
catastrophic loss data. 
The Insurance Bureau of Canada (2020) 
publishes weather-related catastrophic loss 
data dating back to 1983.5 From 1983 to 2019, 
Canada experienced 271 weather-related 
catastrophic loss events, with a total cost of 
$31.8 billion ($2019). Major catastrophic losses 
are tracked for a range of weather-related 
disasters including wildfires, windstorms, 
floods, winter storms, hurricanes, and hail. 
Both datasets point to alarming trends (see 
Figure 2).
Canadians are experiencing a growing number 
of disasters each year—but the total cost of 
disasters is growing faster. 
Both data sets indicate that events are becom­
ing more frequent, while total costs and average 
costs are climbing: 
The annual number of disasters in the CDD has 
steadily increased since the 1970s, fluctuating 
between a low of eight in the early 1970s to a 
high of 27 per year in 2016. The number of events 
3All costs in this section are expressed in 2019 Canadian dollars, normalized by using nominal Gross Domestic Product (or GDP at market prices). 
Nominal GDP is a good price inflator to use to normalize disasters costs in constant dollars since it captures increases in the accumulation of assets 
and population and not just price inflation as with the consumer price index. 
4Heat events were omitted due to a lack of data. 
5Sources cited by IBC for the data include: IBC, PCS Canada, Swiss Re, and Deloitte (1983 to 2007); CatIQ (2008 to 2020). 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
10
is also trending up. This increase, however, is 
small compared to how the costs of disasters 
have ballooned—rising from an average of $8.3 
million per event in the 1970s to an average $112 
million in the 2010s. This change represents a 
staggering 1,250 per cent increase over just four 
and a half decades. There have been $14.5 billion 
in disaster costs tallied so far for 2010 to 2019, 
while the total for the four previous decades 
was $21 billion. The $21 billion includes the 1998 
Eastern Canada ice storm—a $7 billion event. 
Weather-related insured catastrophic loss 
events for the three decades prior to 2010 aver­
aged five per year, with total catastrophic losses 
of $12.7 billion. But between 2010 and 2019, 
the annual average number of events jumped 
to 11, resulting in a total cost of $20.1 billion, or 
nearly double the costs of of the previous three 
decades combined. In 2018 and 2019 alone, 
reported insured catastrophic losses totalled $3.1 
billion from 23 weather events—or about one 
every month. These costs are also getting larger, 
with the average cost per event quadrupling 
from an average of $44 million in the early 1980s 
to $175 million from 2010 to 2019. 
Weather-related disaster costs are high.
Disasters are becoming costly for individuals 
and for the economy. On a per capita basis, costs 
in both datasets rose from about $6 per person 
prior to 2010 to $40–$50 per person after 2010, or 
a nine-fold increase in the average before 2010. 
Of course, this average value masks very acute 
costs for individuals who are directly affected by 
the disasters. For example, the 630,000 people6 
evacuated due to weather-related disasters since 
1970 would have experienced costs well above 
this national average due to lost income, reloca­
tion costs, and uninsured property losses. 
Compared against the growth in Canada’s 
gross domestic product (GDP), which has 
grown at an annual rate of about 2.6 per cent 
per year since 1970,7 weather-related disaster 
costs have been increasing. Prior to 2010, disas­
ter costs in both datasets were equal to about 
0.028 per cent of the annual 2.6 per cent GDP 
growth.8 After 2010, this share rose to five to six 
per cent of annual growth in both datasets. In 
2016, an extreme weather year and slow GDP 
growth year, disaster costs equaled a third of all 
of Canada’s GDP growth. 
The Fort McMurray wildfire of 2016, the largest 
single weather-related insurance loss event in 
Canadian history, resulted in nearly $4 billion 
in insured losses (IBCb, 2020b). The combined 
property, infrastructure, business interrup­
tion, and other indirect economic losses of the 
Fort McMurray wildfire have been estimated at 
almost $11 billion (Alam, et al. 2017), equivalent to 
3.5 per cent of Alberta’s GDP—or about 1.5 years 
of lost provincial economic growth.
6Reported in the CDD. 
7Statistics Canada. Table 36-10-0369-01 Gross domestic product, expenditure-based, at 2012 constant prices, annual (x 1,000,000). 
8Or one per cent of annual growth.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
11
THE RISING COSTS OF WEATHER-RELATED DISASTERS
The Canadian Disaster Database (CDD) records the costs of declared disasters in Canada, and the 
Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) records catastrophic insured losses. Both sources show eye-opening 
trends in weather-related disasters and events.
FIGURE 2
0
10
20
30
40
Number of Weather-related Disasters
Canadian Disaster Database
IBC, 2020
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2019
0
2
4
6
8
Annual Disaster Costs ($2019 Billion)
Canadian Disaster Database
IBC, 2020
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2019
Weather-related disasters are 
hitting more often
Weather-related disasters are 
costing more each year
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
12
0
200
400
Annual Average Cost per Event ($2019 Million)
Canadian Disaster Database
IBC, 2020
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2019
0
50
100
150
200
250
Annual Per Capita Disaster Costs ($2019)
Canadian Disaster Database
IBC, 2020
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2019
Weather-related disasters are 
getting more expensive 
on average
Per capita disaster costs 
are rising
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
13
0
12
23
35
Disaster Costs /Annual GDP Growth
Canadian Disaster Database
IBC, 2020
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2019
Disasters are costing more as a 
share of GDP
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
14
Not all disaster costs are linked to climate change
While the data leaves no question that climate 
change is increasing the risks and costs of 
weather-related disasters in Canada, not all 
increases in disaster risks and costs should be 
attributed to a changing climate. Further analysis 
of the possible causes of specific events is required.
Climate change is intensifying weather-related 
disasters. 
Credibly evaluating the costs of climate change, 
and particularly the past costs of extreme 
events, requires assessing the extent to which 
disasters would happen in the absence of 
climate changes driven by human activity. There 
is a growing body of science that can help estab­
lish the influence of climate change relative to 
more conventional factors on extreme weather 
events. Known as extreme event attribution, this 
field of study has generated mounting evidence 
that greenhouse gases from human activity 
are raising the risk of some types of extreme 
weather. A recent survey of over 300 peer-re­
viewed attribution studies found that, since 2011, 
human-caused climate change had made 280 
global extreme weather events and trends more 
likely or more severe (Carbon Brief, 2020). 
Extreme event attribution has fingerprinted 
climate change in recent Canadian disasters.
The 2013 Alberta floods, which caused $1.8 billion 
in catastrophic insurance losses and $6 billion 
in direct costs such as uninsured losses (CESD 
2016), were the combined result of above-average 
snowmelt that year and extreme rainfall made 
more likely because of the changing climate 
(Teufel et al., 2016).
The Fort McMurray wildfire of 2016 has similar 
links to climate change. The fire resulted in $4 
billion of insured losses, destroyed 2,400 build­
ings, and led to over 80,000 people being evac­
uated. The United States’ National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration (2016) and 
Canadian researchers (Kirchmeier-Young et al. 
2017) determined that this “gargantuan fire” was 
driven by several fire-friendly atmospheric and 
ground conditions that had been made signifi­
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
15
cantly more likely because of climate change. 
These include: drier-than-average conditions in 
2015 that left dry timber as fuel for the inferno; 
below-average amounts of precipitation mani­
fested as an early snow melt, extending the fire 
season; and dry air along with well-above-average 
spring temperatures that dried out vegetation 
prematurely, providing additional fuel.
Climate change aside, Canada’s expanding 
economy, population, and other compounding 
factors are increasing our vulnerability to 
weather-related disasters.
As we explored above in this section, disaster 
costs are growing. Contributing factors include 
an expanding economy, rising property values, 
and increased residential and commercial devel­
opment pushing into hazardous areas. But that is 
not the whole story; growing and compounding 
vulnerabilities are also driving the uptick in cata­
strophic losses. Flood costs, for example, are also 
compounded by the loss of natural habitats that 
protect against flood, aging municipal infrastruc­
ture ill-suited to the range of extreme events now 
being experienced, buildings that don’t incor­
porate sufficient resilience measures, and the 
expansion of impermeable surfaces that create 
more runoff in urban areas (Intact Centre, 2020). 
Further, poverty, discrimination, and marginaliza­
tion have left many, including Indigenous people, 
more severely impacted by disasters and with 
fewer resources to prepare, respond, and recover 
(Adger, 2014; Birkmann, 2015).
Focusing on weather-related catastrophic losses 
and disaster spending only paints a partial 
picture of climate change costs. Other types of 
climate change damages are more gradual and 
less dramatic than changes in extreme events. 
Studies in the U.S. and Europe have shown the 
costs of slow-onset climate change impacts—
such as declining fisheries caused by ocean acid­
ification, lost hydroelectric generation capacity 
due to changing rainfall patterns, sea-level rise 
that permanently floods low-lying areas and 
erodes coastlines, and collapsing buildings and 
roads caused by permafrost thaw—may be of 
similar magnitude to those associated with 
weather-related disasters and climate extremes 
(Ciscar et al., 2018; Martinich and Crimmins, 2019; 
Steininger et al., 2016). 
The next chapter of the report explores this 
broader range of climate change costs. 
The Fort McMurray wildfire of 2016 resulted in $4 billion of insured losses, destroyed 
2,400 buildings, and led to 80,000 people being evacuated.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
16
Permafrost thaw is one of many climate change 
impacts affecting communities across Northern 
Canada. Much of the North has been covered 
in permafrost for millennia as ground tempera­
tures in these areas have largely remained well 
below freezing. However, warmer temperatures 
caused by climate change are causing perma­
frost to thaw, resulting in shifting, slumping, and 
cracking of the ground. This leads to damage and 
destruction of homes, schools, health centres, 
highways, and runways built on permafrost 
(Couture et al., 2003; Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2014; Hjort et al., 2018; Pan-Territorial 
Adaptation Partnership, 2014). Shoring up, 
rebuilding, and dealing with the disruption 
caused by failed infrastructure has become a 
perpetual expense for individuals, communities, 
businesses, and governments (CCA, 2019; Senate 
of Canada, 2019).
In addition, permafrost thaw may become a 
major threat to health, well-being and ways of 
life in Northern Indigenous communities (CCA, 
2019; Senate of Canada, 2019). On top of ongoing 
impacts to traditional harvesting practices, unaf­
fordable prices of store-bought food, high rates 
of mental illness and suicide, and long-term 
boil water advisories, permafrost thaw impacts 
to Northern homes, buildings, and infrastruc­
ture will further reduce the options Indigenous 
communities have for food, water, shelter, and 
healthcare (CCA, 2019; Senate of Canada, 2019). 
Permafrost thaw has been increasingly eating 
into the budgets of Northern governments 
over the past decade. The Northwest Territories 
Association of Communities estimates that 
permafrost thaw results in $51 million in damages 
to public infrastructure every year—or 18.5 per 
cent of the territory’s total infrastructure budget 
for 2020 (EnviroEconomics and Tetra Tech, 2018; 
Government of Northwest Territories, 2020). 
Similarly, the Government of Yukon has spent 
an additional $400,000 each year on road main­
tenance on the Dempster Highway due to 
permafrost thaw; over the past 13 years perma­
frost-related maintenance costs for the one high­
way alone have increased by an estimated $2 
million, making up an estimated three per cent 
of the territorial government’s transportation 
operations and maintenance costs (Burn, 2018; 
Government of Yukon, 2020).
The impacts of permafrost thaw on Northern 
airports is of particular concern. Across the North 
there are 117 airports that serve as the only means 
of year-round access to communities (Office of 
the Auditor General, 2017). As with many infra­
structure systems across the North, many of 
these airports are already in disrepair and can ill 
afford more damage (Government of Nunavut, 
2014). Recent analysis has estimated that the 
impact of thawing permafrost to airports in 
the Northwest Territories is 23 per cent of the 
total asset value (EnviroEconomics and Tetra 
PERMAFROST THAW 
ACROSS NORTHERN CANADA 
CASE STUDY
Tech, 2018; Northwest Territories  Association of 
Communities, 2015). Indirect costs of these airport 
impacts are estimated to be $8.03 million per 
year in business disruptions and $5.76 million per 
year in labour income loss (ibid).
The Inuvik airport is a salient example of the 
economic impact of permafrost thaw and of the 
opportunity to reduce those impacts into the 
future through adaptation. Serving over 7,000 
people in the Beaufort Delta Region, the airport 
has been impacted by permafrost thaw over the 
past decade, with service disruptions and mount­
ing costs. A recent investment of $22 million for 
improved drainage and widening to slow the 
pace of permafrost thaw beneath the runway is 
anticipated to extend the life of the airport and 
reduce service disruption and costs associated 
with critical failures. Other adaptation options are 
increasingly being integrated into capital plan­
ning across the North (Allard et al., 2012), such as 
thermosyphons that protect the integrity of exist­
ing permafrost under buildings and infrastruc­
ture. These adaptation measures can reduce the 
costs of long-term damage by up to 45 per cent 
(Larsen et al., 2008; Melvin et al., 2017). However, 
given that surface permafrost thaw is inevita­
ble in many parts of the North, consideration 
also needs to be given to land-use planning and 
regular lifecycle analysis, as well as the reality that, 
in some cases, replacement of vulnerable infra­
structure may be more cost-effective in the long 
term than trying to protect it in place. 
The adaptation response thus far has been ad 
hoc and underfunded, despite the dramatic and 
clearly visible climate impacts that represent a 
major threat to Northern economies and ways of 
life (Labbé, 2017; Loboda, 2014). Efforts to patch 
over damage can amount to throwing good 
money after bad. Innovative solutions involv­
ing new building and infrastructure construc­
tion technologies may hold promise, but remote 
and Indigenous communities often cannot 
bear the costs to implement them. Indigenous 
people facing large impacts in the North must 
be included as rightsholders in the conversations 
around what is taking place, given the thousands 
of years they have been living on these lands and 
the impacts that these communities face. 
A deeper understanding of the large-scale and 
long-term implications of permafrost thaw 
to communities and economies across the 
North, as well as the benefits and limitations of 
permafrost adaptations, is required to inform 
a concerted strategy. The Institute is contribut­
ing to this understanding through forthcoming 
research in this series. That research will eval­
uate the future risk of permafrost thaw across 
the North and estimate the potential impacts 
and costs to the roads, buildings, and airports. 
It will also assess the degree to which adapta­
tion measures can reduce these costs in the 
medium and long term, including the balance 
of costs between measures that slow the rate of 
thaw and complete infrastructure redesign and 
replacement. 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
17
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
18
Insured losses and other disaster-related costs 
represent just a fraction of the total economic 
costs of extreme weather events. Other costs—
including business interruption, long-term phys­
ical and mental health effects, and depletion of 
government resources—profoundly add to the 
price tag. Further, the impacts of climate change 
will not be limited to those associated with larger 
and more frequent extreme weather disasters. 
Slow-onset changes will have impacts and costs of 
a similar magnitude to extreme weather events. 
This section provides a view of the range of costs 
attributable to extreme events and to slow-onset 
changes across social, economic, and environ­
mental systems in Canada. Based on our review, 
the Institute identified five types of climate-
related damages that are happening now and 
likely to continue:
	
▶Household, business, and infrastructure 
assets are losing value.
	
▶Productivity losses and business 
disruptions are slowing economic growth.
	
▶Human health is at risk. 
	
▶Impacts on ecosystems generate tangible 
costs. 
	
▶More government resources will be required 
to address climate change damages.
The information below is organized under 
these five types of damages, presenting a 
mix of historical and projected cost informa­
tion intended to signal the scope and scale of 
Canada’s climate change costs. 
Limitations in existing analysis make a truly 
comprehensive assessment challenging, 
however. Based on existing information, the 
costs of climate change for Canada are likely 
to be large and pervasive. And that’s before 
accounting for all the unknowns that make up 
the rest of the iceberg.
CLIMATE COSTS ARE 
FAR-REACHING AND PILING UP
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
19
Household, business, and infrastructure 
assets are losing value
The value of household, business, and infrastruc­
ture assets at risk are considerable. For example, 
real estate represents more than 75 per cent of 
Canada’s produced wealth, with a value of over 
$8.5 trillion. Canada’s transportation and electric 
power infrastructure alone have a replacement 
value of over $400 billion, and the reliability of 
this infrastructure is vital to the economy and to 
the everyday lives of Canadians. 
Homes, buildings, and infrastructure are 
extremely sensitive to several climate hazards 
that are expected to become more frequent 
and intense because of climate change. Until 
very recently—and in many cases, continuing 
today—urban development, public infrastruc­
ture such as roads and power lines, and indus­
trial facilities were not designed to withstand 
future climate change, adding to their vulnera­
bility. The climate change hazards placing infra­
structure at risk include flooding from heavy 
rainfall and storm surges, more frequent wild­
fires, and thawing permafrost—all of which will 
be exacerbated by steady warming.
	
▶In the absence of adaptation, coastal 
property losses could equal half a year’s 
GDP growth by mid-century. Withey et al. 
(2015) assess the national costs to dwellings 
and agricultural and forest lands from sea-
level rise and storm surges under various 
future climate scenarios. Between now and 
mid-century, they estimate cumulative 
property damages nationally could range 
between 0.39 and 0.80 per cent of current 
GDP. For some regions, the cumulative 
impact to mid-century exceeds one per cent 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
20
of their current GDP: notably New Brunswick, 
Quebec, the territories, and British Columbia. 
	
▶Permafrost thaw will degrade community 
infrastructure. In the North, accelerated 
permafrost thaw will continue to undermine 
building foundations and municipal 
infrastructure, forcing early replacement, 
higher maintenance costs, and impaired 
function. Permafrost thaw in the Northwest 
Territories’ 33 communities is estimated to 
rack up $1.3 billion in costs over the next 
75 years, equal to about 25 per cent of 
current territorial GDP (EnviroEconomics 
and Tetra Tech, 2018). Because housing and 
infrastructure are very expensive to build and 
maintain in remote Northern Indigenous 
communities, these impacts will exacerbate 
the inequities Indigenous peoples are already 
experiencing as a result of low individual 
incomes, restricted community budgets, and 
a lack of government investment. 
Productivity losses and business 
disruptions are slowing growth
	
▶Wildfires shuttered oil production, reducing 
economic value. The Fort McMurray fire 
reduced oil production by approximately 47 
million barrels with a market value of $1.4 
billion (Antunes, 2016). It is unclear if this 
production was delayed or lost entirely due to 
supply constraints to get oil to market, but it 
likely led to economic losses given the size of 
the shutdown. At the peak of the fire, about 
40 per cent of Canada’s total oil production 
was taken offline, resulting in lost profit, 
royalties to government, and wages. 
	
▶Alberta floods left many without work 
temporarily, lowering overall productivity. 
The 2013 Southern Alberta floods left 300,000 
individuals, or 14 per cent of Alberta’s 
workforce, unable to work over a two-week 
period. This equalled 5.1 million hours of lost 
work due to the flooding and resulted in 
$601 million of lost economic output that is 
equivalent to 0.2 per cent of provincial GDP 
(Government of Alberta, 2015). 
	
▶Recent spring floods impacted small and 
financially vulnerable businesses. For 
weeks, the spring floods of 2019 in New 
Brunswick, Quebec, and Ontario inundated 
areas where 3,800 businesses were located. 
The vast majority were small businesses 
in the retail and construction industries 
with fewer than five employees (Statistics 
Canada, 2019). Financial data indicates that 
small business is much more vulnerable to 
business disruptions than the rest of the 
economy, with operating profit levels well 
below the average for all business.9
Of course, acute disasters receive the attention. 
But the slow-onset changes also impact produc­
tivity. Recent analysis by Kabore and Rivers (2020) 
used Statistics Canada survey data from indus­
try to estimate a link between manufacturing 
output and temperature. They conclude that 
when the temperature exceeds certain thresh­
olds, defined as below -18° C or above 24° C, has 
historically dropped annual manufacturing 
output by 2.7 per cent on average, with extreme 
hot and cold temperatures contributing about 
equally to this impact. Given that manufacturing 
accounts for 10 per cent of Canada’s GDP, even 
small drops in manufacturing output equate to 
large productivity losses.
9In 2018-19, retail trade had profits that were one third the level of all industries in Canada, while the level for construction was about half (Statis­
tics Canada Table 33-10-0008-01). Small businesses tend to underperform larger enterprises across a range of financial performance indicators 
(Government of Canada: Financial Performance Data. Accessed June 25, 2020, from https://www.ic.gc.ca/app/sme-pme/bnchmrkngtl/rprt-flw.
pub?execution=e1s1).
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
21
People’s health is at risk 
Disasters, extreme weather events, and slow-onset 
climate changes have been linked to increased 
deaths and illness, which increase stresses and 
costs on the health care system and reduced 
quality of life (Heath Canada, 2016). The range of 
health vulnerabilities and costs is broad:
	
▶Extreme events make mental health 
worse. In the Northwest Territories, the 
2012 and 2013 wildfires exacerbated feelings 
of loneliness, fear, stress, and uncertainty, 
including among Indigenous peoples 
(Dodd, et al., 2018). Symptoms of mental 
illness were also elevated after the Fort 
McMurray 2016 wildfire and included 
depression, moderately severe depression, 
suicidal thinking, and substance use (Brown, 
et al., 2019). 
	
▶Wildfire smoke harms people. Health 
Canada estimates that between 620 and 
2,700 deaths per year can be attributed 
to fine particle emissions from wildfires 
between 2013 and 2018, excluding the Fort 
McMurray wildfire of 2016 (Matz et al., 2020).
	
▶Extreme heat causes children to miss 
school. Only 128 of the 583 schools in the 
Toronto District School Board have air 
conditioning, which exposes students and 
workers to significant heat stress and has 
led to parents keeping children home from 
school (Flanagan, 2018).
	
▶Extreme heat is deadly. In Ontario, each 5° C
increase in daily temperature has been 
shown to result in a 2.5 per cent increase 
in non-accidental deaths (Chen et al. 2016). 
The Quebec heat wave in summer 2018—
the hottest summer in 146 years of record-
keeping—caused 86 deaths; 291 deaths 
were recorded during the 2010 heat wave 
(ClimateData, 2020). Families with less 
money are disproportionately impacted by 
these tragedies as they are often unable to 
afford air conditioning.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
22
Ecosystem impacts generate tangible and intangible costs 
Ecosystem costs can manifest as losses in 
market value—for instance, when crop yields 
change—but also in less tangible ways, such as 
cultural loss or changes in recreational experi­
ences and opportunities. Examples include:
	
▶Fisheries will be disrupted. Warming 
and acidification of Canada’s oceans and 
warming of inland waters may decrease the 
overall productivity of fisheries and impact 
the food security and cultural practices of 
Indigenous communities (Campbell et al., 
2014; Weatherdon et al., 2016). A reduction 
in the overall size of fisheries can create 
tensions between Indigenous and non-
Indigenous communities as they compete for 
a diminishing resource. These tensions have, 
at times turned violent. 
	
▶Harmful algae blooms wreck beach days 
and hurt tourism. Harmful algae blooms in 
Lake Erie, if left unchecked on their current 
trajectory as the climate warms, could reduce 
recreational values by $155 million annually 
to mid-century, impairing the enjoyment of 
recreational fishers, boaters, and swimmers. 
Impacts on the tourism industry are 
estimated to be in the order of $110 million 
annually to 2040 (Smith et al., 2019). 
	
▶Early heat waves compounded with 
frost to kill apple blooms. A March 2012 
heat wave in Ontario caused fruit trees to 
blossom weeks earlier than usual making 
them vulnerable to the April frosts, which 
ultimately killed 80 per cent of the apple 
blossoms. The resulting lost harvest value 
was estimated at $100 million (Government 
of Canada, 2015).
	
▶Wildfire prevention is increasing land 
management costs. The direct costs to 
the forest sector for wildland fire protection 
has increased by approximately $120 million 
per decade since the 1970s and routinely 
costs more than $1 billion annually (NRCan, 
2017 and 2019). Some of these costs are for 
adaptive responses, such as controlled burns, 
to avoid future damages. 
	
▶More pests ruin harvestable wood. The 
mountain pine beetle outbreaks in British 
Columbia between 2003 and 2005, which 
have been linked to a warming climate, 
decreased harvestable pine by over 50 per 
cent, with a present value cost of $60 billion 
in lost production (Corbett et al., 2016).
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
23
More government resources 
will be required 
Canadian governments of all levels are spending 
more to adapt to climate change and respond 
to the disasters and healthcare stresses that 
climate change creates. Those expenditures 
have opportunity costs: funds could otherwise 
be used to deliver other benefits or priorities. 
Typical costs experienced include:
	
▶Increased capital expenditures linked to 
accelerated asset depreciation and upkeep 
for transportation infrastructure, public 
buildings, land easements, underground 
infrastructure, and water treatment facilities.
	
▶Increased operation and maintenance 
costs, as demand for healthcare services 
rise, disaster response becomes more 
frequent, government self-insured liabilities 
and insurance premiums rise, and potential 
transfer payments rise between levels of 
government to backstop liabilities. 
Specific examples of increased government 
spending due in part to climate change-related 
impacts include the following:
	
▶More disaster spending is needed to cope. 
In 2016, the Parliamentary Budget Office 
concluded federal spending for disaster 
recovery in the provinces and territories was 
on the rise and would continue to climb well 
above historical levels. Canada’s Disaster 
Financial Assistance Arrangements program 
is projected to cost on average $673 million 
annually for floods and $902 million for 
weather-related disasters in the next few 
years. This is well above the hundred million-
dollar annual spending forecast for the DFAA 
(PBO, 2016). 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
24
	
▶Fire management costs for government 
are rising. By the end of the century, total 
average national fire management costs 
are projected to increase to just under $1 
billion a year (a 60 per cent real increase 
from the 1980–2009 period) under the low 
greenhouse gas emissions pathway and 
$1.4 billion a year (a 119 per cent real increase 
from the base period) under the high 
emissions pathway (Hope et al., 2016).
	
▶Damage to community infrastructure is 
on the rise. As one example, the National 
Capital Commission estimated that 
repairing infrastructure damage from the 
spring floods of 2019 would cost $6 million 
to $10 million representing 20 per cent of its 
forecast annual expenditures for operations. 
This cost is on top of $2 million in repairs 
required after the 2017 floods (Porter, 2019).
In the next section we discuss the role that 
climate change adaptation can play in reducing 
these costs. 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
25
The future impacts and costs of climate change 
for Canada are not inevitable—nor are they 
entirely outside our collective control. How 
Canada responds will ultimately affect the costs 
of climate change across the country. 
In the long term, overall global reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions are critical to limit­
ing the climate disruption that Canada will 
experience. However, existing greenhouse gas 
emissions have locked in a significant degree of 
climate change that can no longer be prevented. 
Reducing emissions today and in the future will 
help prevent the worst of the damage, but even 
in the best-case scenario for emissions, Canada 
will still be faced with a changing and unstable 
climate for many decades or centuries to come. 
Preparing for the growing climate risks that 
have been set in motion can reduce impacts 
and costs. Adapting and building the resilience 
of communities, businesses, and individuals can 
reduce the severity of climate change impacts 
occurring today and the potential impacts yet to 
come (Araos, 2016; Lesnikowski, 2015 and 2016). 
These can also ensure a faster recovery from 
impacts that cannot be avoided. 
While the awareness of the need for climate 
change adaptation in Canada is growing and 
more and more individuals and organizations are 
considering new risks in their day-to-day choices, 
action so far remains insufficient to substantially 
reduce Canada’s vulnerabilities. While there are 
many promising examples of adaptation being 
implemented, progress is inconsistent across 
different regions, communities, economic sectors, 
and governments. In the meantime, economic, 
social, and environmental costs continue to spiral. 
The path forward may be shrouded in fog, but 
standing still is not an option. Experts and deci­
THE NEED TO ADAPT AND 
BUILD RESILIENCE 
TO CLIMATE CHANGE
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
26
sion makers don’t fully understand the impacts 
that climate change may bring, let alone which 
adaptation solutions will best reduce these 
impacts. However, the Institute’s work on the 
costs of climate change adds to past findings by 
governments and researchers across the coun­
try to illustrate that climate change impacts and 
costs will be massive—so big that governments, 
industry, and communities need to rapidly 
harness all available tools and knowledge to 
move forward with adaptation. 
Adaptation takes many forms
Climate change adaptation means actions that 
reduce the negative impacts of climate change 
and protect individuals, communities, and econ­
omies. Those actions can also take advantage of 
opportunities that disruptions bring to improve 
the way things are done, increase prosperity, 
and better quality of life (IPCC, 2014; Smithers & 
Smit, 1997). Some kinds of adaptation are already 
occurring and will continue to occur as individ­
uals, government, businesses, and ecosystems 
experience climate changes and are forced to 
respond. However, climate change is so perva­
sive a challenge that these kinds of spontaneous 
responses alone cannot be relied on to protect 
the well-being and prosperity of Canadians. 
Climate change adaptation also requires delib­
erate, proactive choices by individuals, families, 
communities, businesses, and governments 
to incorporate the risks and opportunities of 
a changing climate—and an unpredictable 
future—as a way of living and doing business. 
Adaptation can take many forms. Upgrades to 
physical infrastructure such as roads and storm 
sewers can ensure it functions in, and protects 
Canadians from, a harsher climate. New prac­
tices can help prepare for a new climate real­
ity; for example, agricultural operations can be 
made more resilient to heat and drought, and 
schedules can be changed for outside work­
ers who are experiencing more frequent heat 
waves. Government policy can support risk 
reduction, for example by changing land use 
planning to avoid development in growing flood 
risk zones or by updating building standards 
to reflect the future climate that buildings and 
infrastructure will need to withstand. And the 
Preparing for the growing climate risks that have been set in motion can reduce 
impacts and costs.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
27
capacity of governments and communities to 
respond to climate change and weather-related 
disasters can be improved through investments 
in early warning and emergency response. 
Adaptation is also critical to building capacity and 
preventing further disproportionate impacts to 
communities that have been made vulnerable by 
disenfranchising policies, such as among low-in­
come and non-white communities (Ford, et al., 
2015; Kates et al., 2012). The inherent resilience that 
many marginalized communities derive from 
social cohesion can be strengthened and consol­
idated through investment in local networks and 
the capacity of community groups. 
Specific investments to reduce poverty and 
ensure equitable access to housing, health care, 
education, and economic opportunity can also 
reduce vulnerability and increase resilience. 
These investments can limit the consequences 
of both climate change and other kinds of 
shocks, reducing governments’ and commu­
nities’ long-term costs related to emergency 
response and social assistance (Cutter, 1996; 
Ribot, 2014; Adger et al., 2014). 
Because the Government of Canada has commit­
ted to achieving reconciliation with Indigenous 
peoples through a renewed nation-to-nation, 
government-to-government, and Inuit–Crown 
relationship, adaptation in Canada will also require 
more reflection on the rights of Indigenous 
peoples to the conservation and protection of the 
environment and the productive capacity of their 
lands, territories, and resources (Article 29, United 
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples). Doing so enables Indigenous peoples to 
determine adaptation priorities and develop strat­
egies that best fit the needs of their communi­
ties (Article 32, United Nations Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples). 
The benefits of adaptation go beyond 
avoiding costs
Just as the costs of climate impacts take many 
forms, so too do the benefits of adaptation. 
These benefits need to be understood to make 
informed decisions about adaptation.
The most obvious benefit of climate change 
adaptation is that it can help avoid the 
damages and costs of future impacts. In many 
cases, adaptation can reduce damages and 
costs immediately—even before dramatic 
climate changes take place—because commu­
nities, homes, businesses, and infrastructure 
are already at risk in the current climate. From 
this perspective, good adaptation is not just 
about protecting ourselves against future 
climate disruption. It is also a chance to reflect 
more broadly on how climate and weather 
affect the lives of Canadians, and to plan for 
inevitable variability. 
Analysis consistently demonstrates that every 
dollar spent on appropriate adaptation can 
return many dollars in the form of avoided 
costs of damages and of social and economic 
disruption (GCA, 2019). Measures to protect 
homes and communities from wildfires (Abt 
et al., 2015), coastal flood and erosion protec­
tion (Boyer-Villemaire et al., 2016), flood warning 
systems (Pappenberger et al., 2015), and relocat­
ing neighbourhoods in areas (Godschalk, 2009; 
Förster and Muelenaere, 2011) are all examples of 
adaptation actions for some of Canada’s great­
est climate risks that have been shown to gener­
ate significantly greater economic benefits than 
the costs invested.
However, the benefits of adaptation can extend 
well beyond avoided costs of climate and weather 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
28
impacts—especially if they deal with the causes 
and not just the symptoms of climate risk. Often, 
weather and climate-related disruption occurs 
because many aspects of society—cities, econ­
omies, industries, and social programs—are 
designed to work efficiently but under a narrow 
range of conditions. When change, shocks, and 
stresses take those operating conditions outside 
of the acceptable range, catastrophe can result. 
Climate change is now altering the operating 
range for Canadian society in ways that are not 
entirely predictable, meaning that systems must 
be designed in ways that increase their resil­
ience to a range of conditions. Doing so not only 
reduces climate change risks; people also benefit 
from a society that is more stable, functional, and 
prosperous in the face of many types of change. 
If we collectively play our cards right, this creates 
the potential for multiple social, environmental, 
and economic benefits. 
For example, the runoff from rainstorms in 
Canadian cities is typically carried away by 
complex systems of sewer pipes and drainage 
channels. The increasing intensity of rainstorms 
from climate change threatens to exceed the 
capacity of these pipes and channels and cause 
flooding of properties and basements more often. 
However, even under normal conditions, cities 
are beset by flooding and water quality problems 
because these drainage systems do little to reduce 
the speed, quantity, and quality of dirty runoff 
from urban asphalt and concrete surfaces. 
Adaptation that combines improvements in 
conventional storm drainage infrastructure 
with natural infrastructure such as green roofs, 
stormwater wetlands and urban tree planting 
can reduce and treat runoff and help control 
flooding and water pollution—both immediately 
and as climate change exacerbates the prob­
lem. But the benefits extend further by build­
ing resilience to more frequent extreme heat by 
cooling homes and neighbourhoods and reduc­
ing building energy use, making urban environ­
ments more attractive, and increasing property 
values (O’Neill, 2015). 
Canada’s adaptation deficit is growing
Despite clear evidence of growing climate 
change risk across Canada and the potential 
for immediate and sustained cost savings and 
benefits, adaptation in Canada has not been 
keeping pace (Ford et al., 2015; Paterson et al., 
2012). Much of Canada’s existing physical infra­
structure—both public and private—is at risk 
Much of Canada’s existing physical infrastructure—both public and private—is at 
risk from current and future climate change but there are few plans in 
place to address these risks.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
29
from current and future climate change, but 
there are few plans in place to address these 
risks. Most new investments in infrastructure, 
real estate development, and industrial expan­
sion don’t account for the risks of a chang­
ing climate (CCA, 2019; NRTEE, 2011), although 
Infrastructure Canada’s Climate Lens assess­
ment framework now seeks to change this for 
some projects (Infrastructure Canada, 2020). 
Health risks from climate-change-induced heat, 
air pollution, and infectious diseases are also 
increasingly clear, but health adaptation across 
Canada is slow to get started and regionally 
inconsistent (Austin et al., 2015). Northern regions 
and communities are being more dramatically 
affected by climate change impacts than the rest 
of Canada and frequently lack the resources to 
respond to the scale of change they are experienc­
ing (Ford et al., 2015; Healey, 2015; ITK, 2016). Legacy 
policies that have perpetuated housing shortages, 
health-care delivery, and infrastructure disrepair, 
as well as persistent food and water insecurity in 
Indigenous communities—all of which increase 
climate vulnerability—are still not being addressed 
(Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and 
Resilience, 2018; ITK, 2016; Parlee & Furgal, 2012). 
Why are we collectively not acting faster? The 
most obvious reason is that governments, 
communities, businesses, and individuals don’t 
have a deep enough understanding of the risks 
and costs of climate change to inform action. 
Canada’s Auditors General have highlighted 
that the Government of Canada and provin­
cial governments are lagging significantly in 
the characterization of climate risks necessary 
to support adaptation (OAG, 2018). Leaders of 
Canada’s financial sector have warned that the 
absence of consistent and reliable information 
about the physical risks and costs of climate 
change is limiting their ability to price those 
risks (Smart Prosperity, 2020). Without useful 
information about risk and costs and processes 
to incorporate that information into decision 
making, there is no clear mechanism to steer 
governments, businesses, and individuals away 
from climate change risk and towards resilience 
and adaptation solutions.
In some areas, however, there is a deep under­
standing of how climate change will impact 
Canada, including costs, and individuals and 
organizations are still not acting. For example, for 
more than a decade Canada’s insurance indus­
try has been highlighting the impacts and costs 
of climate-driven extreme events such as flood­
ing and wildfires. They have demonstrated (as 
we have echoed above) that these events are 
growing bigger, more frequent, and much more 
costly (IBC, 2018). However, Canada has been slow 
to implement adaptation measures that could 
reduce known risks and costs, even those that are 
relatively inexpensive and highly effective. Like 
many other nations, Canada is struggling to act 
on known climate change risks and implement 
adaptation at scale. This shows that understand­
ing risks and costs is only a starting point; much 
more work is required to set up the policies, 
governance, expertise, and financial mechanisms 
to execute adaptation.
Addressing Canada’s adaptation deficit is a 
difficult process that will not happen over­
night, but there is no time to lose. On one hand, 
Canada needs to move forward in a context 
of often incomplete information (Moser, 2010; 
Haasnoot, 2012). On the other, adaptation must 
be a higher priority for leaders, decision makers, 
and Canadians everywhere so that it can get the 
focus, resources, and coordination that it needs. 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
30
CASE STUDY
CANADA’S FLOOD RISK
Floods have historically been Canada’s most 
destructive and costly natural disasters, repre­
senting 37 per cent of all disaster costs since 
1970 in the Canadian Disaster Database, for 
example (see Figure 2). Canada is susceptible to 
many forms of flooding. Coastal flooding along 
maritime coasts and the shores of inland lakes 
results from high water levels created by combi­
nations of high tides, strong winds and storm 
surges. Riverine flooding occurs when river and 
stream flows overtop their banks because of 
high rainfall, rapid snowmelt, ice jams, or a mix 
of these. Pluvial flooding takes place primarily in 
urban areas, where intense rainfall overwhelms 
the capacity of storm drains and causes back­
ups and overflows into homes and basements. 
Across all flood categories, about 10 per cent—
about 1.8 million— of homes in Canada are esti­
mated to be at a high risk of flooding (Canadian 
Underwriter, 2016). Continued urban develop­
ment and intensification in flood hazard zones 
across much of Canada has also contributed 
significantly to increased impacts and costs over 
time (Trudeau, 2017).
The total costs of floods can be enormous. The 
2013 riverine flooding in Calgary and Southern 
Alberta is estimated to have cost governments, 
businesses, homeowners, and insurers over $5 
billion (MNP, 2015). Pluvial flooding localized in 
some areas in Toronto that same year cost nearly 
$1 billion—still Ontario’s most costly insured 
weather event of all time (IBC, 2017b; IBC, 2018). 
In an average year, Canadian private insurers pay 
out between tens of millions and hundreds of 
millions of dollars for flood claims, with extreme 
flood years such as 2013 resulting in over $3 billion 
in payouts. Governments pick up many of the 
remaining costs; the federal government Disaster 
Financial Assistance Arrangements program 
currently needs about $700 million annually for 
flood response and recovery, much of which is also 
matched by provincial governments (PBO, 2018). 
There are other significant public costs as well, 
such as tens of millions of dollars annually for evac­
uations of First Nations communities that have 
been relocated, often against their will, in areas 
prone to regular flooding (CBC, 2016). 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
31
In Canada, climate change is expected to affect 
the frequency and magnitude of all types of 
flooding. Rising sea levels and surges from more 
intense storms will dramatically increase the 
number of homes, properties, and businesses 
at risk of coastal flooding in Canada, particularly 
in B.C.’s Lower Mainland (Fraser Basin Council, 
2016). More frequent intense rainfall, expected 
across much of the country, will almost certainly 
increase the number of pluvial flood events. It 
may also increase the risk of riverine flooding, 
although it is still unclear whether the overall risk 
will increase because riverine floods are caused 
by a number of factors that will be affected differ­
ently by climate change (e.g.,Teufel et al., 2017).
On the climate costs iceberg, flooding is one 
impact that’s clearly visible above the waterline. 
We know that Canada is already at risk of flood­
ing, and that climate change is likely to make 
it worse. However, even for this most visible of 
potential climate change impacts, the path 
forward is not entirely clear. To begin, experts  
don’t even understand entirely which areas of 
the country are at existing risk of flooding nor 
the total value of property at risk, as Canada’s 
flood maps are incomplete, dated, and inconsis­
tent (Henstra et al., 2019). Without this baseline 
of understanding, it is not only difficult to project 
how flood risk and cost will evolve under climate 
change but also to prioritize specific areas for 
adaptation investment and to select the adapta­
tion measures that will be most appropriate. 
In some cases, simple and inexpensive adapta­
tion measures can be installed by homeowners 
to prevent flood impacts (Intact Centre, 2019). In 
others, millions of dollars in engineered infrastruc­
ture such as dams, reservoirs, and underground 
drainage systems may be required to mitigate 
both current and future flood risk. The most 
cost-effective adaptation measure in some situ­
ations may even be to relocate homes or entire 
neighbourhoods from high-risk areas. But with­
out knowing either the overall scale of current and 
future flood risk in Canada, or the details of what 
is at risk in particular locations, it is challenging to 
mount a concerted adaptation response. 
Our research on the costs of climate change will 
bring clarity to existing and potential future flood 
risk in Canada by characterizing the overall scale of 
impacts and their associated costs. In the absence 
of national flood mapping, we use risk maps devel­
oped for the insurance industry to determine 
where coastal, fluvial, and pluvial floods threaten 
property and assets across the country and apply 
climate projections to estimate how impacts and 
costs might grow under climate change. We also 
examine the potential for adaptation interventions 
to contain or reduce those growing costs. 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
32
The costs of climate change are massive and 
mounting. Despite gaps in knowledge, climate 
change already threatens the well-being and 
prosperity of people across the country. The 
costs aren’t limited to those affecting economic 
prosperity; while climate change impacts to 
cultural and ecological values cannot be mone­
tized, they threaten the basis of what sustains 
and defines Canada. Every sector of the econ­
omy, every community, and every household is 
either directly or indirectly at risk.
Even though experts currently understand only 
the tip of the iceberg of climate-related costs, 
these alone should be enough to trigger a course 
correction. The large and growing costs of insured 
losses, emergency response, and recovery from 
weather-related disasters are an important 
indication of how a changing climate is already 
impairing Canadian society and the economy. 
Looking forward, Canada could face much higher 
and more pervasive costs, both in terms of disas­
ters and other impacts, than those experienced 
so far.
The bad news is that climate change adapta­
tion in Canada is far behind where it needs to be. 
Progress has been slow, held back in part by a 
lack of understanding about the risks and costs 
of climate change. This uncertainty makes it 
difficult to decide which climate risks should be 
the focus of limited resources. 
However, even where there is a solid understand­
ing of impacts, action is not occurring at the scale 
that is required to adapt and plot a pathway to 
a climate-resilient future. Better information is 
required, without doubt—but better action is also 
needed, based on what is already known. 

RECOMMENDATIONS
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
33
Governments, businesses and communities must get serious about putting adaptation policies and 
practices into place now, while better identifying the physical and social climate risks threatening 
well-being and future prosperity. The following policy recommendations provide a starting point: 
	
All orders of government should significantly scale up public funding for implementing adaptation. 
A lack of foresight on climate change risks should not be a barrier to significantly scaling up 
adaptation investment. Addressing climate-related risk and building resilience implicates many, if 
not most, government activities and programs. Successful implementation therefore requires not 
only dedicated government capacity and expertise on adaptation, but mechanisms to integrate 
and fund adaptation in existing government programs and public investments, including 
infrastructure, health care, Indigenous affairs, Northern programs, economic development, 
energy, public safety, natural resource management, and environmental protection. To drive 
this change, government programs and investments should transparently evaluate their effects 
on current and future climate risks, and the costs and benefits of incorporating adaptation 
and resilience. As our analysis shows, adaptation faces barriers to implementation, but returns 
multiple benefits.
	
The federal government should convene provincial, territorial, Indigenous and municipal 
governments to co-develop a more coordinated approach to governing adaptation.  
The need to deploy adaptation at the scale and speed that Canada requires transcends 
administrative, geographic, and sectoral boundaries. Adaptation must be tailored and 
implemented at a local level to reflect local context. Yet coordination can reduce overlap, 
inconsistencies, and gaps. A coordinated, collaborative approach could set adaptation priorities, 
goals, and measures of progress, establish roles and responsibilities, identify policies that are 
essential for driving adaptation at all scales, and coordinate and leverage finance.
	
Governments and financial regulators should systematically enhance public disclosure and 
transparency of the economic and social implications of climate change risks across both the 
public and private sectors. 
As the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures and Canada’s Expert Panel on 
Sustainable Finance have highlighted, transparency about climate change risks is essential 
for allocating investment away from risk and towards resilience. This extends beyond 
disclosure rules for large, publicly traded companies; it also includes increased transparency 
around the climate risks that governments, communities, and individuals face. Whether 
incorporated into government credit ratings or real estate home inspections, this information 
will help governments, firms, and individuals better prepare for a changing climate. It will also 
shift investments toward resilient solutions, galvanizing a range of adaptation actions.
1
2
3
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
34
Acting on these recommendations will require better insight and foresight into climate risks and 
costs, adaptation options, and the costs and benefits of these options. It will help drive demand for 
improved information to fill Canada’s current knowledge gaps. The research the Canadian Institute 
for Climate Choices publishes over the next two years will help build a more reliable knowledge base. 
Along the way, we will engage stakeholders to gain additional insight on the costs of climate change 
and the types of information they require to act on adaptation. And we will also catalyze conversa­
tions about policy choices and investments that can help move adaptation priorities off the page and 
into practice across the country.
It’s not too late to 
prepare for and adapt 
to the effects of this 
change. Investments 
now can reduce 
the economic and 
human costs of future 
climate impacts.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
35
GLOSSARY
The definitions in this section reflect how key terms below are used in this paper and in the discipline 
of climate change adaptation research. Many terms here also have alternate meanings or application 
outside of climate-related contexts. 
Adaptation
The ways in which human and natural systems adjust to reduce the harmful 
effects of climate-related changes and capitalize on the benefits. 
Adaptive capacity
The combination of the strengths, attributes, and resources available to an indi­
vidual, community, society, or organization that can be used to prepare for and 
undertake actions to reduce negative impacts, moderate harm, or exploit benefi­
cial opportunities resulting from climate change.
Attribution
Identifying how various factors contribute to an observed change or event, such as 
floods or storms.
Baseline
(or reference)
The state against which change is measured. A “current baseline” represents 
observable, present-day conditions. A “future baseline” is a projected future set of 
conditions excluding the driving factor of interest. Alternative interpretations of 
the reference conditions can give rise to multiple baselines.
Catastrophic 
insured loss
An event that causes large insured losses. In Canada, these are currently defined 
as losses of $25 million or greater.
Climate
The average weather in a place over a long period of time, typically decades or 
longer.
Climate change
Changes in the usual climate of the Earth, predominantly caused by the burning 
of fossil fuels, which add heat-trapping gases to Earth’s atmosphere. It manifests as 
overall global warming but also in sea-level rise, melting of previously permanent 
snow and ice, and more extreme weather. 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
36
Climate extreme 
(extreme weather or 
climate event)
The occurrence of a weather or climate variable (such as temperature) that falls 
above or below the upper or lower limits of observed values for that variable. For 
simplicity, both extreme weather events and extreme climate events are referred to 
collectively as ‘climate extremes’.
Climate model
A numerical representation of the climate system that is based on the physical, chem­
ical, and biological properties of its components, their interactions, and feedback 
processes, and that accounts for all or some of its known properties. Climate models 
are applied as a research tool to study and simulate the climate, and for operational 
purposes, including monthly, seasonal, and interannual climate predictions.
Climate projections
Estimates of the response of the Earth’s climate to a range of plausible pathways, 
scenarios, or targets that capture the relationships between human choices, emis­
sions, concentrations, and temperature change. Climate projections are distin­
guished from climate predictions to emphasize that there is major uncertainty 
associated with this range of plausible futures and that none can generally be 
predicted to be more likely than others. 
Disaster
Severe alterations in the normal functioning of a community or a society due to 
hazardous physical events interacting with vulnerable social conditions, lead­
ing to widespread negative human, material, economic, or environmental effects 
that require an immediate emergency response to satisfy critical human needs 
and may require external support for recovery. Disaster risk is the likelihood that a 
disaster will occur within a specified period. 
Drought
A period of abnormally dry weather long enough to cause a serious shortage in the 
availability of water for natural ecosystems, agriculture, and human consumption. 
Exposure
The presence of people; livelihoods; environmental services and resources; infra­
structure; or economic, social, or cultural assets in places that could be adversely 
affected by climate change.
Hazard
The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event that may 
cause loss of life, injury, or other health impacts, as well as damage and loss to prop­
erty, infrastructure, livelihoods, service provision, and environmental resources.
Heat wave 
A period of temperatures that are higher than what is normally expected. Heat 
waves may span several days to several weeks.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
37
Impacts
Effects on natural and human systems. In this report, the term “impacts” is used to 
refer to the effects on natural and human systems of physical events, of disasters, 
and/or of climate change.
Likelihood
An estimate of the probability of the occurrence of a single event or of an outcome 
(for example, a climate parameter, observed trend, or projected change within a 
given range). Likelihood may be based on statistical or modeling analyses, expert 
assessments, or other quantitative analyses.
Permafrost
Ground (soil, rock, ice, and organic material) that is frozen and remains at or 
below 0° C for at least two consecutive years, typically occurring in polar or 
near-polar regions. 
Resilience
The ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, absorb, accommo­
date, or recover from the effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient 
manner, including through ensuring the preservation, restoration, or improve­
ment of its essential basic structures and functions.
Risk
The potential for consequences where something of value is at stake and where 
the outcome is uncertain. Risk is often represented as probability of the occurrence 
of hazardous events or trends, multiplied by the impacts if these events or trends 
occur. Risk results from the interaction of vulnerability, exposure, and hazard. In this 
report, the term risk is used primarily to refer to the risks of climate change-related 
impacts.
Sensitivity
The degree to which an individual, asset, household, community, business, or ecosys­
tem is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by climate variability or change. 
Storm surge
The temporary increase in the height of the sea due to extreme weather conditions, 
including low atmospheric pressure and/or strong winds. The storm surge is 
defined as being the excess above the level expected from the tidal variation alone 
at that time and place.
Vulnerability
The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, negative 
effects of climate change, including climate variability and extremes.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
38
REFERENCES 
Abt, Karen. L., David T. Butry, Jeffrey P. Prestemon, and Samuel Scranton. “Effect of fire prevention programs on acciden­
tal and incendiary wildfires on tribal lands in the United States”. International Journal of Wildland Fire 24(6): 749-762.
Adger, W. Neil, Juan M. Pulhin, Jon Barnett, Geoffrey D. Dabelko, Grete K. Hovelsrud, Marc Levy, Úrsula Oswald Spring, 
and Coleen H. Vogel. 2014. Human security. In Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: 
Global and Sectoral Aspects, eds. C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, et al.      
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change 
(755-791). Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.
Alam, Rafat, Shahidul Islam, Eric Mosely, Sean Thomas, and Virginia Dowdell. 2017. Rapid Impact Assessment of Fort 
McMurray Wildfire. MacEwan University and Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. http://0361572.netsolhost.com/
images/AlamIslam_QuickResponseSummary-ICLR.pdf.  
Allard, Michel, Mickaël Lemay, Carl Barrette, Emmanuel L’Hérault, Denis Sarrazin, T. Bell, and G. Doré. 2012. Permafrost 
and climate change in Nunavik and Nunatsiavut: Importance for municipal and transportation infrastructures. Nunavik 
and Nunatsiavut: From Science to Policy. An Integrated Regional Impact Study (IRIS) of Climate Change and Moderniza­
tion, 171–197.
Antunes, Pedro. The Economic Impact of the Fort McMurray Fires (recorded webinar). The Conference Board of Canada, 
November 29, 2016. https://www.conferenceboard.ca/e-library/abstract.aspx?did=8432&AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1
Araos, Malcolm, Lea Berrang-Ford, James D. Ford, Stephanie E. Austin, Robbert Biesbroek, and Alexandra Lesnikowski. 
2016. “Climate change adaptation planning in large cities: A systematic global assessment”. Environmental Science & 
Policy 66:375–382.
Austin, Stephanie E., James D. Ford, Lea Berrang-Ford, Malcolm Araos, Stephen Parker, and Manon D. Fleury. 2015. 
“Public health adaptation to climate change in Canadian jurisdictions”. International Journal of Environmental Re­
search and Public Health 12(1): 623–651.      
Bauer, Anja, Judith Feichtinger, and Reinhard Steurer. 2012. “The governance of climate change adaptation in 10 OECD 
countries: challenges and approaches”. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning 14(3): 279-304.
Birkmann, Joern, Susan L. Cutter, Dale S. Rothman, Torsten Welle, Matthias Garschagen, Bas Van Ruijven, Brian O’Neill et 
al. 2015. “Scenarios for vulnerability: opportunities and constraints in the context of climate change and disaster risk” 
Climate Change 133(1): 53-68.
Boyer-Villemaire, Ursule, Manon Circé, Laurent Da Silva, Claude Desjarlais, and François Morneau. 2016. Atlantic-Quebec 
Cost-Benefit Analysis of Adaptation Options in Coastal Areas: Synthesis Report. Ouranos, Montreal, QC. https://www.
ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/Synthesis-Report-Atl-Qc.pdf. 
Brown, Matthew R.G.,  Vincent Agyapong, Andrew J. Greenshaw, Ivor Cribben, Pamela Brett-MacLean, Julie Drolet, 
Caroline McDonald-Harker et al. 2019. “After Fort McMurray wildfire there are significant increases in mental health 
symptoms in grade 7-12 students compared to controls. BMC psychiatry 19(1):18.
Burn, C. R. (2018). Evidence on climate change effects and their management and investigation in the western Arctic. 
Ottawa, ON. https://sencanada.ca/content/sen/committee/421/ARCT/Briefs/2018-03-19_Brief_CBurn_e.pdf 
Campbell, Ian D., Dolores G. Durant, Karen L. Hunter, and Kim D. Hyatt. 2014. Food Production; in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, ON. 99-134.
Carbon Brief. 2020. Mapped: How Climate Change Affects Extreme Weather Around the World. https://www.carbon­
brief.org/mapped-how-climate-change-affects-extreme-weather-around-the-world
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation). May 25, 2016. “Frequent Kashechewan evacuations cost taxpayers millions”. 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/sudbury/kashechewan-rebuilding-relocation-funding-1.3597511
CESD (Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development). 2016. Spring 2016 Reports of the Commissioner 
of the Environment and Sustainable Development, Report 2: Mitigating the impacts of Severe Weather Events. Office of 
the Auditor General Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_cesd_201605_02_e_41381.html 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
39
Chen, Hong, Jun Wang, Qiongsi Li, Abderrahmane Yagouti, Eric Lavigne, Richard Foty, Richard T. Burnett, Paul J. 
Villeneuve, Sabit Cakmak, and Ray Copes. 2016. “Assessment of the effect of cold and hot temperatures on mortality in 
Ontario, Canada: a population-based study” CMAJ open, 4(1), E48.
Ciscar, Juan-Carlos, Dolores Ibarreta, Antonio Soria, Alessandro Dosio et al. 2018. Climate impacts in Europe: Final report 
of the JRC PESETA III project. European Union. Luxembourg. https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/
JRC55391/jrc55391.pdf.  
Climate Atlas of Canada. 2020. Agriculture and Climate Change. https://climateatlas.ca/agriculture-and-climate-change/ 
Couture, R., S. Smith, S. Robinson et al. 2003. On the hazards to infrastructure in the Canadian North associated with 
thawing permafrost. Proceedings of Geohazards. 97-104. 
Corbett, L. J., Patrick Withey, Van Lantz, and Thomas Ochuodho. 2016. “The economic impact of the mountain pine 
beetle infestation in British Columbia: provincial estimates from a CGE analysis”. Forestry: An International Journal of 
Forest Research 89(1): 100–105.
CCA, Council of Canadian Academies. 2019. Canada’s Top Climate Change Risks. The Expert Panel on Climate Change 
Risks and Adaptation Potential. Ottawa, ON. https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Report-Canada-top-cli­
mate-change-risks.pdf
Cutter, Susan L. 1996. “Vulnerability to environmental hazards”. Progress in Human Geography 20: 529–539.
Dodd, Warren, Patrick Scott, Courtney Howard, Craig Scott, Caren Rose, Ashlee Cunsolo, and James Orbinski. “Lived 
experience of a record wildfire season in the Northwest Territories, Canada”. Canadian Journal of Public Health 190(3): 
327-337.
EnviroEconomics and Tetra Tech. 2018. The Economic Implications of Permafrost Decay on Public Infrastructure in 
NWT Communities. Working Paper.  
Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience. 2018. Measuring Progress on Adaptation and Climate 
Resilience: Recommendations to the Government of Canada. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. http://publications.
gc.ca/collections/collection_2018/eccc/En4-329-2018-eng.pdf
Flanagan, Ryan. 2018. “Toronto beats temperature record as students swelter in schools without AC”. CTV News. https://
www.ctvnews.ca/canada/toronto-beats-temperature-record-as-students-swelter-in-schools-without-ac-1.4081007#:~:tex­
t=Toronto%20beats%2073%2Dyear%2Dold,schools%20without%20AC%20%7C%20CTV%20News.  
Ford, James D., Tristan Pearce, and Graham McDowell. 2015. “The adaptation challenge in the Arctic”. Nature Climate 
Change 5(12): 1046-1053.
Ford, James. D., Ashlee Cunsolo, Susan Chatwood, Chris Furgal, Sherilee Harper, Ian Mauro, & Tristan Pearce. 2014. 
“Adapting to the Effects of Climate Change on Inuit Health.” American Journal of Public Health 104:E9-E17.
Förster, Johannes, and Lucas De Muelenaere. 2011. Managed realignment of sea walls can enhance coastal protection 
provided by natural habitats and save costs. http://www.teebweb.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/TEEBcase-Man­
aged-realignment-for-coastal-protection-UK.pdf. 
Fraser Basin Council. 2016. Lower Mainland Flood Management Strategy – Phase 1 Report. Vancouver, BC. https://www.
fraserbasin.bc.ca/_Library/Water_Flood_Strategy/FBC_LMFMS_Phase_1_Report_Web_May_2016.pdf.  
GCA (Global Commission on Adaptation). 2019. Adapt Now: A Global Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience. https://
cdn.gca.org/assets/2019-09/GlobalCommission_Report_FINAL.pdf
Godschalk, David R., Adam Rose, Elliott Mittler, Keith Porter, and Carol Taylor West. 2009. “Estimating the value of 
foresight: aggregate analysis of natural hazard mitigation benefits and costs”. Journal of Environmental Planning and 
Management 52(6): 739-756
Government of Alberta. 2015. Impact of southern Alberta flooding on hours worked and GDP. Edmonton, AB. https://
open.alberta.ca/dataset/impact-of-southern-alberta-flooding-on-hours-worked-and-gdp/resource/ab6bcab2-5382-
40d8-87f5-37c2166f2525
Government of Northwest Territories. 2014. Northwest Territories Hazard Identification Risk Assessment. Yellowknife, 
NWT. https://www.maca.gov.nt.ca/sites/maca/files/resources/nwt-hira-final.pdf.
Government of Northwest Territories. 2020. Main Budget Estimates 2020-2021. Yellowknife, NWT. https://www.fin.gov.nt.
ca/sites/fin/files/resources/main_estimates_2020-2021_.pdf. 
Government of Nunavut. 2014. Nunavut Airports 20 Year Infrastructure Needs Assessment 2014 - 2034. Iqaluit, Nunavut: 
Government of Nunavut. https://assembly.nu.ca/nunavut-airports-20-year-infrastructure-needs-assessment-2014-2034. 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
40
Government of Yukon. (2020). 2020-21 Main estimates Highways and Public Works. Whitehorse, YT. 
Healey, Gwen. 2015. Exploring Health-Related Indicators of Climate Change in Nunavut. Iqaluit, Nunavut: Qaujigiartiit 
Health Research Centre.     
Henstra, Daniel, Andrea Minano, and Jason Thistlethwaite. 2019. “Communicating disaster risk? An evaluation of the 
availability and quality of flood maps”. Natural Hazards Earth System Science 19: 313–323. 
Hjort, Jan., Olli Karjalainen, Juha Aalto, Sebastian Westermann, Vladimir E. Romanovsky, Frederick E. Nelson, Bernd 
Etzelmüller, and Miska Luoto. 2018. Degrading permafrost puts Arctic infrastructure at risk by mid-century. Nature 
Communications 9(1): 5147.
Hope, Emily S., Daniel W. McKenney, John H. Pedlar, Brian J. Stocks, and Sylvie Gauthier. 2016. “Wildfire suppression costs 
for Canada under a changing climate”. PloS one 11(8)
Infrastructure Canada. 2020. Climate Lens – General Guidance. Ottawa, ON. https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/pub/
other-autre/cl-occ-eng.html.  
IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada). 2017. Toronto Flood Causes over $80 Million in Insured Damage. http://www.ibc.ca/on/
resources/media-centre/media-releases/toronto-flood-causes-over-80-million-in-insured-damage#:~:text=The%20
most%20costly%20insured%20severe,almost%20%241%20billion%20in%20damage.
IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada). 2018. Combatting Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural infrastructure is an un­
derutilized option. http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Resources/IBC-Natural-Infrastructure-Report-2018.pdf
IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada). 2019. Severe Weather Causes $1.9 Billion in Insured Damage in 2018. http://www.ibc.
ca/on/resources/media-centre/media-releases/severe-weather-causes-190-million-in-insured-damage-in-2018 
IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada). 2020. Facts of the Property and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada. http://assets.
ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2020/IBC-2020-Facts.pdf
Intact Centre. 2019. Water on the Rise: Protecting Canadian Homes from the Growing Risk of Flooding. https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Home-Flood-Protection-Program-Report-1.pdf
Intact Centre. 2020. Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation. https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/
ITK (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami). 2016. Inuit Priorities for Canada’s Climate Strategy. In A Canadian Inuit Vision for Our 
Common Future in Our Homelands. Ottawa, ON. https://www.itk.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/ITK_Cli­
mate-Change-Report_English.pdf.  
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2014. “Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. 
Part B: Regional Aspects.” Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change [Barros, V.R., Christopher B. Field, David Jon Dokken, and Michael D. Mastrandre. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/
WGIIAR5-PartB_FINAL.pdf. 
Kabore, Philippe & Nicholas Rivers. 2020. Manufacturing Output and Extreme Temperature: Evidence from Canada. 
https://ruor.uottawa.ca/bitstream/10393/41184/1/2006E.pdf.  
Kates, Robert W., William R. Travis, and Thomas J. Wilbanks. 2012. “Transformational adaptation when incremental 
adaptations to climate change are insufficient”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109(19): 7156–7161.
Kirchmeier-Young, Megan C., Francis W. Zwiers, Nathan P. Gillett, and Alex J. Cannon. 2017. “Attributing extreme fire risk 
in Western Canada to human emissions”. Climatic Change 144, 365–379.      
Larrivée, Caroline, Claude Desjarlais, René Roy, & Nicolas Audet. 2016. Regional Economic Study on the Potential Im­
pacts of Climate-change-induced Low Water Levels on the Saint-Laurent River and Adaptation Options. Ouranos. 
Montréal, QC. https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/ACA-GLSL_synthesis_english_final.pdf.  
Larsen, Peter H., Scott Goldsmith, Orson Smith, Meghan L. Wilson, Ken Strzepek, Paul Chinowsky, and Ben Saylor. (2008). 
Estimating future costs for Alaska public infrastructure at risk from climate change. Global Environmental Change, 
18(3), 442–457.
Martinich, Jeremy, & Allison Crimmins. 2019. “Climate damages and adaptation potential across diverse sectors of the 
United States”. Nature Climate Change 9: 397-404. 
Matz, Carlyn J., Marika Egyed, Guoliang Xi, Jacinthe Racine, Radenko Pavlovic, Robyn Rittmaster, Sarah B. Henderson, 
and David M. Stieb. 2020. “Health impact analysis of PM2. 5 from wildfire smoke in Canada (2013–2015, 2017–2018)”. 
Science of The Total Environment 725, 138506. 
Melvin, April M., Peter Larsen, Brent Boehlert, James E. Neumann, Paul Chinowsky, Xavier Espinet, Jeremy Martinich et 
al. (2017). Climate change damages to Alaska public infrastructure and the economics of proactive adaptation. Proceed­
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
41
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 114(2), E122–E131.
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy. 2019. Preliminary Strategic Climate Risk Assessment for British 
Columbia. Government of British Columbia. Victoria, BC. https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/cli­
mate-change/adaptation/riskassessment.
MNP LLP. 2015. Review and Analysis of the Government of Alberta’s Response to and Recovery from 2013 Floods. http://
www.aema.alberta.ca/documents/2013-flood-response-report.pdf 
NRTEE (National Round Table on Environment and Economy). 2011. Climate Prosperity: Paying the Price: The economic 
impacts of climate change for Canada. Ottawa, ON. http://nrt-trn.ca/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/paying-the-price.pdf.
NRCan (Natural Resources Canada), Canadian Forest Service. 2017. The State of Canada’s Forests. Annual Report 2017. 
Ottawa, ON. https://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/publications?id=38871
NRCan (Natural Resources Canada). 2019. Cost of wildland fire protection. Ottawa, ON. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/cli­
mate-change/impacts-adaptations/climate-change-impacts-forests/cost-fire-protection/17783
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 2016. Climate connections to Fort McMurray fire. https://
www.climate.gov/news-features/event-tracker/climate-connections-fort-mcmurray-fire
Northwest Territories Association of Communities. 2015. The Technical Opportunities and Economic Implications of 
Permafrost Decay on Public Infrastructure. Yellowknife, NWT. https://climatechange.toolkitnwtac.com/wp-content/
uploads/sites/21/2018/02/reports-section.pdf.  
OAG (Office of the Auditor General of Canada). 2017. Civil aviation infrastructure in the North. Reports for the Auditor 
General of Canada to the Parliament of Canada. Ottawa, ON. Government of Canada. https://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/
internet/English/parl_oag_201705_06_e_42228.html
OAG (Office of the Auditor General of Canada). 2018. Perspectives on Climate Change Action in Canada - A Collabora­
tive Report from Auditors General. Ottawa, ON. Government of Canada. https://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/
parl_otp_201803_e_42883.html
Palko, Kathy G. and Donald S. Lemmen, 2017. Climate risks and adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation 
sector 2016. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/
assess/2016/ClimatRisk-E-ACCESSIBLE.pdf 
Pan-Territorial Adaptation Partnership. 2014. Pan-Territorial Permafrost Workshop Summary Report. Government of 
Yukon, Government of Northwest Territories, Government of Nunavut. Yellowknife, NWT. https://www.northernadapta­
tion.ca/sites/default/files/pan-territorial_permafrost_workshop_report_0.pdf.  
Pappenberger, Florian, Hannah L. Cloke, Dennis J. Parker, Fredrik Wetterhall, David S. Richardson, and Jutta Thielen. 
2015. “The monetary benefit of early flood warnings in Europe”. Environmental Science & Policy 51: 278-291.
Parlee, Brenda, & Chris Furgal. 2012. “Well-being and environmental change in the arctic: a synthesis of selected research 
from Canada’s International Polar Year program”. Climatic Change 115(1): 13–34.      
Paterson, Jaclyn A., James D. Ford, Lea Berrang Ford, Alexandra Lesnikowski, Peter Berry, Jim Henderson, and Jody 
Heymann. 2012. “Adaptation to climate change in the Ontario public health sector”. BMC Public Health 12(1): 452.
PBO (Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer). 2016. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial 
Assistance Arrangements due to Weather Events. Ottawa, ON. https://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Docu­
ments/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf
Pembina Institute. 2020. Climate resilience and deep retrofits: A Reframed Tech Series primer. https://www.pembina.
org/pub/climate-resilient-retrofits
Porter, Kate. 2019. “Flood repairs to cost NCC up to $10M”. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Jun 20, 2019. https://
www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/ncc-2019-flood-costs-estimate-1.5182794#:~:text=Repairing%20the%20capital’s%20
bridges%2C%20pathways,million%2C%20its%20board%20heard%20Thursday.
Ribot, Jesse. 2014. “Cause and response: vulnerability and climate in the Anthropocene”. Journal of Peasant Studies 
41(5): 667–705.
Senate of Canada. 2019. Northern Lights: A wake-up call for the future of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://sencanada.ca/
content/sen/committee/421/ARCT/reports/ARCTFINALREPORT_E.pdf. 
Smart Prosperity. 2015. New Solutions for Sustainable Stormwater Management in Canada. https://institute.smartpros­
perity.ca/sites/default/files/stormwaterreport.pdf.  
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
42
Smart Prosperity, 2020. Bridging the Transparency Gap in Sustainable Finance. https://institute.smartprosperity.ca/
bridging-transparency-gap
Smithers, John, & Barry Smit. 1997. “Human adaptation to climatic variability and change”. Global Environmental 
Change 7(2): 129–146.
Smith, Robert B., Brad Bass, David Sawyer, David Depew, and Susan B. Watson. 2019. “Estimating the economic costs of 
algal blooms in the Canadian Lake Erie Basin”. Harmful Algae 87:101624.      
Statistics Canada. 2019. Impact of spring flooding on businesses in key areas across Canada. The Daily. Ottawa, ON. 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/190524/dq190524b-eng.htm. 
Steininger, Karl W., Martin König, Birgit Bednar-Friedl, Lukas Kranzl, Wolfgang Loibl, and Franz Prettenthaler. 2016. 
Economic evaluation of climate change impacts. Springer International PU.
Teufel, B., G.T. Diro, K. Whan et al. 2016. “Investigation of the 2013 Alberta flood from weather and climate perspec­
tives”. Clim Dyn 48, 2881–2899.      
UNDRIP (United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples). 2008. United Nations. https://www.un.org/
development/desa/indigenouspeoples/wp-content/uploads/sites/19/2018/11/UNDRIP_E_web.pdf
Warren, F.J. and D.S. Lemmen. 2014. Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation. 
Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON, 286p. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/
assess/2014/pdf/Full-Report_Eng.pdf
Trudeau, Mary. 2017. “Urbanization Effect on Hydrology”. Water Canada. https://www.watercanada.net/feature/urbaniza­
tion-effect-on-hydrology/
Weatherdon, Lauren V., Yoshitaka Ota, Miranda C. Jones, David A. Close, and William WL Cheung. 2016. “Projected 
scenarios for coastal First Nations’ fisheries catch potential under climate change: management challenges and 
opportunities”. PloS one 11 (1), e0145285. 
Withey, Patrick, Van Lantz, and Thomas Ochuodho. 2015. “Economic costs and impacts of climate-induced sea-level rise 
and storm surge in Canadian coastal provinces: a CGE approach”. Applied Economics, 48(1): 59-71.
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
43
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
STAFF AUTHORS
Dave Sawyer, Principal Economist, Canadian Institute 
for Climate Choices
Ryan Ness, Adaptation Director, Canadian Institute for 
Climate Choices
Dylan Clark, Senior Research Associate, Canadian 
Institute for Climate Choices
Dale Beugin, Vice President Analysis and Research, 
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices
ADAPTATION EXPERT PANEL REPORT 
WORKING GROUP
Christina Chan, Director, Climate Resilience Practice 
with World Resources Institute; Co-Director, Global 
Commission on Adaptation
Bev Dahlby, Research Fellow, School of Public Policy, 
University of Calgary
Jimena Eyzaguirre, International Team Director and 
Senior Climate Change Adaptation Specialist, ESSA 
Technologies Ltd.
Glen Hodgson, economist, financial consultant, 
Senior Fellow with the C.D. Howe Institute, and Fellow 
with the Public Policy Forum
Roger Street, Research Associate with the 
Environmental Change Institute at the University of 
Oxford
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS
Caroline Larrivée, Scientific Program Director, 
Ouranos
Cheyenne Martin, Partner, Prism Economics and 
Analysis 
Nic Rivers, Associate Professor, Graduate School of 
Public and International Affairs, Faculty of Social 
Sciences and Canada Research Chair in Climate and 
Energy Policy
Paul Watkiss, Director, Paul Watkiss Associates
OTHER REVIEW AND GUIDANCE
Sara Brown, NWT Association of Communities
Jason Dion, Mitigation Director, Canadian Institute for 
Climate Choices
Blair Feltmate, Head, Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation; Adaptation Expert Panel Chair with the 
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices
Maria Shallard, Senior Advisor, Indigenous 
Engagement and Research, Canadian Institute for 
Climate Choices
PRODUCTION SUPPORT 
Design and layout | Laurie Barnett, Graphic Designer 
Proofreading | Julie Stauffer, Cadmium Red 
Communications (English); Edith Sans Cartier (French) 
Translation | Edgar 
Illustrations | Argyle PR
Disclaimer: This report is a consensus document 
representing the views of the Canadian Institute 
for Climate Choices. It does not necessarily reflect 
the views of the organizations with which it is 
affiliated. Any potential errors in this report are 
attributable to the Insitute. 
Copyright © 2020 Canadian Institute for Climate 
Choices. 
All rights reserved. Permission granted to 
reproduce all or part of this publication for non-
commercial purposes, with proper source citation. 
Recommended citation: 
Sawyer, D., R. Ness, D. Clark, and D. Beugin. 2020. 
Tip of the Iceberg: Navigating the Known and 
Unknown Costs of Climate Change for Canada. 
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices.
This project was undertaken with the 
financial support of:
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: Navigating the known and unknown costs of climate change for Canada
44
climatechoices.ca
