Attachment B
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Land Acknowledgement 
The City of Toronto (“The City”) acknowledges that we are on the traditional territory of many nations 
including the Mississaugas of the Credit, the Anishnabeg, the Chippewa, the Haudenosaunee, and the 
Wendat peoples and is now home to many diverse First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples. The City also 
acknowledges that Toronto is covered by Treaty 13 signed with the Mississaugas of the Credit, and the 
Williams Treaties signed with multiple Mississaugas and Chippewa bands. 
We acknowledge and recognize the efforts of Indigenous Peoples across Turtle Island for their climate 
leadership long before Toronto’s Net Zero Strategy and for being active drivers of positive change. In 2019, 
land defenders and water protectors fought against fossil fuel projects which is equivalent to nearly one 
quarter of annual total U.S and Canadians emissions or approximately 400 new coal-fired power plants1. We 
are eternally grateful for Indigenous stewardship of these lands and waters since time immemorial. 
General Acknowledgement  
The City of Toronto would like to acknowledge the community members and staff from across the City that 
contributed to the development of the Net Zero Strategy. The City is grateful to all leaders and community 
members who have contributed their time and expertise to help advance the City’s efforts to address 
climate change.  
About the artwork found in this report 
For ten years, StreetARToronto ('StART') has helped instigate and provide space for individual and 
community expressions to come alive through street art, using the art itself as the catalyst to bring 
communities together, stimulate discussion and advance diversity, equity and inclusion. Working with the 
 
1 https://www.ienearth.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Indigenous-Resistance-Against-Carbon-2021.pdf  
3 
artist community, StreetARToronto has innovated deep engagement processes that foster trust and 
meaningful relationships. Together, we have created world-class street art, helped build artist careers, and 
perhaps most importantly, the murals are intentionally designed to strengthen the sense of belonging and 
pride of place among individuals, neighbourhoods and communities. StreetARToronto is an initiative of the 
City of Toronto, Transportation Services Division. 
Artist credits are included on the section cover pages throughout this document. Cover page image credits 
are as follows, working clockwise from the top left corner: Kayla Whitney (light bulbs), Erika Giraud 
(children’s photo), Lacey and Layla Art (‘Grandmother’ mural), James Thomas (park photo), Colin Turner 
Bloom (streetcar mural), Julia Prazja (house painting). 
For More Information 
The following detailed documents, plus more resources, are available on the City of Toronto TransformTO 
web page at www.toronto.ca/TransformTO: 
●
TransformTO Net Zero Strategy staff report to City Council
●
Net Zero Technical Modelling Report (Sustainability Solutions Group, 2021)
●
Reports on community engagement
Foreword 
[To be added once Strategy is considered by City Council] 
4 
Contents 
Acknowledgements 
2 
For More Information 
3 
Foreword 
3 
Executive Summary 
5 
1. Introduction
15 
2. Where We Are Now
19 
2.1 Where are we now?
20 
2.2 Development of the Net Zero Strategy 
22 
2.3 Guiding Principles 
23 
2.4 Indigenous Worldview 
24 
2.5 The Voice of the Community 
26 
2.6 Where do we want to go? Toronto’s future 
28 
2.7 The COVID-19 Pandemic and Lessons for the Climate Emergency 
30 
3. A Pathway to Net Zero
31 
3.1 Technical Analysis
32 
3.2 Investing in a Net Zero Toronto 
35 
3.3 Benefits of Climate Action 
37 
4. Net Zero Targets & Actions
47 
4.1 Buildings
50 
4.2 Energy 
58 
4.3 Transportation 
64 
4.4 Sustainable Consumption & Waste 
72 
4.5 Natural systems 
77 
4.6 Engagement & Equitable Implementation 
80 
4.7 Leading by Example 
87 
5. Looking Forward
97 
5.1 Summary of Challenges & Keys to Success (Dependencies)
98 
5.2 Implementation & Next Steps 
100 
Glossary 
101 
TransformTO Net Zero Strategy Short-term Implementation Plan 2022-2025 
103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Executive Summary 
 
The climate crisis grows more urgent every year. The window to make significant and lasting change is 
disappearing. Action must happen immediately, and it must be at  the scale and pace required to 
successfully fight this threat and create a future Toronto that benefits all.  
In 2017, TransformTO was unanimously approved by City Council, demonstrating Toronto’s commitment to 
a global call for action to limit global temperature rise in line with international goals. Since 2017, the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has shown that to limit global temperature rise to below 
1.5 degrees Celsius, cities globally need to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 and halve global emissions of 
greenhouse gases (GHGs) by 2030. 
City Council’s 2019 declaration of a climate emergency shifts Toronto’s focus to align with the IPCC's 
recommended pathway - net zero GHG emissions by 2050 or sooner. 
This TransformTO Net Zero Strategy (“the Strategy”) responds to the climate emergency by focusing on a 
new target of net zero GHG emissions community-wide by 2040. The Strategy outlines the rationale behind 
the net zero pathway and opportunities needed to successfully reach the net zero target. The Strategy 
presents a set of 2030 interim targets for community-wide emissions, as well as City of Toronto (“City”) 
corporate targets to demonstrate leadership by example. It also presents thirty near-term actions that will 
be taken to put Toronto on the net zero pathway. 
Technical modelling of Toronto's net zero pathway shows that in order to reach net zero GHG emissions by 
2050 or sooner, Toronto must first achieve the 2030 City Council adopted goal of a 65 per cent emissions 
reduction from 1990 levels. Without aligning our action and implementation to this interim target, net zero 
by 2040 or 2050 will be out of reach. 
KEY FINDINGS FROM THE NET ZERO TECHNICAL MODELLING WERE: 
● 
Fossil fuels, primarily natural gas used in homes and buildings and gasoline used in cars, need to 
be completely phased out by 2040. 
● 
Taking early action now saves money in the long run. Reducing emissions more quickly also 
means that the City can collect the financial benefits of the avoided carbon costs and avoided energy 
costs more quickly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
● 
To meet future energy needs, electricity generation and distribution must be able to fill the gap 
in order to ensure uninterrupted and reliable service.  
● 
To achieve the net zero target, Ontario's electricity grid needs to be carbon free. 
● 
Efficiency measures in buildings (e.g., thermal retrofits, smaller buildings) and transportation 
(e.g., avoiding trips by working at home, shifting to active modes and transit, reducing trip length 
through land-use planning) are required to reduce the requirement for new renewable electricity 
generation and generate cost savings which can be used to finance the actions. 
Steady progress has been made to reduce emissions in recent years, and community-wide emissions have 
decreased since 1990. Toronto is on track to achieve its 2020 GHG emissions target of a 30 per cent 
reduction from 1990 levels. Despite population growth, community-wide emissions continue to decline 
while Toronto's gross domestic product (GDP) rises. The decrease in emissions in recent years can be 
attributed to a less carbon intensive electricity grid and lower transportation emissions from gasoline and 
diesel fuels. The 2019 GHG inventory shows that Toronto's emissions approach City Council's approved 
pathway of an 80 per cent reduction by 2050 from 1990 levels. 
However, emissions have not decreased appreciably; the City’s data shows that emissions have plateaued, 
indicating that acting incrementally will not be enough to put us on the net zero trajectory. Rapid action to 
scale up existing programs, additional authorities for the City of Toronto (City) to implement nimbly and 
effectively, significant levels of investment and coordinated action with other levels of government will all be 
needed to achieve City Council's ambition. 
Achieving the targets in the Net Zero Strategy will not just be the work of the City government. The City 
Corporation can control only a small portion of Toronto's community-wide emissions directly - nearly 4 per 
cent according to recent GHG inventories. This Strategy emphasizes that in order to be successful, bold 
leadership and collaboration will be required from public and private stakeholders. 
The City has already approved a number of ambitious plans and targets to reduce emissions from its own 
operations, including the Corporate Real Estate Management's Net Zero Carbon Plan earlier this year, the 
Sustainable Fleets Plan, and the TTC Green Bus Program. Implementation of these plans is underway and 
will go a long way to reduce emissions from City operations. 
However, the City plays a clear role in defining the ways we build, travel and consume, and when policies are 
effectively implemented and programs are easily accessed to realize maximum uptake and engagement, the 
City can have a great impact on the community's emissions.  
In order to meet the 2030 targets, the City must use its influence to regulate, advocate and facilitate rapid 
transformation in five critical steps: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
● 
Demonstrate carbon accountability locally and globally by establishing a carbon budget – 
Leading by example, the City will establish a carbon budget to track climate actions against annual 
emission limits and drive accountability. The City's actions will be measured against these limits each 
year until net zero is achieved, with any gaps in action identified and solutions proposed so we stay 
on course. 
● 
Accelerate a rapid and significant reduction in natural gas use – Toronto will take further action 
to limit the use of natural gas. Natural gas use for water and space heating represents over half of 
Toronto’s total GHG emissions. In addition to new buildings eliminating natural gas use through the 
Toronto Green Standard v.4, the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy articulates ambitious targets to 
replace conventional heating systems with more efficient electric heat pumps while greening the 
provincial electricity grid. 
● 
Establish performance targets for existing buildings – Toronto intends to establish mandatory 
emissions performance reporting, disclosure and emissions performance targets for buildings so we 
can better understand and limit emissions from our homes and buildings. These mandatory targets 
will be preceded by voluntary targets. Catalyzing the electrification of building heating systems, as a 
preferred alternative to the use of fossil-fuel heating systems, will be key. 
● 
Increase access to low carbon transportation options, including walking, biking, public transit 
and electric vehicles – Increasing the use of active and public transportation reduces GHG 
emissions, energy use and congestion while promoting equity and health benefits. The City will also 
advance options to incentivize electric vehicle adoption and disincentivize the use of carbon-
polluting gasoline and diesel vehicles, through supporting the transition to electric vehicles.  
● 
Increase local renewable energy to contribute to a resilient, carbon-free grid – Toronto will 
work in step with Toronto Hydro to successfully support the growth and prosperity of the city 
through reliable, uninterrupted electric service provision. By increasing opportunities for local 
renewable generation to be located within the City's boundary, Toronto will be more resilient and 
will contribute to a decarbonised provincial electricity grid. 
In order to be on the path to net zero, Toronto must meet the City Council’s 2030 GHG reduction target. To 
stimulate and measure progress, the Strategy defines 2030 interim targets across all sectors, both 
community-wide and for the City’s operations. 
THE 2030 COMMUNITY-WIDE TARGETS PRESENTED IN THIS STRATEGY ARE: 
● 
65 per cent reduction in community-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 from 1990 levels 
● 
100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built to be near zero greenhouse gas emissions 
● 
Greenhouse gas emissions from existing buildings are cut in half, from 2008 levels 
● 
50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from renewable or low-carbon sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
● 
25 per cent of commercial and industrial floor area is connected to low carbon thermal energy 
sources 
● 
75 per cent of school/work trips under 5km are walked, biked or by transit 
● 
30 per cent of registered vehicles in Toronto are electric  
● 
Identify pathways to more sustainable consumption in City of Toronto operations and in Toronto's 
economy 
● 
70 per cent residential waste diversion from the City of Toronto’s Integrated Waste Management 
System 
THE 2030 TARGETS FOR THE CITY OF TORONTO CORPORATION TO SHOW LEADERSHIP BY 
EXAMPLE ARE: 
● 
City of Toronto corporate greenhouse gas emissions are reduced by 65 per cent over 2008 base year 
● 
All City Agency, Corporation and Division-owned new developments are designed and constructed 
to applicable Toronto Green Standard Version 4 standard achieving zero carbon emissions, 
beginning in 2022  
● 
Greenhouse gas emissions from City-owned buildings are reduced by 60 per cent from 2008 levels; 
by 2040, City-owned buildings reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions 
● 
All City-owned facilities have achieved zero waste 
● 
Generate and utilize 1.5 Million Gigajoules of energy from biogas  
● 
Approximately 107,700 tonnes CO2e per year are reduced through Organics Processing with 
Renewable Energy and Landfill Gas Utilization  
● 
50 per cent of the City-owned fleet is transitioned to zero-emissions vehicles  
● 
50 per cent of the TTC bus fleet is zero-emissions 
● 
Greenhouse gas emissions from food the City of Toronto procures are reduced by 25 per cent 
THE STRATEGY ALSO SETS AN INTERIM TARGET FOR 2025: 
● 
45 per cent reduction in community-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 from 1990 levels 
The thirty actions to be taken immediately to put Toronto on the path to net zero are outlined below. These 
near-term actions are described in more detail in the Net Zero Strategy Short-Term Implementation Plan 
2022-2025 which is included in this Strategy. 
 
Actions for implementation 2022-2025 
100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built to be near zero greenhouse gas emissions, 
by 2030 
1 
Ensure near zero emissions for all new construction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Actions for implementation 2022-2025 
2 
Evaluate and limit impacts of embodied carbon in construction 
Greenhouse gas emissions from existing buildings are cut in half, from 2008 levels, by 2030 
3 
Advance Implementation of the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy. 
(Please refer to the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy, Adopted by City Council in July 2021 for 
a detailed short-term implementation plan.) 
50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from renewable or low-carbon sources & 25 per 
cent of commercial and industrial floor area is connected to low carbon thermal energy sources, 
by 2030 
4 
Work with industry experts to explore limiting the expansion of natural gas systems and 
reversing system growth, where feasible, and limiting installation of natural gas equipment 
5 
Support adoption and mainstreaming of net zero, resilient energy sources for new and existing 
developments 
6 
Address barriers and develop strategies to increase the deployment of renewable energy and 
storage technologies, including but not limited to solar, wind, biomass, geothermal, waste heat 
recovery and heat pumps 
7 
Actively support, advocate to and partner with Toronto Hydro, as well as the Provincial and 
Federal governments and agencies, to 
decarbonize the provincial electricity grid, promote energy conservation and enable local 
renewable energy generation 
75 per cent of school/work trips under 5 km are walked, biked, or by transit, by 2030 
8 
Expand biking and pedestrian infrastructure, including the rollout of cycling routes, bicycle 
parking and bike share at or near TTC stations 
9 
Increase existing bus and streetcar service levels to encourage shifts to low-carbon, sustainable 
transportation 
10 
Update and accelerate implementation of city-wide Transportation Demand Management 
Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Actions for implementation 2022-2025 
11 
Develop tools to address emissions of greenhouse gases and air pollutants on an area or project 
level 
30 per cent of registered vehicles in Toronto are electric, by 2030 
12 
  
  
  
Align the City’s Electric Vehicle (EV) Strategy to the net zero goals and implement the EV Strategy 
A) Increase public EV charging infrastructure 
B) Increase EV charging at residential, commercial, institutional and industrial buildings 
C) Review the Electric Vehicle Strategy 
13 
Determine options to incentivize EV adoption and disincentivize use of gas and diesel vehicles 
14 
  
  
Encourage the adoption of electric commercial and freight vehicles, including EVs and e-bikes 
for last mile deliveries 
A) Encourage the use of e-bikes and EVs for last mile deliveries 
B) Encourage adoption of electric commercial and freight vehicles 
Identify pathways to more sustainable consumption in City of Toronto operations and in 
Toronto's economy 
15 
  
  
Continue to pursue policy and programmatic interventions that help the City reach its 
aspirational goals of zero waste and a circular economy, and which identify pathways to more 
sustainable consumption in both municipal operations and in all sectors of the economy 
A) Develop a City-wide governance structure, strategy and policy framework to establish a path 
to make the City the first municipality in the Province of Ontario with a circular economy and to 
align with the Provincial goal as part of the Waste Free Ontario Act 
B) Conduct a consumption based emissions inventory and identify targets that would 
meaningfully reduce consumption based emissions 
C) Enable Torontonians to reduce waste and engage in sustainable consumption by 
implementing the Single Use and Takeaway Items Reduction Strategy 
70 per cent residential waste diversion from the City of Toronto’s Integrated Waste Management 
System 
16 
Continue implementation of the City’s Long Term Waste Management Strategy which sets a goal 
of diverting 70 per cent of waste managed from City customers away from landfill, by focusing 
on waste reduction, reuse and recycling activities that promote resource conservation and 
reduce environmental impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Actions for implementation 2022-2025 
A) Continue outreach and engagement on waste reduction and diversion, with a focus on food 
and organic waste 
Develop and implement strategies to improve greenspace infrastructure to build climate 
resilience  
17 
  
Increase canopy cover and biodiversity and enhance greenspaces 
A) Achieve equitable distribution of the urban forest, increasing tree canopy and naturalized 
greenspace where it is most needed 
Ensure equitable implementation and ongoing improvement of engagement and reporting 
18 
  
  
Support resident-led climate action and engagement 
A) Support resident-led climate action engagement through Climate Action Grants 
B) Expand Neighbourhood Climate Action Champions Program 
19 
  
Work with Indigenous rights holders and urban Indigenous communities to share knowledge 
and learnings 
A) Develop and deliver Indigenous Climate Action Grants program 
20 
  
Develop and implement youth engagement strategy 
A) Design and launch a City-academic innovation hub to support youth-led climate initiatives 
and innovative student pilot projects 
21 
Design and launch a climate advisory group for 2022 and beyond to ensure implementation of 
the Net Zero Strategy is equitable and reflects  the priorities and interests of the community 
22 
Develop equity indicators to be reported out as part of the TransformTO implementation status 
update 
23 
Encourage the growth of green industry to provide the products and services needed to enable 
a net zero city 
24 
Leverage Live Green Toronto to develop and implement a city-wide climate action awareness 
campaign 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Actions for implementation 2022-2025 
Lead by Example – Corporate emissions are reduced by 65 per cent over 2008 base year, by 2030 
25 
  
  
  
  
Develop and apply a Climate Lens in decision-making 
A) Implement a Climate Lens Program 
B) Report on climate risks to assets 
C) Enhance Sustainable Procurement 
D) Consider a carbon offset purchase policy and update the Carbon Credit Policy 
26 
Design and implement a Toronto Carbon Budget 
27 
  
  
Ensure net zero City-owned buildings 
A) Constructing new City-owned buildings to net zero by 2022 
B) Pursuing a Net Zero Carbon Plan for existing City buildings 
28 
  
  
Reduce emissions from City and Agency-owned vehicles 
A) Update and implement the Sustainable City of Toronto Fleets Plan to support the transition of 
20 per cent of City fleet to zero-emission by 2025 and 50 per cent by 2030. Starting in 2022, for 
any light duty vehicle being purchased by the City, the City will select only the electric version of 
this vehicle where operationally feasible. 
B) Implement the TTC Green Bus Program to achieve target of 20 per cent of TTC buses zero 
emission by 2025-2026 
29 
Encourage City staff to adopt sustainable and climate positive practices at work and in their 
commute 
A) Implement Live Green @ Work Strategy 
B) Encourage City staff to take transit, carpool, cycle or walk rather than drive alone to work, 
through the Smart Commute program 
30 
  
  
Lead by example in managing waste and producing renewable energy from biogas at City 
facilities 
A) Begin development of a third organics processing facility with renewable energy, targeting 
completion by 2028 
B) Produce renewable natural gas from the Disco Road Organics Processing Facility, Dufferin 
Organics Processing Facility and the third organics processing facility (target completion by 
2028) and landfill gas control and utilization systems at Green Lane and Keele Valley Landfills 
(target completion by 2026) 
C) Produce renewable natural gas from wastewater 
D) Divert waste from landfill in City-owned facilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
For the most part, the short-term actions do not require Toronto to pursue dramatically new climate actions 
- they require Toronto to do them faster and at a larger scale. Existing strategies and plans such as the 
Electric Vehicle Strategy, the Toronto Green Standard, the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy and the TTC 
Green Bus Program are examples of approved plans that identify detailed steps and considerations to get to 
net zero. 
The 2030 greenhouse gas emission reduction targets and short term actions have been developed through 
extensive consultation across City divisions and agencies, and with stakeholders and the public. Since 2019, 
the City has engaged over 5,000 residents, businesses, and other stakeholders to understand key priorities, 
opportunities and challenges. Consultations in recent years, particularly in 2021, have highlighted the 
importance of responding to the climate crisis with urgency.    
Many challenges outside of the City's control have been identified through consultation. Some of these 
challenges are identified and explored in the Strategy as keys to success, also called dependencies: 
● 
Action must begin now and must focus on equity 
● 
Action from all levels of government will also need to align and accelerate 
● 
The electricity system needs to be carbon free 
● 
The labour market must shift and local supply chains must be developed 
● 
Innovative and adaptive delivery mechanisms must be adopted to scale up 
● 
Impacts on material and land resources should be accounted for 
Collaboratively addressing these dependencies in a timely manner is necessary so that Toronto can move 
ahead on the five critical steps identified in this Strategy in time to meet the 2030 targets. As time passes, 
opportunities to avoid “lock in” of carbon emissions from city systems are being missed.  Achieving the 
targets set out in the Strategy will require new means of delivery. Decision-making will need to be re-
oriented so that the net zero choice becomes the best choice now and in the future. 
When we achieve the City's TransformTO Net Zero vision, Toronto will be a net zero-carbon city that benefits 
all. It will be an equitable city where everyone has access to affordable transportation and quality housing. It 
will be a prosperous city that is resilient to social, economic and environmental shocks and stresses. It will 
be a net zero GHG city with clean air and healthy communities. We will only achieve this success through a 
respectful approach to the land, water and air, collaboratively with the diverse communities across Toronto.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
1. Introduction 
Human-caused climate change is already contributing to many weather and climate extremes in every 
region across the globe,2 causing immeasurable harm to people and ecosystems. Scientists indicate that 
there is a narrow time window to limit further warming. The City of Toronto has developed the TransformTO 
Net Zero Strategy (“the Strategy”) to address the climate emergency declared by City Council.3 The Strategy 
builds on and increases the ambition of TransformTO, Toronto’s climate action strategy, to respond to the 
urgency of climate change. 
The Strategy focuses on actions to achieve City Council’s ambitious 2030 greenhouse gas (GHG) emission-
reduction target, and sets a course to reach net zero emissions by 2040. To get there, it identifies 2030 GHG 
reduction targets for each sector and short-term actions to put Toronto on a path to achieve these targets. 
These 2030 targets address GHG emissions from our homes and other buildings, transportation, waste, and 
all other sources in Toronto. 
2030 EMISSION REDUCTION TARGETS  
● 
100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built to be near zero greenhouse gas emissions 
● 
GHG emissions from existing buildings are cut in half, from 2008 levels 
● 
50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from renewable or low-carbon sources 
● 
25 per cent of commercial and industrial floor area is connected to low-carbon thermal 
● 
75 per cent of school/work trips under 5km are walked, cycled or by transit 
● 
30 per cent of registered vehicles in Toronto are electric  
● 
Identify pathways to more sustainable consumption in City of Toronto operations and in Toronto's 
economy 
● 
70 per cent residential waste diversion from the City of Toronto’s Integrated Waste Management 
System 
The Strategy envisions a future that nearly eliminates GHG emissions, using existing technologies. It also 
improves the lives of Torontonians by making a healthier, more active and more accessible city with new 
 
2 IPCC, 2021. Summary for Policymakers. In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
3 In 2019, City Council voted unanimously to declare a climate emergency and accelerate efforts to reduce GHG 
emissions and adapt to climate change, adopting a stronger emissions reduction target of net zero by 2050 or sooner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
opportunities for jobs and businesses and greater resilience against extreme weather. In Toronto’s net zero 
future, air pollution from gasoline and diesel vehicles and the combustion of fuels in homes is virtually 
eliminated. 
The impacts of climate change are being felt in Toronto, and these impacts are creating a greater burden for 
some residents more than others. The challenge of preventing further climate change is great, and everyone 
plays a role: the private sector, the nonprofit sector, the community, and all levels of government including 
the City of Toronto. 
This Strategy identifies the City’s role in ensuring the ways we build, travel, and consume result in fewer 
emissions and enable us to reach the GHG-reduction targets. Achieving net zero is not simply a technology 
solution. The combination of attentive urban design, city planning, active transportation, and transit systems 
will need to work in step to cumulatively increase the efficiencies of the urban systems. The Strategy focuses 
on achieving the near term challenges of reaching our 2030 target through addressing five critical steps that 
will ensure rapid transformation: 
1. Demonstrate carbon accountability locally and globally by establishing a carbon budget  
2. Accelerate a rapid and significant reduction in natural gas use 
3. Establish performance targets for existing buildings 
4. Increase access to low carbon transportation options, including walking, biking, public transit and 
electric vehicles 
5. Increase local renewable energy to contribute to a resilient, carbon-free grid 
This Strategy outlines Toronto’s planned approach to reach net zero. Additional materials, including 
technical modelling and public consultation reports, are available  on the City’s website at 
http://www.toronto.ca/TransformTO. 
WHAT ARE GREENHOUSE GASES? 
Greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) are necessary to keep our planet 
warm enough to sustain life. However, in excessive quantities, they block heat from escaping the earth’s 
atmosphere, causing the earth to heat up and creating imbalances in the atmosphere which lead to more 
unstable and severe weather events. Increased GHG emissions from human activities, such as burning fossil 
fuels, are primarily responsible for climate change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
WHAT IS NET ZERO? 
Basically, net zero means zero. Net zero emissions is achieved when we stop emitting GHGs from how we 
live, work, and travel. The goal is to get emissions as close to zero as possible, with any remaining human-
driven emissions balanced by an equivalent amount of carbon removals. Carbon removals from the 
atmosphere can be achieved by restoring natural lands and soils, or through direct air capture and storage 
technologies. 
For the City, net zero will be achieved by decarbonizing rapidly and thereby reducing GHG emissions from 
how people move around, how residents operate buildings, how goods are produced and manufactured,4 
and how people consume materials and dispose of waste. 
 
 
4 While consumption-based emissions (e.g. emissions from the manufacturing and transportation of items we use in our daily lives) are 
not addressed in this analysis, the City is seeking to better understand and reduce these emissions through additional projects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
2. Where We Are 
Now 
To understand where we need to get to as a city to achieve net zero, we need to know where we have been 
and where we are now. 
2.1 Where are we now?  
Those living in and around Toronto have felt the city and the region change over time. They’ve felt the 
winters get warmer and the weather get wilder. Toronto’s population continues to grow rapidly, and with it 
the demand for transportation and housing. The cost of living has increased. These changes are taking place 
in the context of rapid global change in technology, employment, and awareness of environmental 
sustainability. All of these factors and many others influence how we as a society make decisions about our 
collective future. 
Each year, the City takes stock of its emissions in a GHG Inventory. The inventory tells a story about the total 
GHG emissions community-wide, and the major sources of those emissions. In 2019, the most recent year 
for which data are available, community-wide emissions were approximately 15.6 million tonnes (MT) of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (eCO2). Buildings continue to be the largest source of GHG emissions in Toronto, 
followed by transportation and waste. In 2019, an estimated 57 percent of GHG emissions across the 
Toronto community come from buildings. These emissions stem primarily from burning natural gas to heat 
space and water. Approximately 36 per cent of emissions come from transportation, with almost all of this 
coming from burning gasoline in our personal cars. The remaining 7 per cent comes from waste, primarily 
from landfills.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
Figure 1. Toronto’s GHG emissions (2019). 
 
In 2019, community-wide emissions decreased 3.9 per cent from 2018, when Toronto emitted 16.2 MT eCO2 
(Figure 2). This decrease was largely driven by a methodological change in counting waste emissions, 
specifically, refining the emissions estimate calculation methods for two City-owned landfills. The largest 
sources of emissions, buildings and transportation, remained largely the same in 2019. Transportation 
emissions decreased by 2.8 per cent from 2018, with most of those emissions continuing to be from 
gasoline used in passenger cars and trucks. 
Figure 2. Toronto’s GHG emissions by sector from 1990 to 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
City of Toronto Corporate Emissions 
The City’s 2019 corporate emissions, or local government emissions, decreased 3.7 per cent relative to 2018 
but remained stable as a share of community-wide emissions at about 5 per cent. The largest sources of 
corporate emissions are buildings and transportation, particularly natural gas used in buildings, water 
supply and wastewater treatment, and diesel used by TTC buses. Further detail on the City’s corporate GHG 
emissions is available in the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory 2019 report on the City's website. 
Consumption-based emissions 
Consumption-based emissions are an emerging area of research and action. Cities like Toronto consume 
more than we produce, meaning we indirectly cause emissions elsewhere by purchasing goods and services 
from other areas of the world. Currently, lifecycle (or consumption-based) emissions from the products and 
services consumed by residents, businesses and institutions in Toronto are not included in the GHG 
inventory. Work to define and calculate these emissions is being planned, and a consumption-based 
inventory is anticipated to be completed and reported in 2023. 
Lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic 
It is possible that GHG emissions in Toronto decreased during the COVID-19 pandemic. Daily carbon dioxide 
emissions around the world are estimated to have fallen by about 17 per cent by early April 2020, relative to 
2019 average levels. The experience of COVID-19 is that a rapid and massive shift in human behaviour can 
reduce GHG emissions but the pathway needs to be implemented thoughtfully to maximize co-benefits 
such as improved air quality, enhanced employment opportunities and new economic activity. 
 
2.2 Development of the Net 
Zero Strategy 
In 2017, Toronto City Council unanimously adopted TransformTO, Toronto’s climate action strategy, and set 
the target of reducing GHG emissions by 80 per cent against 1990 levels by the year 2050. City Council 
adopted an interim target of reducing community-wide GHG emissions by 65 per cent by 2030 from 1990 
levels, and a short-term target of reducing GHG emissions by 30 per cent by the year 2020. The vision of 
TransformTO is a low-carbon future that reduces emissions and achieves multiple community-wide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
 
priorities including poverty reduction, good quality jobs, healthy communities, and increased resilience to 
extreme weather. 
In October 2019, Toronto City Council declared a climate emergency, joining a global call to recognize the 
urgency of the climate crisis, and adopted a stronger emissions reduction target for Toronto: net zero by 
2050 or sooner.  
In April 2020, the City established the Toronto Office of Recovery and Rebuild (TORR) to engage with 
Torontonians on a city-wide approach for recovering and rebuilding from COVID-19. The results of TORR’s 
work and extensive engagement was published in the COVID-19: Impacts and Opportunities report, which 
provided recommendations for the City of Toronto and its agencies and corporations to support the 
recovery and rebuild of communities, organizations, partners and businesses. This Net Zero Strategy 
includes consideration of the extensive work done by TORR and City staff across the organization to ensure 
the implementation of bold policies cross-corporately that enable an equitable low-carbon transition. 
Development of this Net Zero Strategy began shortly after City Council approved the Climate Emergency 
Declaration in 2019 and included several rounds of stakeholder and public engagement over the past three 
years, an update of the TransformTO technical modelling to re-align with the more ambitious target of 
achieving net zero emissions by 2050 or sooner, and collaboration internally and externally to identify those 
climate actions that need to be implemented and accelerated in order to achieve the Council-approved 2030 
target. The results of the modelling and engagement were used to identify a potential pathway for Toronto 
to achieve net zero emissions, based on a collection of bold climate actions and available technologies.  
2.3 Guiding Principles 
TransformTO is guided by the following principles. It aims to create benefits for the community by designing 
and implementing climate actions that:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
Figure 3. Guiding Principles for Toronto’s Net Zero Strategy. 
 
2.4 Indigenous Worldview 
This Strategy aims to include an Indigenous worldview through its implementation. This can be done in part 
by asking big questions, such as "are we good ancestors?", and “how are we honouring the land, water, and 
all our relations?” Through asking these questions, learning from Indigenous stories and expertise, and 
having respectful, ongoing engagement with local Indigenous Peoples, the City  aims to address climate 
change as one part of advancing the reconciliation process. 
 
Ways of marking progress and looking forward 
This Strategy will seek to measure its progress and goals with an Indigenous lens. This means asking bigger 
questions that go beyond climate mitigation as the work will not stop once the City of Toronto achieves its 
2030 targets. For instance, how can we honour the land, water, and all our relations when implementing the 
Strategy? We hope asking questions that embody seven generation thinking and an engagement plan that 
embodies a good mind will create a safe place for an exchange of knowledge between nations in this unified 
effort to address  climate change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
There are huge limitations when heavily relying on Western ways of knowing, decision making, and problem 
solving. The Western worldview aims to be objective and is devoid of relationality which creates a limited 
vision for a net zero future.  
There are many lessons to be learned from creatures big and small as our survival is linked to the 
appreciation and understanding of all our relatives who share the earth with us. The traditional stories of 
Indigenous Peoples across Turtle Island contain a multitude of lessons about the importance of gratitude 
and reciprocity. 
This is one instance of how Indigenous knowledge and worldviews bring a way of looking at current realities 
that goes beyond quantitative data. This Strategy will move forward in a way that incorporates Western and 
Indigenous ways of knowing to create a resilient future without oil and gas. Luckily, we do not need to 
reimagine “net zero” cities as they have existed in the past and still do.  
MURAL TITLE: THE POWER OF THE LAND 
The Power of the Land mural description by lead artist Philip Cote: 
The Anishinaabe peoples have occupied this land for thousands of years creating a Land-Based Pedagogy to 
communicate with the flora and fauna and beyond to the stars. The woodland designs are deeply connected to the 
creation story of the Anishinaabe as this design with all its black lines speaks about the beginning of the Universe. 
There is a wavelength that goes from the First Mans’ mouth to the First Woman’s mouth. This symbolizes 
Indigenous communication across time, like our land-based teachings. It represents how stories are embedded in 
the land and how our ancestors remind us of who we are, the animals, and plants continue to show how we are in 
a relationship to all life across this land called Canada.  
- Philip Cote, MFA, Elder and Ancestral Knowledge Keeper 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
2.5 The Voice of the 
Community 
In recent years, the City consulted extensively with the public, stakeholders and relevant City Divisions, 
Agencies and Corporations to receive input on key priorities and next steps the City and its partners should 
take to address climate change. Key findings from this engagement are summarized in the following reports 
available on the City’s TransformTO website: 
● 
Equity and Engagement Report (2016) 
● 
Indigenous Climate Action Report (2018) 
● 
Final Report of Toronto's Reference Panel on Climate Action (2019) 
● 
TransformTO Public Meeting Report (2019) 
● 
TransformTO Getting TO Net Zero public consultation summary (2021) 
The City launched TransformTO Getting TO Net Zero public consultations in the summer of 2021 to support 
the development of the TransformTO Net Zero Strategy. The consultations featured web and social media 
content, a video, Net Zero backgrounder, Community Discussion Guide, public survey and an online idea 
board. Participants were asked to assist the City in prioritizing key climate actions in buildings, energy, 
transportation and waste, as identified in previous consultations. During this process from late June to early 
August, 2021, over 1,000 survey responses were received, 10 community discussions were held, and over 
100 ideas were posted to the online idea board. 
The results from this round of public consultation align well with the overall themes noted in the previous 
consultations, listed above. The highest priority actions continue to be building retrofits and fuel switching, 
support for the Toronto Green Standard sustainable design requirements, increased local renewable energy 
generation, enhancements to public and active transportation, improved waste management, increased 
tree canopy, and a greater emphasis on climate in decision making. 
Similar to the previous TransformTO consultation results, participants continue to prioritize aggressive GHG 
reduction targets and implementation strategies that encourage immediate climate action. There continues 
to be considerable emphasis on ensuring that climate actions are equitable, particularly for seniors and 
equity-deserving communities. Participants of this round of consultation also urged the City to consider the 
impacts of the climate actions on affordability and the cost of living for Torontonians, particularly renters. 
Many participants shared concerns about the potential for landlords and building owners to significantly 
raise rents to make up the cost of retrofitting existing buildings. However, other participants noted they are 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
willing to embrace the higher cost of goods and services if the increase in price is due to meaningful and 
beneficial action on climate. 
The key difference between the themes in this year’s consultation results and the previous results is the 
sense of urgency. Responses received in 2021 are more action-oriented than in previous consultations. 
Participants strongly believe that the City’s focus should be on implementing aggressive climate action and 
utilizing financial incentives and disincentives, rather than prioritizing education and outreach. However, 
participants still feel education and outreach are important tactics to continue. 
Respondents continue to support the City’s investment in infrastructure but feel that it shouldn’t be limited 
to transit and active transportation. For example, many respondents advise the City to invest in green 
energy, low-carbon construction and to subsidize building retrofits and the maintenance of privately-owned 
mature trees. Participants also acknowledge the importance of city-wide involvement – including individuals, 
organizations and corporations – in developing and delivering on climate action to achieve the medium and 
long-term TransformTO targets. 
Also in 2021, a Net Zero External Advisory Group comprised of 25 diverse stakeholder organizations, 
including youth organizations, provided input on draft elements of the Net Zero Strategy and equity 
considerations. Participants provided advice at a virtual meeting through discussion and a virtual 
whiteboard. In addition to providing sector-specific expert advice, participants emphasized the urgency of 
ambitious action to meet 2030 targets, the need for an equitable approach to implementation, and the need 
for collaboration, support, policies, and leadership by all levels of government and the private sector to 
enable net zero. 
Climate-related consultation was also conducted by the Toronto Office of Recovery and Rebuild (TORR), and 
is identified in the COVID-19: Impacts and Opportunities Report. Through consultations conducted in the 
summer of 2020, the TORR report identified climate considerations that should be included in the post-
pandemic recovery process, including a focus on resilience, equity, and building back better. 
The feedback received from these consultations informed the development of the GHG emissions reduction 
targets and prioritization of actions in this Net Zero Strategy. It also informed the technical GHG modelling 
and identified opportunities to create health, economic, social, and resilience benefits.  
Additional reports on public and stakeholder consultation are available on the City’s website at 
http://www.toronto.ca/TransformTO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
2.6 Where do we want to go? 
Toronto’s future  
When we achieve the TransformTO Net Zero vision together, Toronto will be a net zero-carbon city that 
benefits all. It will be an equitable city where everyone has access to affordable transportation and quality 
housing. It will be a prosperous city that is resilient to social, economic and environmental shocks and 
stresses. It will be a net zero GHG city with clean air and a healthy community. We will achieve this success 
through a respectful approach to the land, water, and air, collaboratively with the diverse communities 
across Toronto.  
This Strategy sets out a path to achieve this vision. The Strategy focuses on achieving an ambitious 2030 
GHG emission-reduction target, a critical step on the path to net zero by 2040. To guide Toronto along the 
path to net zero, the Strategy includes a series of interim targets as follows: 
2030 OVERALL TARGET:  
● 
65 per cent reduction in community-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 from 1990 levels 
2030 TARGETS BY SECTOR: 
● 
100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built to be near zero greenhouse gas emissions 
● 
Greenhouse gas emissions from existing buildings are cut in half, from 2008 levels 
● 
50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from renewable or low-carbon sources 
● 
25 per cent of commercial and industrial floor area is connected to low carbon thermal energy 
sources 
● 
75 per cent of school/work trips under 5km are walked, biked or by transit 
● 
30 per cent of registered vehicles in Toronto are electric  
● 
Identify pathways to more sustainable consumption in City of Toronto operations and in Toronto's 
economy 
● 
70 per cent residential waste diversion from the City of Toronto’s Integrated Waste Management 
System 
2030 LEAD BY EXAMPLE TARGETS: 
● 
City of Toronto corporate greenhouse gas emissions are reduced by 65 per cent over 2008 base year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
● 
All City Agency, Corporation and Division-owned new developments are designed and constructed 
to applicable Toronto Green Standard Version 4 standard achieving zero carbon emissions, 
beginning in 2022  
● 
Greenhouse gas emissions from City-owned buildings are reduced by 60 per cent from 2008 levels; 
by 2040, City-owned buildings reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions 
● 
All City-owned facilities have achieved zero waste 
● 
Generate and utilize 1.5 Million Gigajoules of energy from biogas 
● 
Approximately 107,700 tonnes CO2e per year are reduced through Organics Processing with 
Renewable Energy and Landfill Gas Utilization 
● 
50 per cent of the City-owned fleet is transitioned to zero-emissions vehicles  
● 
50 per cent of the TTC bus fleet is zero-emissions 
● 
Greenhouse gas emissions from food the City of Toronto procures are reduced by 25 per cent 
2025 TARGET: 
● 
45 per cent reduction in community-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 from 1990 levels 
The actions the City will take with its partners in the short term to put Toronto on track to reach these 
interim targets, and ultimately net zero carbon emissions, are outlined in the Short-Term Implementation 
Plan 2022-2025 which is included below in this Strategy. The Implementation Plan actions are also outlined 
sector-by-sector throughout the Strategy.  
Following this path and reaching a net zero Toronto that benefits all will require immediate and sustained 
transformational action at a remarkable scale and pace. This will only be achieved through collaboration by 
all parties: all levels of government, the private sector and the community. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
2.7 The COVID-19 Pandemic 
and Lessons for the Climate 
Emergency 
COVID-19 brought a powerful reminder that the everyday stresses that Torontonians face are significantly 
exacerbated by external risks emerging from the natural world. Climate change has long been recognized as 
a disruptive force that could undermine Toronto’s efforts to build prosperity, equity and well-being. 
The pandemic has highlighted some of the unique opportunities and challenges associated with tackling a 
local, national and global emergency, such as the need for common objectives, dedicated resources, good 
data, and close collaboration among all levels of government, the private sector and the community. It has 
shown the scale of mobilization necessary, and what we as a society are capable of even under time frames 
unimaginable prior to the current pandemic. A similar scale and pace of response and collaboration are 
needed to address the challenges and opportunities we continue to face in the global fight against climate 
change. 
The intersection of COVID-19 and climate change compounded stresses and risks for many people. COVID-
19, like climate change, disproportionately impacts lower income residents. For instance, many people who 
were off work at home due to COVID-19 closures experienced the summer’s extreme heat in apartments 
without air conditioning. The impact of extreme heat was amplified due to COVID-19 closures, and the 
unavailability of many cooling locations such as recreation centres, malls, and initially pools. Lower-income 
residents are less likely to have the type of employment and home environment that allowed work and 
income to continue from home and exposed them to elevated risks of COVID-19 transmission in their 
employment situations. The pandemic highlighted the need to consider compound stresses and to have a 
central focus on equity when addressing the climate emergency. 
The Net Zero Strategy is consistent with the recommendations of the Toronto Office of Recovery and 
Rebuild. Both emphasize the need to move Toronto forward (to build back better) rather than simply 
returning to the pre-COVID-19 state.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
z 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
3. A Pathway to Net 
Zero 
 
To understand how Toronto can reach net zero, the City undertook technical modelling to figure out what 
changes need to take place in our city, and how much of each major change is required to reach our goals. 
Financial costs and savings were assessed, and other benefits of GHG-reduction actions were explored. 
3.1 Technical Analysis 
A model was used to explore pathways to net zero GHG emissions. The model uses demographic, building, 
transportation, waste, and energy data to calculate city-wide energy and emissions and to track how these 
change over time when specific policies or actions are implemented.5 The model also calculates financial 
impacts, including fuel costs, operations and maintenance costs, capital investments, and the price of 
carbon emissions. The modelling enabled us to understand the GHG impact of various activities, and the 
impact of taking or delaying action. 
The modelling results provide a clear picture of several possible paths forward (Figure 4). Only the Net Zero 
by 2040 (NZ40) pathway provides a response to the climate emergency that is robust enough to meet or 
exceed the City’s 2030 GHG target. To meet this target, GHG emissions need to decline by nearly 1 million 
tonnes of CO2 per year over the next eight years. This is equivalent to electrifying 200,000 single-family 
homes (using heat pumps) every year. The modelled actions in the NZ40 pathway are outlined later in this 
report, providing a pathway for Toronto to achieve net zero emissions by 2040. 
 
5 The modelling method and results are described in detail in the Net Zero Technical Modelling Report 
(Sustainability Solutions Group, 2021), available on the City’s website at TransformTO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
Figure 4. Overview of the net zero modelling process. 
 
MODELLING PROCESS 
The net zero modelling process followed a series of steps in which the following questions were asked: 
● 
STEP 1: What are the current conditions? These are the conditions in the base year from which the 
analysis started. 
● 
STEP 2: What happens if the City makes little to no additional effort or investment in climate action? 
This is the Do Nothing Scenario. 
● 
STEP 3: What happens if the City implements current plans that are already approved? Approved 
projects considered include district energy expansion, transit expansion, personal vehicle and City 
fleet electrification and the Toronto Green Standard (TGS). This scenario shows the benefit of 
approved plans, and the future trajectory that Toronto would be on, given current approved plans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
and authorities, without implementation of the Net Zero Strategy. This is the Business as Planned 
(BAP) scenario. 
● 
STEP 4: What actions can reduce GHG emissions in Toronto?  
● 
STEP 5: What happens if these actions are implemented? This is the Net Zero by 2050 Pathway 
(NZ50). 
● 
STEP 6: What happens if these actions are implemented more quickly? This is the Net Zero by 2040 
Pathway (NZ40). 
● 
STEP 7: What GHG emissions remain after the actions are taken? Most of the remaining GHG 
emissions are the result of burning natural gas to generate electricity. 
  
SOME KEY OBSERVATIONS FROM FIGURE 4 ARE: 
● No scenario will be able to reach net zero through actions alone; a remaining residual will need to be 
“zeroed” out by the purchase of carbon offsets, renewable energy credits or through carbon 
capture/storage technologies 
● The BAP scenario, our current trajectory, will not achieve existing 2030 City Council adopted GHG 
target of 9 million tonnes of CO2e 
● Today, Toronto's emissions are approaching the 80 x 50 trajectory, City Council's existing target of an 
80 per cent reduction by 2050 from 1990 levels. Significant additional, new actions and authorities, as 
outlined in the Net Zero Strategy, are needed to reduce Toronto's future emissions from the BAP 
scenario to meet the 2030 target and any of the low-carbon trajectories.  
● Only the most ambitious net zero by 2040 pathway will put Toronto on a sufficient enough trajectory 
to reach Toronto's 2030 target of 9 million tonnes CO2e emitted that year 
3.2 Investing in a Net Zero 
Toronto 
Implementation of the 2040 and 2050 Net Zero pathways requires investments in building retrofits, 
renewable energy, electric vehicles and other zero emissions technologies and infrastructure. These 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
investments result in energy savings (for example, homes use less energy) and revenue generation (selling 
power from electricity generation or district energy).6    
Figure 5: Investments and savings relative to Toronto’s projected GDP to scale, 2021-2050. 
 
Investing in the future 
When the annual investments and savings are summed up for each year, the result is a curve as illustrated 
in Figure 6. The annual investments in NZ40, setting aside financial returns, total approximately 5 per cent of 
Toronto’s annual GDP for a decade, before declining to zero. After 2040, savings start to exceed costs on an 
annual basis.   
 
6 The modelling method and results are described in detail in the Net Zero Technical Modelling Report 
(Sustainability Solutions Group, 2021), available on the City’s website at TransformTO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
 
Figure 6. Net annual community-wide costs/savings (if the blue line is above 0, there is a net 
annual cost, and when the blue line goes below 0, there is a net annual saving).  
 
NZ40 costs less than NZ50 
When all the costs and savings are added up the NZ40 pathway costs less than the NZ50 pathway. In other 
words, achieving net zero by 2040 does not imply a financial penalty over achieving net zero by 2050; rather, 
additional savings can be harvested. Reducing emissions more quickly means that the City can collect the 
financial benefits of the avoided carbon costs and avoided energy costs more quickly.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
 
3.3 Benefits of Climate Action 
Figure 7. Key actions and key benefits to reducing GHG emissions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
 
Multiple Benefits 
Decarbonizing the city will require new investments that provide multiple benefits, such as improved well-
being and quality of life, and new business and job opportunities. Many of the proposed actions not only 
achieve GHG emissions reductions, they synergistically support other City objectives, such as improved 
economic development, health and equity outcomes, and climate resilience.  
The Outcomes of Climate Investments to Advance 
Equity 
TransformTO is grounded in the idea that reducing GHG emissions is not only necessary to avoid the worst 
effects of climate change, but that climate actions can also achieve multiple community-wide objectives.  
The impacts of climate change will be felt by all Torontonians, however not everyone will be impacted 
equally. Climate change is amplifying the vulnerability of some people including those with low incomes, 
Indigenous Peoples, 2SLGBTQ communities, undocumented individuals, immigrants and refugees, women, 
seniors, children, people with disabilities, and racialized people. People in these groups often have less 
power and access to resources and infrastructure, and poverty and marginalization leave people vulnerable 
to rising energy, food, and housing costs.  
These circumstances limit one’s ability to invest in preparing for the impacts of climate change, such as 
preparing one’s home to withstand extreme heat, or flooding from extreme rain. These vulnerabilities also 
reduce one’s ability to rebuild after a climate-related event, for instance a failed garden crop due to heat 
and drought, spoiled food after a power-outage due to extreme weather, or flood damage from extreme 
rain. Without supports, marginalized people also have fewer resources with which to participate in the 
transformation to a net zero future, such as investing in building upgrades and renewable energy. 
The City is committed to designing climate actions to maximize their benefit to equity-deserving and 
vulnerable groups by applying an equity lens to program design. For instance, populations with a lower 
socio-economic status face intersecting barriers and disadvantages. Lower-income Torontonians tend to live 
in poorer-quality housing which reduces quality of life, costs more to heat, and has reduced access to 
cooling such as air conditioning, recreational facilities, and shady greenspace. These neighbourhoods are 
more likely to have lower levels of transit accessibility and active transportation infrastructure. As noted in 
the Toronto Poverty Reduction Strategy, poverty in Toronto is gendered, racialized, and geographically 
concentrated. Climate action presents opportunities to develop a more equal and inclusive city by improving 
building quality, increasing access to transportation infrastructure, creating economic benefits for equity-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 
deserving communities, reducing household costs, improving quality of life, and increasing access to daily 
needs including employment options.  
In terms of the cost of living, the Net Zero technical modelling indicates that average household energy 
costs decrease in the Net Zero pathway. In 2050 in the Net Zero pathways, households will be more efficient 
and, on average, energy costs will be 70 per cent less per month (energy and transportation combined), 
compared to the Do Nothing Scenario. These savings can be used to finance the building retrofits and 
electric vehicles. Lower household energy expenditures are particularly meaningful for lower-income 
households where energy and transportation costs make up a larger proportion of expenses. During Net 
Zero Strategy implementation, care will need to be taken to ensure equitable distribution of benefits and 
costs, such as ensuring that the cost of housing improvements does not overburden renters, and that those 
in rental housing receive the benefits of lower energy costs. 
Taking responsibility today for managing climate change will alleviate some of the pressure on future 
generations, another important aspect of an equitable approach. One method for reflecting the impact of 
climate change on society is the social cost of carbon (SCC). The SCC metric sums the quantifiable costs and 
benefits resulting from each tonne of carbon dioxide on society, and includes assumptions about the future, 
such as population size, economic growth, and the rate and impact of climate change. The Net Zero 
technical modelling determined that the cumulative Social Cost of Carbon of the Do Nothing Scenario for 
Toronto between 2020 and 2050 is $94 billion. Implementing the Strategy to reach net zero by 2040 will 
reduce the Social Cost of Carbon to $35 billion, significantly reducing the burden of climate change on future 
generations (see TransformTO Net Zero Technical Modelling Report for details). 
Toronto is actively working to ensure our programs and policies address the disproportionate impacts of 
our changing climate on equity-deserving groups and future generations. Using the TransformTO guiding 
principles and following a framework for equitable design and implementation of climate actions and 
programs will help to ensure that the transition to a net-zero Toronto occurs in a way that enhances equity, 
maximizes public benefit, and minimizes harms. 
Health 
Torontonians care deeply about health and well-being. In 2018, a City of Toronto commissioned survey of 
residents found that 91 per cent believe climate change threatens our health and well-being and that 
everyone needs to take steps to reduce their GHG emissions. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown us that 
our environment impacts our health and well-being, from the air we breathe, to the places we live and work, 
to the transportation choices we make every day. Taking action to reduce GHG emissions in Toronto 
benefits our health in many ways. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
Less Air Pollution through Fuel Switching 
Burning fossil fuels to heat our buildings and run our vehicles emits GHGs that cause climate change. 
Burning fossil fuels also releases air pollutants, such as particulate matter, nitrogen oxides, carbon 
monoxide, and volatile organic compounds, and can create ground-level ozone, all of which adversely 
impact human health. Air pollution causes cardiovascular and respiratory health problems; affects birth 
outcomes and brain development and function; and is linked to cancer, chronic diseases including diabetes, 
and other illnesses. Toronto Public Health has estimated that air pollution in Toronto from all sources gives 
rise to 1,300 premature deaths and 3,550 hospitalizations annually. 
Pursuing a Net Zero pathway will see a 99 per cent reduction in local fossil fuel combustion compared to the 
status quo. This reduction comes from switching vehicles and building heating systems to electric sources. 
The Net Zero pathway will dramatically reduce local sources of the GHGs that cause climate change and air 
pollutants that harm our health. 
Air quality benefits alone could total $750 million per year 
The Net Zero pathway generates a broad range of societal benefits with direct and indirect financial benefits 
which are in addition to the financial analysis described in this report. For example, improved air quality as a 
result of electrifying transportation could deliver health benefits valued at nearly $750 million per year.7 
Improved indoor air quality in dwellings and office space as a result of building retrofits will reduce health 
care costs and absenteeism at work. Reduced air pollution from the combustion of fossil fuels (on roads, in 
houses, and in electricity generation) will reduce asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Increased walking and cycling will reduce heart disease.  
Net Zero Transportation 
Motor vehicles are the greatest local source of air pollution emitted in Toronto. Toronto Public Health has 
estimated that air pollution from internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles in Toronto is responsible for 280 
premature deaths and 1,090 hospitalizations in the city each year, as well as greater numbers of less severe 
effects such as asthma symptom days. 
Toronto currently has 1.1 million passenger vehicles and 121,000 commercial vehicles, most of which are 
powered by internal combustion engines (fossil fueled). With a rapidly growing population, these numbers 
 
7 Calculated based on this study: Choma, E. F., Evans, J. S., Hammitt, J. K., Gómez-Ibáñez, J. A., & Spengler, J. D. (2020). 
Assessing the health impacts of electric vehicles through air pollution in the United States. Environment International, 
144, 106015. For more information, the Net Zero Technical Modelling Report (Sustainability Solutions Group, 2021), 
available on the City’s website at TransformTO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
 
are predicted to continue increasing.  In Toronto, modelled air quality is markedly worse in areas near major 
highways and arterial roads such as along Highway 401 and downtown. Research in cities indicates that in 
general adverse health impacts from air pollution rise with proximity to major roadways, creating an 
inequitable health burden for those who live, work, play and learn near major roads. This traffic-related air 
pollution and its health effects will be improved with increased active transportation, transit ridership, and 
switching to electric vehicles. 
OTHER TRANSPORTATION-RELATED HEALTH BENEFITS OF THE NET ZERO STRATEGY 
INCLUDE: 
● 
A completely electrified transportation system could benefit mental and physical health by 
substantially reducing noise pollution and associated annoyance and sleep disturbance. 
● 
A modal shift to electrified public transit can improve cardiovascular and respiratory health by 
promoting walking to and from transit stops, decreasing personal vehicle use, and reducing 
associated tailpipe air pollutants. 
● 
Expanded active transportation infrastructure promotes walking and cycling, which can improve 
cardiovascular health and reduce the occurrences of premature mortality, diabetes and cancers.  
● 
Expanded and improved active transportation infrastructure can lead to mental health benefits from 
increased physical activity.  
Healthy Buildings 
Toronto Public Health indicates that the residential and commercial building sectors together are the 
second greatest contributor to health impacts of air pollution from sources in Toronto and are responsible 
for approximately 28 per cent of premature deaths and 20 per cent of hospitalizations arising from pollution 
emitted in Toronto. This is primarily from burning natural gas to heat homes and buildings and to heat 
water. As the City implements clean heating and switches to electric and renewable energy, society benefits 
from lower GHG emissions and air pollutant emissions. 
Over 80 per cent of the floor space that will exist in 2050 has already been built. This means that to reach 
the City’s net zero goals, upgrading existing buildings is even more important than new net zero buildings.  
 BUILDING-RELATED HEALTH BENEFITS OF IMPLEMENTING THE NET ZERO STRATEGY: 
● 
Building energy retrofits can reduce outdoor air pollutants associated with natural gas and as a 
result, benefit physical health.  
● 
Building retrofits can benefit the physical and mental health of residents by improving indoor air 
quality and reducing dampness and exposure to noise. People typically spend 90 per cent of their 
time indoors, so the condition of these spaces is important. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
 
● 
Improvements to insulation of poorer quality homes can improve the physical and mental health of 
vulnerable populations by improving thermal comfort and reducing energy poverty.  
Managing Extreme Heat 
Both the duration and intensity of heat waves are projected to increase with climate change. By 2040-2050, 
Toronto will experience approximately 66 days per year with maximum temperatures above 30°C. Hot 
weather is associated with health impacts ranging from heat stroke to more serious effects, such as 
cardiovascular-related morbidity and mortality. Groups more at risk from extreme heat can include isolated 
adults and seniors, individuals who are experiencing homelessness or are under-housed, people with 
chronic illnesses, and infants and young children. Building practices that reduce the heat absorption of roofs 
and hardscape materials and enhance greenspace, can help to reduce urban heat. These strategies together 
with building retrofits that improve the building envelope, insulation and ventilation; and community 
resilience supports for vulnerable people; can reduce the risk of heat-related illness and death. 
Greenspace 
An important component of any climate action plan is the enhancement of green space, especially in areas 
of the city that lack significant parkland and tree canopy cover. Urban greenspace is linked to increasing 
active leisure, which has been found to improve cardiovascular and mental health and reduce obesity and 
cancer, and contribute to a sense of community and social cohesion. These benefits, plus removal of air 
pollutants by the tree canopy, will be enjoyed by residents as the tree canopy increases and greenspace is 
enhanced, particularly in areas currently lacking an equitable share of greenspace.  
Climate Resilience 
In June 2019, Toronto’s Resilience Strategy was launched after two years of collaboration and input from 
residents and organizations across the city. One of the major goals of the Resilience Strategy is to 
institutionalize resilience into the City’s decision-making and demonstrate leadership on resilience, including 
integrating climate resilience into TransformTO. In October 2019, City Council directed the integration of 
resilience into TransformTO (Report 2019.MM10.3). Implementation of the Net Zero Strategy will consider 
the four priority actions identified in the Resilience Strategy: 
● 
HOME RESILIENCE: Support homeowners and renters to prepare their homes for shocks. 
● 
VERTICAL RESILIENCE: Enable wide-scale change in apartment towers to improve resilience through 
the improvement or retrofit of apartment towers and units. 
● 
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE: Enhance the capacity of neighbourhoods to prepare for and 
recover from shocks through grassroots action and network building.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
 
● 
FLOOD RESILIENCE: Centralize resources towards a city-wide flood planning and prioritization tool. 
An important consideration in the implementation of this Net Zero Strategy is that increased reliance on 
electricity for transportation and heating of buildings could mean more vulnerability if the electricity supply 
is for any reason jeopardized. Key resilience strategies in the near and long term will need to focus on 
ensuring a continuous and reliable supply of electricity to homes, businesses and institutions. Reduction of 
electricity consumption and demand management to reduce pressure on the current grid capacity and 
distribution network, and the diversification of electricity generation through widespread local renewable 
energy and storage, will be critical to meet the increased demand for electricity forecasted in this Strategy. 
City staff are working with electricity sector organizations such as the Independent Electricity System 
Operator and Toronto Hydro to better understand the risks and opportunities and plan accordingly. 
Collectively we need to understand what will be necessary to protect these and other related assets against 
extreme weather events. 
BY IMPLEMENTING THE NET ZERO STRATEGY, NUMEROUS RESILIENCE IMPROVEMENTS 
FOR TORONTO WILL BE REALIZED: 
● 
Safer buildings during extreme weather (flooding, extreme heat/cold), as older buildings are 
retrofitted. 
● 
Homes that can keep the lights on during power outages, once outfitted with renewable energy and 
storage or connected to district energy systems. 
● 
Decreased stress on water and wastewater systems, as a result of retrofits and more stringent 
efficiency standards for new buildings. 
● 
Less urban heat island effect and flood stress, as a result of enhanced greenspace and tree canopy. 
● 
More back-up power, from electric vehicles. 
Prosperity  
Climate change, climate resilience, and the economy are deeply connected. Recent events, including the 
COVID-19 pandemic and increasing incidents of extreme weather, have demonstrated the impacts that 
unexpected events can have on the economy. Conversely, the historic and current economic systems 
centred on resource extraction and continued fossil fuel use have had a catastrophic impact on our planet. 
Climate action has already strengthened Toronto's economy. Toronto's green industries are one of the 
fastest growing sectors of Toronto's economy.  The sectors’ employment continues to grow at a rate twice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
 
as fast as the overall employment in Toronto (3.9 per cent vs. 1.6 per cent annually between 2015 - 2019) 
and contributed an estimated $6.55 billion to the local GDP in 2018.8 
CLIMATE ACTION CAN GENERATE ECONOMIC BENEFITS IN THE FOLLOWING WAYS: 
● 
Generating direct, indirect and induced jobs. 
● 
Lowering household and business energy demand, thereby saving costs, freeing disposable income 
for re-investment in the economy and improving business competitiveness.  
● 
Protecting households and businesses against energy price volatility. 
● 
Generating overall economic output (GDP) and associated tax revenue. 
● 
Mitigating future climate impacts that will be costly to society, and reducing the cost of adaptation 
by acting early. 
● 
Improving public health, and therefore productivity, through improved indoor and outdoor air 
quality, reduced noise and improved building comfort. 
Driving toward net zero emissions helps position Toronto's economy for the jobs and growth industries of 
today and tomorrow. The Canadian Institute for Climate Choices recently examined more than 60 possible 
pathways for Canada to reach net zero by 2050 and found that Canada's GDP grows substantially in all 
possible pathways, and that on average, Canadians' incomes will rise.    
By 2030, green industries are projected to employ 639,200 Canadians across clean transportation (363,700), 
clean energy supply (111,100), clean buildings (110,600), grid infrastructure (29,900) and industry (24,000). 
The highest concentration of jobs would be located in Ontario (220,700).9 
The modelling for Toronto shows that aggressive climate action (net zero by 2040) adds a net of 1.2 million 
person-years of employment over the Do Nothing scenario between 2020 and 2050—an average of 40,000 
per year. Two of the largest sources of clean energy jobs are in the sectors that generate Toronto's largest 
amount of emissions (transportation and buildings). In other words, there are opportunities to advance 
multiple City and society objectives while simultaneously achieving deep GHG emissions reductions, 
creating a win-win-win scenario. 
 
8 greentechtoronto, 2020. https://torontogreenindustries.home.blog/2020/06/23/economic-data/ 
9 Clean Energy Canada, 2021. The New Reality. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
Figure 8: Person-years of employment generated as a result of the investments in the Net Zero 
by 2040 pathway. 
 
Achieving net zero emissions in Toronto depends largely on an energy transition from fossil fuels to non-
polluting alternatives. For households, the energy transition will be experienced most directly in how we 
heat and cool homes, and how we move around the city. Household expenditures on energy—natural gas, 
electricity, gasoline, and diesel—are projected to decline in the Net Zero pathways. The Net Zero pathways 
involve shifting away from natural gas and gasoline to electricity, a more costly energy source. The increased 
cost, however, is offset by the increased efficiency of homes as required by building codes and the high 
efficiency of electric vehicle motors as compared to internal combustion engines. The carbon price also 
adds to the cost of using fossil fuels for heating and transport.  
 
In the Net Zero pathways, an average household in 2050 spends less on fuel and electricity (household 
energy and transportation expenditures) than they would have in the Do Nothing scenario. Depending on 
the business, policy and financing strategies used in the implementation of the GHG reduction actions, 
these savings will be partly offset by the incremental capital expenditures required. 
The Net Zero pathways show the share of Canadian households' income spent on energy services (home 
heating, electricity and transportation) can decrease by an average of 70 per cent, with an average reduction 
of nearly $1,500 per household per year compared to the status quo. These savings can be used to finance 
the capital costs of retrofits and the incremental costs of electric vehicles.10  
 
10 The modelling method and results are described in detail in the Net Zero Technical Modelling Report 
(Sustainability Solutions Group, 2021), available on the City’s website at TransformTO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 
Similarly, after the capital costs are paid back, local businesses will see a 32 per cent decrease in fuel costs 
to heat and cool their buildings due to efficiency improvements from building envelope retrofits and from 
replacing heating and cooling systems with heat pumps. This frees up money for other purposes such as 
improving business competitiveness or for reinvestment in the economy. Reduced household costs for 
energy and transportation also represent opportunities for residents to spend money locally, resulting in 
more resilient neighbourhoods. Other benefits to the local economy are seen from changing travel patterns 
and modes in the Net Zero pathways, resulting in more visits to and spending at local shops. 
The economic transition away from fossil fuels is stimulated in part by the price on carbon. In the Net Zero 
technical modelling, the carbon price is projected to climb to $170/tCO2e by 2030. This has the impact of 
increasing the cost of gasoline and natural gas relative to electricity. As a result, gasoline will be more 
expensive than electricity on a per-unit-of-energy basis by 2028. This benefit is compounded by the fact that 
electric vehicles can go further per unit of energy than gasoline vehicles. Similarly, heat pumps are three 
times more efficient than natural gas heating, and home heating with an electric heat pump becomes more 
affordable than heating with natural gas in 2027. 
The Net Zero pathway reduces transportation costs for households and increases accessibility to 
destinations as transit is expanded, which is particularly beneficial for households for which transportation 
costs are a larger share of their disposable income. Energy costs are also reduced for households that pay 
for energy, either directly or indirectly as renters, but these benefits may not occur in the first or second 
decade, depending on how the retrofits are financed. Because the pathways involve investments, the 
mechanisms for financing the pathways could generate disproportionate returns for investors, which could 
exacerbate inequality.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
4. Net Zero Targets 
& Actions 
 
This Strategy focuses on achieving the City’s ambitious 2030 overall target and setting a course for net zero 
GHG emissions community-wide by 2040. The Strategy also includes an 2025 interim target to emphasize 
the work that needs to be done immediately to get Toronto onto the net zero pathway. 
 2030 OVERALL TARGET:  
● 
65 per cent reduction in community-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 from 1990 levels 
 2025 TARGET:  
● 
45 per cent reduction in community-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 from 1990 levels 
The Strategy identifies 2030 emission reduction targets for each major source sector, such as buildings and 
transportation, and short-term actions to put Toronto on the path to net zero GHG emissions. Reaching 
these interim goals and net zero by 2040 will require bold action across all sectors, and cooperation and 
commitment from all levels of government, the private sector, and the community.  
The Net Zero Strategy technical modelling shows one of several possible paths to achieve net zero GHG 
emissions. The technical analysis and modelling show that we can achieve net zero GHG emissions by 2040 
by addressing all sectors at once (Figure 9). The following pages provide an overview for each sector. More 
detail on the technical modelling is available in the Net Zero Technical Modelling Report, available on the 
City’s TransformTO web page. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
Figure 9. Net Zero by 2040 Pathway Wedge Summary: The relative impacts of the key actions 
modelled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
4.1 Buildings 
Benefits of climate action: HEALTH, EQUITY, RESILIENCE, PROSPERITY 
According to Toronto’s most recent Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 57 per cent of local GHG emissions come 
from the energy used in our buildings. Buildings are a source of GHGs when using fossil fuels for heating, 
cooking and other end-uses, and during manufacturing and construction. Natural gas for heating continues 
to be the largest source of emissions, accounting for approximately 50 per cent of all GHG emissions in 
Toronto.  
To achieve our net zero goal, we need to make a number of changes in our buildings, increasing energy 
efficiency and shifting from natural gas to clean and renewable electricity.  
Modelled Pathway & Emissions Impact 
The modelling demonstrates the scale of activity needed to transform buildings and reach net zero by 
2040.11 The modelled pathway to net zero by 2040 involves new homes and commercial buildings being net 
zero GHG emissions in the near term. New buildings are constructed with near-zero emissions and use low-
carbon materials. Existing homes and commercial buildings need to be retrofitted (renovated) for energy 
savings by 2050 to reduce their energy consumption and switch to low-carbon energy sources. For instance, 
we need to switch from natural gas furnaces to heat pumps for space heating in our homes and other 
buildings. In the modelled pathway, the use of natural gas in buildings is phased out by 2040. On this 
pathway, all of these activities need to be taken together in order to achieve our goal (Figure 10). 
 
11 The modelling method and results are described in detail in the Net Zero Technical Modelling Report 
(Sustainability Solutions Group, 2021), available on the City’s website at TransformTO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
 
Figure 10. Emissions from buildings under the Net Zero by 2040 pathway. 
 
Implementing the modelled actions, above, would mean 134 MtCO2e fewer emissions emitted in Toronto 
between 2020 and 2050, and an 87 per cent reduction in emissions from buildings over that time (Figure 
11). Nearly 90 per cent of these reductions come from electrification of space and water heating. 
Figure 11. GHG emissions from buildings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
 
2030 Interim Targets & Actions 
Meeting our longer-term net zero GHG goal will depend on Toronto’s ability to get on that path by meeting 
2030 targets.  
THE NET ZERO STRATEGY SETS THE FOLLOWING 2030 TARGETS FOR BUILDINGS: 
● 
By 2030, 100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built to be near zero GHG emissions 
● 
By 2030, GHG emissions from existing buildings are cut in half, from 2008 levels 
Achieving these 2030 targets and net zero emissions will take leadership and involvement from all levels of 
government, the private sector, and the community. The City of Toronto’s short-term actions to achieve 
these targets includes those outlined in the table, below. A more detailed description of planned actions is 
available in the Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025, attached to this Strategy. 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health 
Equity 
Resilien
ce 
Prosperi 
ty 
1 
Ensure near zero emissions for 
all new construction 
Buildings are the greatest source of GHG emissions 
in Toronto. Net zero buildings are critical to 
achieving a net zero Toronto. Building emissions 
primarily come from burning natural gas to heat 
space and water. 
  
  
  
  
2 
Evaluate and limit impacts of 
embodied carbon in 
construction 
All materials and construction methods have an 
impact on our city. Using low-carbon materials, such 
as wood, and using low-carbon construction 
techniques, will reduce our impacts on the 
environment. 
  
  
  
  
3 
Advance Implementation of 
the Net Zero Existing Buildings 
Strategy. 
(Please refer to the Net Zero 
Existing Buildings Strategy, 
adopted by City Council in July 
2021, for a detailed short-term 
implementation plan.) 
Buildings are the greatest source of GHG emissions 
in Toronto, accounting for about 57 per cent of total 
community-wide emissions (based on the 2019 GHG 
inventory). Natural gas accounts for 92 per cent of 
emissions from buildings. Residential natural gas 
use alone accounts for 54 per cent of building 
emissions. These statistics highlight the need to 
reduce natural gas use in buildings to meet future 
emissions targets. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
 
Discussion 
Buildings are the largest source of GHG emissions in the city, accounting for 57 per cent of emissions. 
Natural gas for heating continues to be the largest single source of emissions, accounting for approximately 
50 per cent of all GHG emissions in Toronto.  
To meet our 2030 reduction targets, we need to focus on ensuring new construction has near-zero 
emissions and uses low-carbon materials. We also need to make a number of changes in our buildings by 
increasing energy efficiency and occupant comfort and shifting from natural gas to clean and renewable 
electricity. The City’s Toronto Green Standard Zero Emissions Buildings Framework sets us on a path from 
today’s building practices to a near-zero emissions level of performance by the year 2030. 
In the coming years, we will require more skilled workers with the knowledge to build net zero buildings and 
transform existing buildings through deep retrofits and fuel switching. We will also need lower carbon 
materials and new, faster ways of delivering these skills, materials and services on a large scale. 
Taking action in the buildings sector means making sure no-one is left behind and housing is affordable and 
healthy. It is evident that retrofitting to net zero will require considerable upfront costs. The main challenge 
in the residential sector is to prevent or minimize these costs being passed down to tenants and occupants, 
which could exacerbate housing affordability challenges in Toronto. These affordability challenges are often 
felt most by Toronto's equity-deserving groups. Consideration should also be given to affordability concerns 
in the commercial buildings sector, where local business owners may face increased costs of building 
upgrades that will impact their bottom line. Transforming Toronto's buildings will need to be done in a way 
that ensures people can afford to live in their homes and local small businesses can thrive. 
New Development and the Toronto Green Standard 
Every new building that is constructed today will contribute to Toronto's climate future. Buildings built  
today will contribute to Toronto's emissions for their entire lifespan. Builders and owners can avoid costly 
retrofits by ensuring buildings that are constructed today are built to the highest possible performance 
standards.  
For new construction buildings in the community, Council has recently adopted new energy performance 
measures in Toronto Green Standard Version 4 that will commence on May 1, 2022 and keep Toronto on a 
pathway to high performance low emissions new construction by 2030 based on absolute performance 
targets related to GHG emission limits, energy use intensity and thermal energy demand intensity.  
  
This latest version of the Toronto Green Standard advances requirements for building energy and GHG 
reduction and electric vehicle parking, and introduces tracking of embodied emissions in building materials 
used in construction. It addresses resilience through enhanced green infrastructure to manage stormwater 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
 
runoff, reduce urban heat island impacts and promote biodiversity, including extensive and higher 
performance green roofs, bioswales, rain gardens, native pollinator species plantings and a new 
requirement for ”green streets” (roads or streets that incorporate green infrastructure).  
Embodied Carbon in Construction 
Embodied carbon has become an area of focus in mitigating climate change with some leading jurisdictions 
and the federal government moving towards setting performance targets and requirements. As buildings’ 
operational energy performance requirements become more evolved over time, the "upfront" energy and 
emissions of extraction and processing building materials become more prominent within the buildings' 
overall emissions profile from "cradle" (materials sourcing) to "grave" (decommissioning and demolition).  
Studies indicate that embodied emissions in construction materials can account for up to 80 per cent of a 
large building’s total emissions from extraction to decommissioning. Due to the emerging nature of this 
work, more data is needed on local projects to understand the benchmark level of emissions from typical 
Toronto region buildings in order to set performance targets.  
A new requirement has been added in the latest Toronto Green Standard update that requires Tier 2 and 3 
projects to conduct a materials emissions assessment of the upfront embodied carbon of structural and 
envelope components, and to calculate the embodied carbon and the carbon sequestration within 
landscape designs. These requirements recognize the importance of the carbon footprint of building 
materials.  
The City is also undertaking a number of studies on embodied carbon funded by The Atmospheric Fund to 
assess embodied construction materials impacts. These studies will establish benchmarks by building type, 
in order to share with other Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area (GTHA) municipalities and to set specific 
targets for performance within the Toronto Green Standard. 
Existing Buildings 
CRITICAL STEP TO REACH THE 2030 GHG REDUCTION TARGET: 
Establish performance targets for existing buildings – Toronto intends to establish mandatory emissions 
performance reporting, disclosure, and emissions performance targets for buildings so we can better 
understand and limit emissions from our homes and buildings. These mandatory targets will be preceded 
by voluntary targets. Catalyzing the electrification of building heating systems, as a preferred alternative to 
the use of fossil-fuel heating systems, will be key. 
In order to meet the council-adopted 2030 GHG reduction targets, emissions from buildings need to be 
dramatically reduced in the next eight years.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 
Retrofitting existing buildings to net zero poses a significant challenge due to the diversity of buildings by 
age, size, system and type. To achieve the target of reducing GHG emissions by half, over 2008 levels, 
Toronto will need a massive scaling up of deep retrofits and fuel switching in the coming years. 
Recognizing that existing buildings are the single largest source of emissions in Toronto, the City has been 
focused on finding ways to accelerate action in this sector in the past few years. Immediate action and 
investment in early adoption is required.  
In July 2021, City Council passed the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy (ExB Strategy), which sets out a 
plan to decarbonize all existing residential, commercial, and institutional buildings by 2050. Accelerating this 
work to 2040 will entail significant challenges and require resources and a transformational level of support 
and collaboration from other levels of government and other sectors.  
 
The ExB Strategy was informed by technical modelling, extensive stakeholder engagement, and a review of 
energy and emissions reduction policies and best practices in other jurisdictions.  
KEY INSIGHTS INCLUDE: 
● Emissions reductions of over 80 per cent across Toronto's existing buildings are possible by 2050 
through deep retrofits. 
● Offsets, renewable energy credits, and other means for achieving emissions reductions will be 
necessary to some extent, as modelling shows that reaching net zero emissions is not technically nor 
financially feasible from building retrofits alone. 
● Voluntary measures are not enough to catalyze transformative action toward net zero emissions; 
mandatory requirements are necessary. 
● Fuel switching and a clean electricity grid are the two most significant technical requirements for 
achieving net zero emissions. 
● The cost of the needed retrofit actions represent a significant net investment for building owners and 
these measures do not pay back on their own. 
● Financial supports will be needed to enable market transformation. 
● The City does not have all of the authorities needed to unilaterally implement the ExB Strategy in full. 
Dialogue with the province will be necessary. 
The ExB Strategy takes the approach of first introducing voluntary programs and policies in the near-term, 
followed by a transition to mandatory requirements in the medium to long-term. Lessons learned from the 
operation of voluntary programs, along with detailed discussions with partner City Divisions and further 
stakeholder engagement, will inform the specific design details and implementation plans for any 
mandatory requirements. A key aspect of this work includes analysis of equity and affordability impacts and 
development of implementation strategies that mitigate negative impacts and enable positive ones for 
equity-deserving groups. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
 
The following are the nine key actions from the Existing Buildings Strategy: 
Purpose 
Existing Buildings Strategy Actions 
Set requirements to assess 
building performance and create 
a path to net zero  
1. Require annual emissions performance reporting and 
public disclosure for all existing buildings 
2. Establish emissions performance targets 
3. Require energy and emissions audits and tune-ups  
Provide support and resources to 
make retrofits easier and more 
affordable 
4. Provide integrated retrofit support  
5. Expand and enhance retrofit financing 
6. Support permitting and approvals processes for deep 
retrofits 
Lay the groundwork for market 
transformation 
7. Build awareness and capacity of home and building 
owners for emissions reduction strategies and supports 
8. Support workforce development and training 
9. Advocate and partner with other levels of government 
 
For more information on the ExB Strategy implementation plan, please refer to the Net Zero Existing 
Buildings Strategy Staff Report. 
Keys to Success 
To reach net zero, all of the buildings in Toronto must be retrofitted by 2040. As an example to imagine the 
scale of this effort, if these deep retrofits were divided evenly over the next 18 years, this would require in 
the range of 31,000 deep retrofits per year within Toronto. The challenge is that deep retrofits are not 
commonplace today. Toronto is currently not on course to reach this target, and technical work on the Net 
Zero Existing Buildings Strategy identified significant barriers to reaching this goal, barriers that the City of 
Toronto cannot overcome on its own. Getting on track and meeting this target will take transformative work 
at a scale seen few times in history. It will require resources, policy changes, new City authorities, deep 
collaboration by other levels of government, and transformative change in the private sector. 
Reaching a net zero future in Toronto depends on collaboration and some key factors required for success 
(also called “dependencies”). Meeting the targets for buildings will require skilled workers with the 
knowledge to build net zero buildings and transform existing buildings through retrofits and fuel switching. 
It will also rely on net zero materials and new, faster ways of delivering these skills, materials and services 
on a large scale. Success also means making sure no-one is left behind. As such, success will also depend on 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 
 
how well we collaborate with equity-deserving communities and include those most impacted by climate 
change. 
A Note on Land Use 
Land use planning plays a significant role in determining a city’s GHG emissions. In 2021, City Planning 
launched consultation on Our Plan Toronto: the review and update of the City's Official Plan policies. 
Environment, climate change, sustainability and the need for a healthy and resilient community were 
repeatedly identified in the consultation as key challenges for the city's future. 
The current Official Plan policies set a solid foundation for advancing the City's climate change goals. It 
envisions a city with “a healthy natural environment including clean air, soil, energy and water; 
infrastructure and socio-economic systems that are resilient to disruptions and climate change; and a 
connected system of natural features and ecological functions that support biodiversity and contribute to 
civic life”. The polices state that “City building activities will be environmentally friendly based on … 
minimizing pollution; protecting and restoring the natural ecosystem and supporting biodiversity; protecting 
and enhancing the urban forest; reducing solid waste; reducing energy use; reducing GHG emissions and 
reliance on fossil fuels; reducing risk associated with hazard; and promoting green infrastructure”. In 
addition, policies encourage sustainable design and construction through green roofs, advanced energy 
conservation, and stormwater management. They enable securing of sustainable design features through 
the Toronto Green Standard and require submission of an Energy Strategy as part of a complete 
application. 
Part of the review and update is to ensure that the Official Plan policies are in conformity with required 
policies in the Growth Plan. These include the identification and protection of key hydrologic features and 
areas, addressing climate change (reducing dependence on cars; addressing risk to infrastructure and 
management of stormwater in extreme weather); conservation of water, including efficient use and reuse; 
conservation of energy for existing buildings and planned developments including opportunities for district 
energy; improvements to air quality, including reducing emissions; integrated waste management, including 
promotion of building conservation and adaptive reuse; and the development of soil reuse strategies and 
best practices. 
The draft policies will be consulted on in early 2022 and be presented to Council for adoption late spring 
2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
 
4.2 Energy 
Benefits of climate action: HEALTH, EQUITY, RESILIENCE, PROSPERITY 
To achieve our net zero GHG target, we need to move to cleaner energy sources and use energy more 
efficiently.  
Modelled Pathway & Emissions Impact 
The modelling demonstrates the scale of work that will be required to meet our target. The NZ40 pathway 
includes expanding local renewable energy generation. By 2040, many homes, buildings, and parking lots 
have solar energy systems installed, and wind turbines provide additional renewable energy. Battery 
storage is installed in homes and businesses to store energy locally. In this modelled pathway, low-carbon 
district energy systems (multiple buildings connected to a central energy supply) are expanded and are 
powered by renewable energy. Additional modelling investigated the impact of implementing zero-carbon 
provincial energy policies and making electricity in Ontario clean by 2040. The results showed that if this 
were to be done alongside the NZ40 pathway actions, Toronto would be able to reach its net zero by 2040 
target. 
Implementing these modelled actions for energy would result in a cumulative emissions reduction from 
2020 to 2050 of 18 MtCO2e (Figure 12).  
Figure 12. GHG emissions from energy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 
 
2030 Interim Targets & Actions 
THE NET ZERO STRATEGY SETS THE FOLLOWING 2030 TARGETS FOR ENERGY: 
● 
By 2030, 50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from renewable or low-carbon sources 
● 
By 2030, 25 per cent of commercial and industrial floor area is connected to low carbon thermal 
energy sources 
Achieving these 2030 targets and net zero emissions will require transformational effort from all parties. 
The City of Toronto’s short-term actions to achieve these targets are summarized below. A more detailed 
description of planned actions is available in the Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025, attached to 
this Strategy. 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health 
Equity Resilien
ce 
Prosper
ity 
4 
Work with industry experts to 
explore limiting the expansion 
of natural gas systems and 
reversing system growth, 
where feasible, and limiting 
installation of natural gas 
equipment 
Achieving net zero depends on quickly moving away 
from natural gas for space and water heating in 
buildings. Natural gas for buildings is the greatest 
source of GHG in Toronto. 
  
  
  
  
5 
Support adoption and 
mainstreaming of net zero, 
resilient energy sources for 
new and existing 
developments 
Renewable thermal energy systems remove natural 
gas from the energy system, reduce annual 
maintenance costs and increase resilience of the 
energy system through energy supply security. 
Low-carbon back-up power enables buildings to be 
available to provide essential services and act as 
community hubs during power outages due to 
extreme weather or other causes. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health 
Equity Resilien
ce 
Prosper
ity 
6 
Address barriers and develop 
strategies to increase the 
deployment of renewable 
energy and storage 
technologies, including but not 
limited to solar, wind, biomass, 
geothermal, waste heat 
recovery and heat pumps 
Decarbonizing buildings is only possible if there is a 
supply of renewable energy. The City has a 
supporting role in increasing supply and a key role in 
facilitating local access to that energy. 
Resilient solar (solar + storage) allows buildings to 
operate during power outages due to extreme 
weather and become resilience hubs that provide 
essential services to the community. 
  
  
  
  
7 
Actively support, advocate to 
and partner with Toronto 
Hydro, as well as the Provincial 
and Federal governments and 
agencies, to 
decarbonize the provincial 
electricity grid, promote energy 
conservation and enable local 
renewable energy generation 
The City of Toronto cannot move Toronto to net zero 
on its own. Necessary collaboration will include re-
evaluating current limits to the City of Toronto's 
authorities, and the roles various organizations can 
play in moving Toronto to net zero. Achieving net 
zero through the electrification of buildings and 
transportation relies on zero carbon, renewable 
electricity. 
  
  
  
  
Discussion 
Reaching net zero requires reducing energy consumption, electrifying the consumption that remains, and 
ensuring that the electricity available from the provincial grid and locally is zero carbon. This will involve 
expanding local renewable energy generation in Toronto along with energy storage. The benefits of this 
approach go beyond limiting climate change - local renewable energy generation will increase resilience to 
power outages from extreme weather and other causes. 
Electrification and decarbonizing the provincial electricity grid 
As a city, we use a lot of energy – particularly in our buildings. But we currently generate very little of our 
own energy in Toronto, as most energy comes from the provincial electricity grid.  
Toronto's plans for reaching net zero focus on electrification of heating and transportation because key 
technologies (heat pumps and electric vehicles) are available and extremely efficient. These efficient, electric 
technologies have zero GHG emissions if the electricity that powers them has zero emissions. Ensuring a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
 
zero-carbon, resilient electricity supply will require a zero-carbon provincial electricity grid as well as 
expanded local renewable energy generation and storage. It is equally important to reduce overall energy 
consumption in our daily lives by reducing the amount of energy required for our buildings and 
transportation, to ensure demand for zero-carbon energy does not outstrip supply. 
Ontario’s electricity system is relatively clean in comparison to other provinces, but is projected to become 
more GHG intensive per unit of electricity generated due to the upcoming retirement of nuclear energy 
generation and planned increases in energy generation from natural gas12. This means that GHG emissions 
per unit of electricity generated is expected to climb in the near future. This trend has wide-ranging 
implications for Toronto’s ability to rapidly reduce GHG emissions and has significant implications for 
reaching a net zero future.  
Achieving a low-carbon future is strongly dependent on decarbonizing the Provincial electricity supply. In 
order to meet our 2030 GHG reduction targets and achieve net zero emissions, the City requires clean 
electricity. Currently, there are no commitments to ensure that the provincial electricity grid in Ontario will 
become zero emissions by 2050 or sooner. If the provincial grid is not decarbonized, Toronto would need to 
generate 100 per cent renewable energy to meet expected electricity requirements.  
Natural gas 
CRITICAL STEP TO REACH THE 2030 GHG REDUCTION TARGET: 
Accelerate a rapid and significant reduction in natural gas use – Toronto will take further action to limit 
the use of natural gas.  Natural gas use for water and space heating represents over half of Toronto’s total 
greenhouse gas emissions. In addition to new buildings eliminating natural gas use through the Toronto 
Green Standard v.4, the Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy articulates ambitious targets to replace 
conventional heating systems with more efficient electric heat pumps while greening the provincial 
electricity grid. 
Natural gas for heating in buildings continues to be the largest source of emissions, accounting for 
approximately 50 per cent of all GHG emissions in Toronto. In the net zero pathway, natural gas is phased 
out by installing electric heat pumps and appliances. In 2021, City Council adopted strategies for new 
construction and existing buildings to make progress towards fuel switching to electricity and renewable 
energy by 2030. 
In order to meet its 2030 emission-reduction targets, the City needs to send clear signals to the market and 
the community immediately. To minimize costs, the phase out of natural gas connections and equipment 
can coincide as much as possible with the end of useful life and planned replacement of equipment. For 
 
12 IESO (2020). Annual Planning Outlook- Ontario’s electricity system needs: 2022-2040.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
 
example, if a natural gas boiler at the end of its useful life is replaced with a heat pump, the associated cost 
is significantly lower than if the natural gas boiler is replaced prior to the end of its useful life. In the net zero 
2040 pathway, no new natural gas furnaces will be installed after 2030, as it takes at least 10 years for the 
stock of equipment to turn over. 
Natural gas is primarily composed of methane, known as a near-term climate forcer. Methane escapes 
during natural gas production, processing, transmission, distribution and storage (“fugitive emissions”) and 
these escapes increase the warming impact of natural gas consumption. Phasing out natural gas usage will 
eliminate both the fugitive emissions and combustion emissions. 
Renewable energy and storage 
CRITICAL STEP TO REACH THE 2030 GHG REDUCTION TARGET: 
Increase local renewable energy to contribute to a resilient, carbon-free grid – Toronto will work in 
step with Toronto Hydro to successfully support the growth and prosperity of the city through reliable, 
uninterrupted electric service provision.  By increasing opportunities for local renewable generation to be 
located within the City's boundary, Toronto will be more resilient and will contribute to a decarbonised 
provincial electricity grid. 
A key component of the Net Zero strategy for energy is expanding local renewable energy and energy 
storage. The City will work with Toronto Hydro, the Province, and other partners to enable local, renewable 
generation through technologies such as solar, wind, biomass, geothermal, waste heat recovery, and heat 
pumps. 
This will entail addressing barriers and developing strategies to increase deployment of renewable energy 
and storage technologies. Permitting and connection processes were identified as key opportunities to 
reduce installers’ and therefore, customers’ permitting costs and timelines for installation for both small-
scale residential and large-scale commercial installations. Affordability was identified as a barrier that needs 
to be addressed in order to rapidly expand distributed renewable energy generation in Toronto. While the 
cost of solar generation has declined over the years, the payback period is still relatively long, which deters 
further uptake particularly for residential projects, highlighting the need for financial incentives.  
These challenges and opportunities illustrate the need for coordination and problem-solving with Toronto's 
local utility. This work will include direct focus on promoting and accelerating local adoption of renewable 
energy generation through a review of regulatory options, potential incentives and permitting and 
connection processes, as well as other identified restrictions. 
Driving equity in renewable energy deployment is an important consideration during program design. Low- 
and mid-income households spend a higher proportion of household income on energy, compared to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
higher-income households, and renewable energy is capital intensive. Designing business models with 
equity in mind will allow for renewable energy to reach more people, strengthen the grid, and help 
accomplish renewable energy goals. Community Solar is an example of a project where multiple 
participants can own or lease a portion of a solar project, including renters and others who may not be able 
to install solar directly. Subscribers/participants are credited through a (virtual) net metering mechanism. 
This is an example of a valuable and innovative approach, which requires collaboration with the City’s 
partners, specifically a provincial commitment to continue to expand Virtual Net Metering. 
In addition to addressing climate change, the renewable energy sector brings multiple benefits including 
jobs creation. It is estimated that every megawatt (MW) of solar generated creates 25 to 35 jobs in the solar 
sector. Local, distributed renewable energy generation plus energy storage provides value during normal 
operation of the electricity grid and during power outages. During electricity grid outages, resilient 
renewable energy systems such as “solar plus storage” provide critical emergency power that can help 
people in need and ease demand on emergency fuel supplies. Community organizations with solar plus 
storage can also become resiliency hubs. 
A foundational aspect of the net zero pathway is configuring the electricity grid so that it can accommodate 
electrification of heating and transportation, increased renewable energy and decentralised energy 
generation and energy storage. This transformation will require integrated planning with Toronto Hydro and 
provincial regulatory partners. 
Keys to Success 
Achieving Toronto’s net zero goal requires decarbonizing the Provincial electricity system. The emissions 
intensity (amount of GHG emitted per unit electricity) of Ontario's electricity grid is projected to increase. For 
Toronto to get to net zero, the grid needs to be carbon free.  Failing this, the city can only rely on the “net” 
part of the target and will need to purchase carbon offsets or renewable energy certificates, both of which 
add significant cost to becoming net zero.  Ensuring that electricity generation does not produce carbon 
pollution also addresses the scale of the global challenge. 
At a local level, while it is important to decarbonize the grid (reducing the carbon or GHG emissions of 
Ontario’s electricity supply), the electricity system needs to be able to adapt to new demands as heating and 
transportation are electrified. Focusing on conservation first can reduce electricity consumption and is the 
most inexpensive way to provide additional electricity capacity; however, additional work will be necessary 
to fully understand how to enable large-scale electrification of transportation and buildings and manage 
peaks in electricity demand. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
 
THE POWER OF ELECTRIFICATION 
Most low carbon pathways focus on electrification of heating and transportation because key technologies 
are available and efficient (heat pumps and electric vehicles) and the pathway to greening the grid is 
relatively straightforward.  
 
4.3 Transportation 
Benefits of climate action: HEALTH, EQUITY, RESILIENCE, PROSPERITY 
Transportation is responsible for 36 percent of local GHG emissions in Toronto. Fossil fuels power our cars, 
trucks, ships, trains and planes, resulting in GHG emissions. Most (73 percent) of the transportation 
emissions come from our personal vehicles (e.g. cars, vans, SUVs and light trucks used by individuals or 
households). To achieve net zero GHG, we need to reduce vehicular trips as much as possible by mode 
switching to walking, cycling or transit and then electrify vehicles.   
Modelled Pathway & Emissions Impact 
In the modelled net zero 2040 pathway all personal and commercial vehicles are electrified by 2040, and rail 
and air-travel GHG emissions are eliminated by 2050. Transit is free, and tolls are paid by fossil-fueled 
vehicles to help subsidize transit costs. Transit service is more frequent, and there are exclusive bus lanes 
on key routes. In this pathway 75 per cent of trips under 2 km are walked, and 75 per cent of trips under 5 
km shift to bikes and e-bikes by 2040. Many people telecommute, eliminating some of their trips. 
Implemented as a package, these activities would provide transportation alternatives to enable 
transportation to reach net zero. 
Implementing the modelled actions above would result in a cumulative emission reduction from 2020 to 
2050 of 86 MtCO2e, and a decrease of emissions from transportation by nearly 90 per cent over that time 
(Figure 13). Nearly all of these reductions come from electrifying personal use, commercial and transit 
vehicles. Switching to electric vehicles dramatically reduces energy consumption used for transportation. In 
the modelled pathway, gasoline and diesel are phased out by 2038, so that the remaining emissions after 
2040 are the result of natural gas combustion in the provincial electricity grid.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
 
Figure 13. GHG emissions from transportation. 
 
2030 Interim Targets & Actions 
THE NET ZERO STRATEGY SETS THE FOLLOWING 2030 TARGETS FOR TRANSPORTATION: 
● 
By 2030, 75 per cent of school/work trips under 5km are walked, biked or by transit 
● 
By 2030, 30 per cent of registered vehicles in Toronto are electric  
The City of Toronto’s short-term actions to achieve these targets are summarized, below. A more detailed 
description of planned actions is available in the Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025, attached to 
this Strategy. 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
8 
Expand biking and pedestrian 
infrastructure, including the 
rollout of cycling routes, bicycle 
parking and bike share at or 
near TTC stations 
Gas and diesel vehicles are a major source of GHG in 
Toronto. Active transportation and low-carbon transit 
reduce GHG emissions and benefit health by reducing air 
pollution and increasing physical activity. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
9 
Increase existing bus and 
streetcar service levels to 
encourage shifts to low-
carbon, sustainable 
transportation 
Increased transit service will improve access to 
employment, healthcare and community services, 
encourage shifts away from single-occupancy vehicles and 
improve transit equity. 
  
  
  
  
10 
Update and accelerate 
implementation of city-wide 
Transportation Demand 
Management Strategy 
Transportation Demand Management eases traffic 
congestion and reduces transportation emissions of GHGs 
and air pollutants through transportation alternatives, 
ride sharing, teleworking and other approaches. 
  
  
  
  
11 
Develop tools to address 
emissions of greenhouse gases 
and air pollutants on an area 
or project level 
Many cities successfully assess potential GHG and air 
pollutant emissions from an area as a whole, rather than 
from each source in isolation using these tools. 
 
  
  
  
  
12 
  
  
  
Align the City’s Electric Vehicle 
(EV) Strategy to the net zero 
goals and implement the EV 
Strategy 
Internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles are a major 
source of GHG in Toronto. Quickly transitioning these 
vehicles to electric vehicles, and shifting our electricity 
supply to net zero, renewable sources, are critical to 
achieve a net zero Toronto. Switching from fossil-fueled to 
electric vehicles also reduces air and noise pollution and 
decreases vehicle energy costs. 
  
  
  
  
A) Increase public EV charging 
infrastructure 
In addition to active transportation and transit, electric 
vehicles are a key part of reaching net zero GHG 
emissions in Toronto. Public EV charging infrastructure 
alleviates range anxiety and provides charging options for 
people who need charging on the go or don't have 
charging at home. It can also support cargo and logistics, 
operational fleets, vehicles for hire and car sharing. 
  
  
  
  
B) Increase EV charging at 
residential, commercial, 
institutional and industrial 
buildings 
Sufficient EV charging where people live, work, and play is 
necessary for widespread adoption of EVs. Together with 
walking, cycling and transit, electrification of 
transportation is an important part of the pathway to a 
net zero Toronto. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
C) Review the Electric Vehicle 
Strategy 
EV technology, adoption and infrastructure change 
rapidly. Reviewing the EV strategy keeps our shared 
approach current and relevant. 
  
  
  
  
13 
Determine options to 
incentivize EV adoption and 
disincentivize use of gas and 
diesel vehicles 
Incentives are needed to accelerate the shift from 
gasoline and diesel vehicles to electric vehicles, transit, 
walking and cycling to reduce GHG emissions. Relative to 
fossil-fuelled vehicles, electric vehicles have a low lifetime 
cost due to reduced fuel/energy costs as well as reduced 
maintenance. Financial incentives help people address the 
initial higher purchase price for an EV. 
  
  
  
  
14 
  
  
Encourage the adoption of 
electric commercial and freight 
vehicles, including EVs and e-
bikes for last-mile deliveries 
Reducing emissions from freight transportation also 
improves health and equity. Vulnerable populations are 
more often located near major freight routes and 
disproportionately experience traffic-related air pollution 
health impacts. 
 
  
  
  
A) Encourage the use of e-
bikes and EVs for last mile 
deliveries 
E-bikes including e-cargo bikes, and electric vehicles, 
reduce neighbourhood GHG and air pollutant emissions 
caused by the "last mile" of delivery. E-cargo bikes also 
provide a more affordable transportation option for small 
businesses and individuals. 
  
  
  
  
B) Encourage adoption of 
electric commercial and freight 
vehicles 
Heavy commercial and freight vehicles are predominantly 
fueled by diesel, a significant source of GHG and air 
pollutant emissions in Toronto. Air pollution and health 
impacts from transportation are inequitably distributed, 
with higher levels near major roadways. Switching to 
electric vehicles reduces emissions and helps protect 
health. 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
 
Discussion 
Transportation is the second largest source of GHG emissions in Toronto, accounting for 36 per cent of total 
emissions. To meet our 2030 reduction targets and ultimately achieve net zero, we need to focus on 
encouraging active transportation and public transit use while facilitating a rapid transition from internal 
combustion vehicles to electric vehicles. This will mean that most short trips (under 5km) are walked, cycled, 
or by transit. For remaining longer trips, the focus will be on taking transit and switching to electric vehicles. 
CRITICAL STEP TO REACH THE 2030 GHG REDUCTION TARGET: 
Increase access to low carbon transportation options, including walking, biking, public transit and 
electric vehicles – Increasing the use of active and public transportation reduces greenhouse gas 
emissions, energy use and congestion while promoting equity and health benefits. The City will also advance 
options to incentivize electric vehicle adoption and disincentivize the use of carbon-polluting gas and diesel 
vehicles, and support the transition to EVs.  
Active Transportation, Public Transit, Transportation Demand Management 
and Telework 
A shift towards transit and active modes, and a reduction in overall travel, alongside a shift to EVs, will 
significantly reduce GHG emissions.  This will be accomplished through a number of initiatives, including 
transportation demand management planning, transit service and infrastructure expansion, improved 
active transportation infrastructure, and ongoing telework.  
The expansion of public transportation will play a key role in getting to net zero. Transit is a more efficient 
use of energy, and also has added co-benefits relating to reduced congestion and improved mobility, 
including in equity-deserving areas. Increasing service on existing transit routes and expanding the use of 
priority transit measures, including dedicated road space for transit, will attract more transit riders and will 
reduce the associated GHG emissions associated with personal transportation in the city. In addition, the 
transition away from diesel-powered buses to electric buses will further reduce emissions and improve air 
quality. 
Access to public transit is enhanced by investments in cycling infrastructure at, near, and to/from transit 
stations. The first and last mile of transit trips that are often taken by private vehicles can be supplemented 
by active transportation where bike parking and bike share are provided near stations. Similarly, cycling 
infrastructure and Bike Share stations are needed on roadways and destinations across the city to improve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
 
the access and convenience of cycling. The benefits of these improvements are enhanced when Bike Share 
stations are connected directly to electricity so that they can charge e-bikes. 
Active transportation has the same co-benefits as transit, with the added benefit of increased physical 
activity. The City must continue the rollout of the Cycling Network Plan and Vision Zero Road Safety Plan to 
improve access to safe active transportation infrastructure, and continue to expand the Bike Share Toronto 
system. Data show that among the most significant factors in encouraging people to cycle is accessible and 
protected cycling infrastructure (bike lanes) that connects people with their destinations. 
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) planning will play an important role as the City continues to 
grow, by promoting a wider range of transportation options for residents. Engaging with communities, 
employers and local organizations will enable the City to increase the understanding and uptake of lower 
carbon transportation options.  
Electric Mobility 
Transitioning to electric vehicles is critical for achieving net zero GHG emissions. In 2020, Council approved 
an Electric Vehicle Strategy (EV Strategy) for Toronto. In order to align the EV Strategy with the net zero goal, 
the level of ambition set out in the EV Strategy is being raised to target 30 per cent of vehicles registered in 
Toronto being electric by 2030. 
The City will explore ways to incentivize EV adoption and disincentivize gas and diesel vehicles. Strategies 
being deployed by other cities include congestion charges, EV-only lanes or parking, parking charges for gas 
and diesel vehicles, and fossil-fuel free zones to encourage the uptake of EVs and discourage the use of gas 
and diesel vehicles. To ensure that incentives for EVs do not result in a net increase in personal vehicles, 
incentives for EVs should be offset by disincentives for fossil fuel-powered vehicles. Similarly, consideration 
for equity deserving groups, including low-income residents, seniors, and persons with disabilities, will be 
made in an effort to positively impact these communities. Toronto will explore these and other options, 
evaluate equity impacts and report back to City Council in 2023 with recommendations on opportunities to 
encourage EV adoption.  
The EV transition will require consistent partnerships in the GTHA and at higher levels of government. 
Personal vehicles 
The EV Strategy focuses on passenger light-duty vehicles, with ten actions in four areas of opportunity that 
the City can pursue to enable the market-based transition to EVs.  
In surveys of Toronto and GTHA residents on electric mobility, cost was identified as the biggest barrier to 
EV adoption. The City of Toronto can take a leadership role in advocating to the Ontario government to 
provide EV purchase incentives, and to the federal government to maintain and perhaps expand its current 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
 
incentive program. The City can also explore providing its own purchase incentives, as an interim measure 
until sufficient provincial and/or federal incentives are available and/or as a top-up to future provincial 
incentives.  
The transition to electric vehicles depends on whether sufficient EV charging infrastructure is available. The 
EV Strategy has interim objectives for public EV charging: 
● 
By 2025, 220 Level 3 (also called DCFC, Direct Current Fast Charging) ports and 3,000 Level 2 ports 
are installed in public locations; and 
● 
By 2030, 650 Level 3 ports and 10,000 Level 2 ports are installed in public locations. 
While the 2025 objective is likely sufficient, the 2030 objective may not be sufficient to meet the demand 
from 30 per cent of registered personal vehicles. The City has a key role in providing public charging 
infrastructure in Toronto, including on-street parking spaces, in Green P lots, and at City facilities. The City 
can also support and encourage other organizations to provide public EV charging. 
Because most EV charging occurs at home and at work, new and existing residential and commercial 
buildings will need to have EV charging infrastructure, ramping up over time to meet the charging needs of a 
rapidly increasing number of EVs. 
The EV Strategy identifies other challenges to EV adoption, including range anxiety (fear that an EV will run 
out of energy before it can reach a charging station), the need to adapt to a new technology, and limited 
information about EVs. To help increase awareness and understanding of EVs, the City will undertake 
communications and outreach activities, on its own and in collaboration with partners, such as Plug n’ Drive 
and the Clean Air Partnership.  
The transition to EVs will have significant co-benefits. The health of Toronto residents will benefit from air 
quality improvements (EVs have no tailpipe emissions), reduced noise pollution (EVs are quiet), and reduced 
urban heat island effect (EVs emit only 20 per cent of the heat emitted by internal combustion engine 
vehicles). Due to the lower total cost of ownership of EVs, EV owners will have additional disposable income 
to spend in the local economy. EVs can help support the optimal use of electricity generation by leveraging 
vehicle-grid integration technologies. A strong commitment to zero emission vehicles will signal that Toronto 
is a prime destination for innovative businesses. 
To ensure that the benefits of EVs are enjoyed by all Toronto residents, the City can play a role in ensuring 
that there is equitable access to incentives for EVs and EV infrastructure and that information about EVs is 
accessible to everyone. The City can also support and encourage provision of EV charging infrastructure so 
that EVs are a viable option for all residents. Finally, the transition to EVs should be done with a community 
safety lens in mind, to keep streets and publicly accessible charging areas safe for all residents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
 
Commercial vehicles 
To help ensure that Toronto is on track for 100 percent net zero emission transportation, actions include 
working toward 35 per cent of commercial vehicles in Toronto being electric by 2030. The City’s Freight and 
Goods Management Strategy (FGMS) identifies actions to encourage the adoption of zero and low-emission 
freight vehicles. This includes working with industry and senior levels of government to overcome barriers 
such as refueling infrastructure and vehicle cost, and working with public and private sector partners to 
improve acquisition and utilization of zero- and low-emission freight vehicles. It also includes exploring the 
potential to introduce city-wide electric vehicle charge station hubs supporting freight and goods movement 
vehicles. 
The use of EVs, e-bikes, cargo e-bikes, and autonomous delivery vehicles for last-mile deliveries can reduce 
GHG emissions, improve air quality, reduce noise pollution, and lower the urban heat island effect, and may 
be faster and more cost-effective for delivery companies. Additionally, by replacing conventional delivery 
vehicles, alternative options can help alleviate traffic congestion and free up curbspace. The FGMS includes 
actions to promote the use of cargo bicycles, including determining required regulatory changes, identifying 
infrastructure needs and safety considerations and conducting a pilot program in partnership with courier 
companies. 
Keys to Success 
Success in achieving net zero transportation, through active transportation, transit and electrification, 
requires planning with equity as a priority. Different regions and communities of the city have different 
transportation needs that must be kept in mind to ensure no-one is left behind. 
Electrifying transportation will be a central part of transforming the way we move. Success in electrifying is 
dependent upon having a zero carbon electricity grid, as well as the skilled labour, materials, and rapid 
delivery required to provide for electric vehicles and charging.  
THE INERTIA OF A SYSTEM 
There is a delay between when zero carbon actions are implemented and when society is actually 
decarbonised. For example, people typically hold on to vehicles for 10 years or so before purchasing a new 
vehicle. If 100 per cent of vehicles sold are electric in 2030, it is not until 2040 before all gasoline and diesel 
vehicles are phased out. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
4.4 Sustainable Consumption 
& Waste 
Benefits of climate action: HEALTH, EQUITY, RESILIENCE, PROSPERITY 
Waste accounts for 7 per cent of GHG emissions in the GHG inventory. Most GHG emissions from waste 
come from landfills, with a small portion from wastewater treatment processes. Consumption emissions 
from the products and services consumed by residents, businesses and institutions in Toronto are not 
included in the City's calculations of its emissions. 
To achieve a net zero, we need to focus on advancing toward a zero-waste, circular economy. 
Modelled Pathway & Emissions Impact 
The modelled pathway to net zero by 2040 involves increasing waste diversion to 95 per cent by 2050. The 
pathway also includes eliminating organic “green bin” waste from entering landfills by 2025, and generating 
renewable natural gas from wastewater. 
Implementing the modelled actions above would result in a cumulative emissions reduction from 2020 to 
2050 of 10 MtCO2e, and a 90 per cent reduction in waste emissions over that time (Figure 14). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
 
Figure 14. GHG emissions from waste, water, and wastewater.  
 
2030 Interim targets & Actions 
THE NET ZERO STRATEGY SETS THE FOLLOWING 2030 TARGET FOR WASTE:  
● 
By 2030, Identify pathways to more sustainable consumption in City of Toronto operations and in 
Toronto's economy 
● 
By 2030, 70 per cent residential waste diversion from the City of Toronto’s Integrated Waste 
Management System 
The City of Toronto’s planned short-term actions to achieve this target are summarized below. A more 
detailed description of planned actions is available in the Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025, 
attached to this Strategy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health Equity Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
15 
  
  
  
Continue to pursue policy and 
programmatic interventions that 
help the City reach its 
aspirational goals of zero waste 
and a circular economy, and 
which identify pathways to more 
sustainable consumption in both 
municipal operations and in all 
sectors of the economy 
Cities are well-positioned to play a critical role in 
achieving climate neutrality and moving to more 
sustainable consumption models. Accelerating 
Toronto's circular city transition will contribute to 
the City's climate action goals and will play a key 
role in building a resilient, inclusive, green, and 
prosperous future for residents and businesses. 
  
  
  
  
A) Develop a City-wide 
governance structure, strategy 
and policy framework to 
establish a path to make the City 
the first municipality in the 
Province of Ontario with a 
circular economy and to align 
with the Provincial goal as part of 
the Waste Free Ontario Act 
Circular economy strategies consider sustainable 
resource consumption and material efficiency for 
their potential impacts on climate change, 
environmental degradation, and social outcomes. 
Continued relationship building and partnerships 
will be important to accelerate the City of Toronto's 
progress toward its aspirational circular economy 
outcomes and climate action targets. 
  
  
  
  
B) Conduct a consumption based 
emissions inventory and identify 
targets that would meaningfully 
reduce consumption based 
emissions 
Understanding and reducing GHGs released during 
the manufacture and transport of articles and 
services we use helps address Toronto residents' 
true climate impact. 
  
  
  
  
C) Enable Torontonians to reduce 
waste and engage in sustainable 
consumption by implementing 
the Single Use and Takeaway 
Items Reduction Strategy 
It is estimated that approximately 400 million 
single-use plastic bags, 85 million foam takeaway 
containers and cups, and 39 million single-use hot 
and cold drink cups are generated annually by 
single family households in Toronto. Through 
consultation, the City identified strong public 
support for the implementation of mandatory 
measures (e.g. bylaws) restricting single-use and 
takeaway items. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health Equity Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
16 
  
Continue implementation of the 
City’s Long Term Waste 
Management Strategy which sets 
a goal of diverting 70 per cent of 
waste managed from City 
customers away from landfill, by 
focusing on waste reduction, 
reuse and recycling activities that 
promote resource conservation 
and reduce environmental 
impact 
  
There are challenges with achieving this target 
including the transition of the City's Blue Bin 
Recycling program to extended producer 
responsibility (EPR). Currently, the direct impact of 
diversion on the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions is not known. 
  
Also, weight-based metrics such as diversion do not 
take into account the evolving nature of packaging 
and limit the amount of control SWMS has to make 
an impact on the measure. The Long Term Waste 
Management Strategy 5-year review is upcoming, 
and may result in changes to performance 
measurement and implementation strategies.   
  
  
  
  
A) Continue outreach and 
engagement on waste reduction 
and diversion, with a focus on 
food and organic waste 
Outreach and engagement are critical to helping 
residents have the knowledge, opportunities, and 
passion for reducing waste. Organic (food) waste in 
particular creates powerful GHG emissions when it 
reaches the landfill so is a key area for 
engagement. 
 
 
 
 
Discussion 
To achieve a net zero GHG society, we need to focus on advancing toward a zero-waste, circular economy 
and continue implementation of the City’s Long Term Waste Management Strategy. A circular economy is a 
model of design, production, and consumption that keeps resources in use for as long as possible in order 
to reduce waste and human impact on the environment. With a focus on product longevity, renewability, 
reuse, and repair, circular economy strategies consider resource consumption and material efficiency for 
their potential impacts on climate change, the environment and social outcomes. In a circular economy, 
economic and human activity supports the health of natural systems and contributes to thriving, 
sustainable communities. 
The Long Term Waste Management Strategy includes reduction, reuse and recycling activities, including a 
food waste reduction strategy, a textile collection and reuse strategy, supporting other reduction and reuse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
 
programs, exploring new technologies, and creating a Circular Economy and Innovation unit within Solid 
Waste Management Services (SWMS) help Toronto reach its goal of becoming the first circular city in 
Ontario. In 2021, the unit completed Baselining for a Circular Toronto, one of the first studies in Canada to 
baseline a city's existing levels of circularity. Findings from the project, as well as other research, proof of 
concept pilots, and stakeholder feedback, are being used to inform the development of a Circular Economy 
Road Map for Toronto. Once finalized, Toronto's Circular Economy Road Map will inform policy and program 
changes to advance the City's aspirational circular economy goals. 
SWMS will be conducting a review of the Long Term Waste Management Strategy, which may result in 
changes to targets, performance measurement, and implementation strategies related to waste diversion. 
The policy and market context for waste management in Ontario has changed substantially since the 
Strategy was adopted in 2016. The composition of waste streams continues to evolve in response to 
consumer demand and purchasing choices, as well as changes to producer packaging design choices. More 
stringent market quality specifications have impacted both access to recycling markets and the market value 
of recyclables. Most significantly, the Province of Ontario released several regulations under the Resource 
Recovery and Circular Economy Act, 2016 that transitions the responsibility of end-of-life management of 
products and packaging from municipal governments to producers (also known as Extended Producer 
Responsibility or EPR). The transition of the City's Blue Bin Recycling program to EPR will impact the City's 
integrated waste management system, including how the waste diversion rate is calculated and how to 
measure system performance. 
These points underscore the challenges to achieving the residential waste diversion target. Weight-based 
metrics such as diversion do not take into account the evolving nature of packaging and limit the amount of 
control that SWMS has to make an impact on the issue. Additionally, the direct impact of diversion on the 
reduction of GHG emissions is not known. Research into the current state of Toronto's circular economy has 
also identified significant data gaps and limitations that pose a barrier to generating a comprehensive 
understanding of material and waste systems in Toronto (i.e. waste that is not managed by the City of 
Toronto's Integrated Waste Management System). Given this, the Long Term Waste Management Strategy 
identifies waste management planning as an ongoing process that requires flexibility and includes reviews 
at regular intervals. Upcoming projects such as the Long Term Waste Management Strategy review and the 
Circular Economy Road Map will be essential initiatives to further understand, quantify, and identify 
pathways to sustainable consumption and waste management in Toronto.     
Finally, consumption-based emissions are an emerging area of research and actions. Cities like Toronto 
consume more than we produce, meaning we indirectly cause emissions elsewhere by purchasing goods 
and services from producer areas of the world. A partnership with C40 resulted in a preliminary analysis of 
consumption-based emissions in Toronto which identified significant opportunities to address 
consumption-based emissions associated with the construction industry and food. City staff will conduct a 
consumption-based emissions study in 2022 and use the findings to determine an appropriate reduction 
target. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77 
 
Keys to Success 
Success in this area will depend on the collaboration between all levels of government, the private sector 
and the community. It will require a new mindset and processes that prioritize waste reduction and view 
waste as a valuable resource. It will require considering the environmental, social and economic implications 
of how we use resources and manage our waste. 
4.5 Natural systems 
Benefits of climate action: HEALTH, EQUITY, RESILIENCE 
Getting to net zero also requires consideration of opportunities to remove carbon from the atmosphere. 
Greenspaces, including street trees and trees in parks and ravines, contribute to climate resilience, provide 
natural carbon removal, and help to create a liveable and healthy city. Greenspaces and trees provide many 
health and resilience benefits such as helping to manage extreme heat and rain, and providing recreational 
and mental health benefits.  
Modelled Pathway & Emissions Impact 
The modelled pathway includes increasing tree canopy cover city-wide to 40 per cent. 
Increasing tree canopy cover in the city results in a cumulative reduction of 0.2 MtCO2e from 2020 to 2050. 
The many benefits provided by tree cover were not quantified in the modelling study. 
Targets & Actions 
The City aims to develop and implement strategies to improve greenspace infrastructure to build climate 
resilience. The City has an existing target of 40 per cent tree canopy cover city-wide. The City of Toronto’s 
short-term actions to achieve this target are summarized below.  A more detailed description of planned 
actions is available in the Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025, attached to this Strategy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equity Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
17 
  
Increase canopy cover and 
biodiversity and enhance 
greenspaces 
Toronto's urban forest is a vital city asset that 
contributes to quality of life and healthy communities. 
The city’s tree population helps to filter air pollution and 
save energy by helping to cool neighbourhoods and 
buildings in the summer. Trees also sequester carbon as 
they grow. Equitable access to greenspaces, including 
trees, parks and ravines, and their benefits is important 
to creating a healthy, livable city. 
  
  
  
  
A) Achieve equitable 
distribution of the urban 
forest, increasing tree canopy 
and naturalized greenspace 
where it is most needed 
A well-managed urban forest is vital to quality of life and 
supports climate resilience, disaster risk reduction, 
ecosystems conservation, food security, poverty 
alleviation and improved quality of life. Equitable 
distribution of the city's tree canopy brings with it a more 
equitable distribution of the services and benefits 
provided by trees and greenspace. 
  
  
  
  
 
Discussion 
Getting to net zero requires consideration of opportunities to remove carbon from the atmosphere. 
Greenspaces, including trees, parks and ravines, provide natural carbon removal and help create a liveable 
and healthy city.  
To achieve net zero, a number of nature-based solutions will be implemented. The following strategic goals, 
set out in the City's Strategic Forest Management Plan, contribute to climate resilience and will help toward 
achieving the net zero target: 
● 
Increase tree canopy cover, biodiversity and enhance greenspaces 
● 
Achieve equitable distribution of the urban forest, increasing tree canopy and naturalized 
greenspace where it is most needed 
● 
Expand and improve the park system 
● 
Improve the ecological health of ravines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 
 
The City has a target of 40 per cent tree canopy cover by 2050. The 2018 Tree Canopy Study found that 
Toronto's canopy cover increased from 26.6 to 28 per cent in 2008 to 28.4 - 31 per cent in 2018. This 
represents an increase of 1.3 million trees over 10 years, resulting in an urban forest with an estimated 11.5 
million trees. Toronto’s trees are estimated to provide ecosystem services worth more than $55 million 
annually. The city's street trees are a significant contributor to the provision of ecosystem services while 
providing co-benefits at the pedestrian level, such as shade and physical and mental health benefits. These 
ecosystem services and benefits of the urban forest include energy savings, carbon sequestration, pollution 
removal and avoided water runoff.  
The urban forest is made up of all the trees along the public road allowance, trees in parks and ravines, and 
trees in private backyards. Together, they provide significant physical and mental health benefits to all 
Toronto residents. While Toronto’s canopy cover and greenspaces are not equally distributed, the City will 
continue to work with external partners to expand the urban forest through protection, maintenance and 
planting, on both public and private lands.  
Expanding the park system creates opportunities to support the tree canopy goals and expands and 
improves access to green spaces. Protecting the ravine system by maintaining and improving the ecological 
health of ravines will improve ecological function and resilience. 
Biodiversity is also essential to the health, livability and resilience of our city. Cities have an important role to 
play in protecting and enhancing biodiversity through habitat creation and restoring the natural 
environment with native plants, trees and shrubs.  
Keys to Success 
Success in meeting the City’s ambitious tree canopy target will depend on collaboration between City 
divisions, private landowners and community members to establish and maintain healthy trees and 
greenspaces. Focusing efforts on areas of the city where greenspace and trees are needed most will 
increase access to the benefits of the urban forest for more Torontonians. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
 
4.6 Engagement & Equitable 
Implementation 
Benefits of climate action: HEALTH, EQUITY, RESILIENCE, PROSPERITY 
Getting to net zero requires informed decision-making and community-wide involvement. In addition to 
targeting the largest sources of GHG emissions and enhancing greenspaces in our city, we need to focus on 
making climate-informed decisions and engaging with our local community – including with Indigenous 
communities, equity-deserving groups, and youth. 
Actions 
The City aims to ensure equitable implementation and ongoing improvement of engagement and reporting. 
The City’s activities over the short-term are summarized, below.  A more detailed description of planned 
actions is available in the Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025, attached to this Strategy. 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health Equity Resilie
nce 
Prospe
rity 
18 
  
  
Support resident-led climate 
action and engagement 
Engaging and enabling the community to lead on 
climate issues is central to achieving a net zero 
GHG Toronto. 
  
  
  
  
A) Support resident-led climate 
action engagement through 
Climate Action Grants 
Funded projects will increase awareness and 
engagement on climate action at the local level. 
They also strengthen the efforts and capacity of 
local community agencies, grassroots groups and 
resident leaders. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health Equity Resilie
nce 
Prospe
rity 
B) Expand Neighbourhood 
Climate Action Champions 
Program 
Neighbourhood Climate Action Champions 
inspire, motivate and encourage other residents 
to undertake community-focused actions to 
support TransformTO and reach net zero GHG 
emissions. 
  
 
  
  
19 
  
Work with Indigenous rights 
holders and urban Indigenous 
communities to share 
knowledge and learnings 
Meaningfully working with members of Toronto's 
Indigenous communities, and including an 
Indigenous worldview in the Net Zero Strategy, 
are important to our ongoing relationship with 
Indigenous communities on climate issues and 
the successful implementation of the Strategy. 
  
  
  
  
A) Develop and deliver 
Indigenous Climate Action 
Grants program 
Supporting local level Indigenous climate action 
projects is essential, and current funding models 
need adaptation to ensure accessibility to 
Indigenous communities. 
  
  
  
  
20 
  
Develop and implement youth 
engagement strategy 
Youth involvement is critical to the design and 
implementation of the Net Zero Strategy. 
Meaningfully including youth voices is important 
from an equity perspective, and the Strategy also 
benefits from this group's innovative thinking. 
  
  
  
  
A) Design and launch a City-
academic innovation hub to 
support youth-led climate 
initiatives and innovative 
student pilot projects 
Supporting youth climate action projects is 
essential to inspire current and future climate 
action. 
  
  
  
  
21 
Design and launch a climate 
advisory group for 2022 and 
beyond to ensure 
implementation of the Net Zero 
Strategy is equitable and 
reflects  the priorities and 
interests of the community 
Receiving advice from diverse sources is critical to 
the design and implementation of a robust Net 
Zero Strategy that reflects the priorities of 
residents and stakeholders. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health Equity Resilie
nce 
Prospe
rity 
22 
Develop equity indicators to be 
reported out as part of the 
TransformTO implementation 
status update 
Ensuring equitable implementation is an 
important goal of Net Zero Strategy. Measuring 
and reporting on indicators is an effective way to 
stimulate and track progress. 
  
 
  
  
23 
Encourage the growth of green 
industry to provide the 
products and services needed 
to enable a net zero city 
Developing green industry can create economic 
benefits to the region and provide the materials 
and services needed to enable a net zero city. An 
industry's growth is generally controlled by six key 
drivers: Advocacy; Collaboration Building; Market 
Development; Marketing; Policies and 
Regulations; and Workforce Development. 
 
  
  
  
24 
Leverage City’s Live Green 
Toronto program to develop 
and implement a city-wide 
climate action awareness 
campaign 
Communication is key to creating understanding, 
enthusiasm and participation in moving our city 
to net zero. 
  
 
  
  
Discussion 
Local Climate Action Leadership & Partnerships 
Since the approval of TransformTO in 2017, the City has been developing and delivering programs to 
support community leadership and engagement in climate action. Residents in Toronto have a long history 
of climate leadership and strong commitment to delivering climate action in their communities. Deeper 
engagement and long-term support is needed to develop long-lasting partnerships and trust between 
communities that are dedicated to furthering climate action in Toronto.  
The City will continue to develop more thorough long-term collaborations between the City and key sectors 
that are traditionally underrepresented in climate action engagement (e.g. equity-deserving communities, 
Indigenous communities, local development agencies, etc.) which will enable broader engagement of 
Torontonians in climate action.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83 
 
Dedicating more resources to expanding existing community programs and developing new innovative 
partnerships with academic institutions, equity-deserving groups, Indigenous communities, and youth will 
provide new opportunities and ideas for climate action engagement.  
In the short term, the City will focus on enhancing existing successful programs such as the Climate Action 
Grants program and the Neighbourhood Climate Action Champions program. These programs will be 
expanded to reach broader demographics and further promote local leadership and innovation. 
The City will continue working with local organizations such as Community Hubs to support community-led 
work in climate action. The City will also explore additional new partnerships with academic institutions, 
Indigenous groups and youth to increase awareness of required actions and enable local leadership. 
Toronto residents know that climate action is needed. Over 90 per cent of people agree that climate change 
is a threat and agree that everyone needs to reduce their emissions. However, almost half of residents 
surveyed say that they don't know what they can do to address climate change. To help residents better 
understand what they can do, Live Green Toronto will continue to engage residents and will launch a city-
wide climate action awareness campaign. 
Advisory Committee 
An Advisory Group can play a valuable role in the TransformTO Net Zero Strategy. Receiving advice from 
diverse sources will be important in the design and implementation of a robust Net Zero Strategy, ensuring 
that the implementation of the Strategy is equitable and reflects the priorities, interests and values of the 
broader community. 
In 2020, the City of Toronto conducted an evaluation of best practices for establishing an advisory 
committee or peer review group that could be incorporated to strengthen the development and 
implementation of TransformTO. Examples were analyzed from municipalities and corporations, and 
through a comparative analysis of the structure, responsibilities, authorities, and review process of these 
groups were identified to provide potential considerations for the City of Toronto. 
Once the Strategy has been approved by City Council, an Advisory Group will be established, based in part 
on the background research conducted and implementation priorities, to focus on an external advisory 
capacity that will provide guidance in ongoing implementation. 
Youth Engagement 
Engagement with and empowerment of youth, including youth from equity-deserving neighbourhoods, will 
form an important part of implementing the Net Zero Strategy. This will be accomplished by developing a 
Youth Climate Action Strategy that will build on existing initiatives, such as the ongoing collaboration with 
the Toronto District School Board (TDSB) that focuses on: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84 
 
● 
Sharing resources on best practices in climate action and community / youth engagement, in the 
form of a detailed toolkit; and 
● 
A pilot program that is providing micro-grants to support student-led climate actions that benefit 
schools and surrounding communities. 
This work will also build upon an existing partnership with Youth Challenge International that is supporting 
the development and implementation of youth-led community climate action projects, along with youth 
mentorship in climate action engagement, which has a focus on equity-deserving groups through the 
Climate Action Fund. 
The Neighbourhood Climate Action Champions program also includes a number of youth participants and 
youth-focused climate engagement projects. 
Reconciliation and Implementation 
To effectively address climate change and advance the process of reconciliation, the City of Toronto will 
meaningfully engage Indigenous Peoples in an ongoing partnership that upholds Indigenous rights, 
knowledge and their approaches to climate change to avoid the pitfalls of failed climate strategies. Thus, the 
Net Zero Strategy will do the following to effectively address the climate crisis: 
● 
Develop a plan for meaningful, in-depth, respectful and ongoing engagement with local Indigenous 
Peoples to foster and improve government-to-government relationships 
● 
Ensure economic development and employment are developed with and for Indigenous Peoples to 
ensure a just economic transition 
● 
Ensure Indigenous representation throughout Transform TO implementation, such as advisory 
committees and local community engagement 
● 
Explore ways to measure and communicate progress that speak to broader questions through an 
Indigenous lens such as "How will the city look in seven generations?”, “Are we good ancestors?" and 
“How are we honouring the land, water and all our relations?” 
● 
Amplify the voices of those who are disproportionately impacted by climate change and create 
opportunities for them in decision making 
● 
Support the continued efforts of water protectors and land defenders while creating opportunities 
to give land back/land ownership back to Indigenous Peoples  
From internal discussions between Indigenous City employees and the Toronto Office of Recovery and 
Rebuild engagement report, participants noticed the lack of meaningful engagement and co-development 
with Indigenous Peoples as a concern in the creation of the Net Zero Strategy. This is a potential barrier for 
future engagement with Indigenous communities as the lack of trust and respect discourages people from 
rejoining the conversation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85 
 
By 2025, the City of Toronto will involve Indigenous Advisory Circles to implement actions and help integrate 
Indigenous knowledge throughout the Strategy. The inclusion of elders, knowledge keepers, land defenders, 
rights holders and treaty partners at the decision making table will drive meaningful climate action rather 
than presenting false solutions that do not address the root cause of climate change. The diverse 
Indigenous representation (2SLGBTQIA+, Afro-Indigenous, Métis, and Inuit) in advisory groups will ensure 
their voices are deeply represented and ensure the benefits of our climate actions are felt by communities 
that have been hit hardest by social and economic injustices. 
There are voices missing in this Strategy as a result of short timelines for meaningful engagement with First 
Nations, Métis and Inuit members of the diverse urban Indigenous community of Tkaronto. To address this 
barrier, the City of Toronto will seek to build a meaningful, in-depth, respectful, and ongoing relationship 
with local Indigenous People that honours the City’s commitments to reconciliation in accordance with the 
Indigenous Affairs Office. The City will also develop a separate engagement approach with Urban 
Indigenous communities to ensure diverse voices are represented in the implementation of the Net Zero 
Strategy. This Strategy recognizes meaningful engagement with Urban Indigenous communities cannot be 
replaced solely by land acknowledgments, integration of pan-Indigenous worldview, or Indigenous 
representation in advisory circles. The Strategy should act as a living document to grow and adapt as 
needed in the future to ensure new and better ways of thinking about our environment are included.  
Green Economy and Green Industries 
The Green Economy is the greening of all parts of society to reduce the impact of human activity on the 
environment. Sustainably sourced coffee, bike couriers and banks that practise sustainability are all part of 
the green economy. The City of Toronto uses an internationally accepted definition of the green sectors, or 
green industries, which includes companies that provide products and services to businesses and 
individuals that are part of the green economy. 
The City breaks the green industries into five distinct sub-sectors:  Bio-economy (e.g. urban sawmills), clean 
energy (e.g. solar installers), green buildings, resource management (e.g. recycling and clean water) and 
sustainable transportation (e.g. electric vehicles). Each sector in turn is composed of multiple unique supply 
chains or clusters such as the bike cluster and the urban wood cluster. These five distinct sectors have 
unique issues that impact their growth. EVs have growth challenges different from those faced by solar 
installers or recycling companies. While there are opportunities to find similarities in barriers and 
opportunities between green sectors, many of the actions to support their growth need to be done on a 
sector by sector basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86 
 
Toronto's green industries are among the fastest growing sectors of Toronto's economy.  The sectors’ 
employment continues to grow twice as fast as overall employment in Toronto (3.9 per cent vs. 1.6 per cent 
annually between 2015-2019) and contributed an estimated $6.55 billion to the local GDP in 2018.13  
Transitioning to a green low- or zero-carbon economy is expected to have four categories of impacts on 
labour markets: additional jobs will be created in emerging sectors, some employment will be shifted (e.g. 
from fossil fuels to renewables), certain jobs will be reduced or eliminated (e.g. internal combustion engine 
vehicle mechanics), and many existing jobs will be transformed and redefined. Technical modelling shows 
that pursuing the Net Zero pathways will add an additional 1.2 million person-years of employment over 
what is expected. This amounts to approximately 40,000 to 50,000 jobs annually with the majority in 
building retrofits and infrastructure investments. 
Businesses base their business expansion decisions on product market forecasts. Job creation and the 
hiring of new employees are a result of increased sales (both projected and actual). Governments can 
provide more certainty to industry, and speed up the job creation process, by working with industry to 
develop product sales forecasts. The City of Vancouver's Green Buildings Market Research for example has 
identified $3.3 billion of market opportunity through to 2032 for specific technologies. This has created the 
certainty that companies need to invest in expansion and to attract companies to Vancouver to be part of 
the rapidly expanding local supply chain. 
The City of Toronto can provide that certainty to Toronto's green industries by undertaking a similar market 
forecast study of key growth areas of the Net Zero Strategy. City staff will work with Toronto's green 
industries to undertake market research of key products and services required to achieve the goals of the 
Strategy and to provide a report back to City Council. 
The City will also develop green industry growth roadmaps for each green sector in partnership with 
Toronto's green industries and report back to Executive Committee. The roadmaps will include 
recommendations and needed actions in all key industry drivers to accelerate the growth of Toronto's green 
sectors. This will include a workforce development plan (a low-carbon job strategy) and will recommend 
proposals to other orders of government that align with the industry growth strategy. 
City staff will lead consultation with the local green industries on the opportunities to develop a green 
industries cluster management organization or organizations, and identify the preferred form of the 
organization(s) and the necessary steps to achieve its creation and report back to Council. 
 
13 greentechtoronto, 2020. https://torontogreenindustries.home.blog/2020/06/23/economic-data/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
 
Keys to Success 
Deeper engagement and long-term support is needed to develop long-lasting partnerships and trust 
between the community and the City and foster equity. Developing long-term collaborations between the 
City and traditionally underrepresented groups (e.g. equity-deserving communities, Indigenous 
communities, local development agencies, etc.) will enable broader engagement of Torontonians in climate 
action. Working with local green industries will help enable Toronto to have the goods, services, skills and 
jobs required to meet the Strategy’s goals. 
 
4.7 Leading by Example 
Benefits of climate action: HEALTH, EQUITY, RESILIENCE, PROSPERITY 
One role that the City can play is showing leadership by providing an example of what can be done now, 
demonstrating success, and sharing lessons learned. The City can lead by example in all sectors. This means 
quickly moving the City’s own buildings, vehicles, waste, decision-making processes, and other practices 
along the path to net zero.  
Electrifying City-owned and managed buildings and vehicles, along with expanding renewable energy, will be 
key. In the modelled pathway, transit is fully electrified by 2040. The City’s fleet of vehicles is also fully 
electrified. Showing leadership as a City also means introducing a system of climate governance to update 
the City’s decision-making processes to address the climate emergency. 
2030 Interim Targets & Actions 
THE NET ZERO STRATEGY INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING LEAD BY EXAMPLE TARGETS FOR 
2030: 
● 
City of Toronto corporate greenhouse gas emissions are reduced by 65 per cent over 2008 base year 
● 
All City Agency, Corporation and Division-owned new developments are designed and constructed 
to applicable Toronto Green Standard Version 4 standard achieving zero carbon emissions, 
beginning in 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 
 
● 
Greenhouse gas emissions from City-owned buildings are reduced by 60 per cent from 2008 levels; 
by 2040, City-owned buildings reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions 
● 
All City-owned facilities have achieved zero waste 
● 
Generate and utilize 1.5 Million Gigajoules of energy from biogas 
● 
Approximately 107,700 tonnes CO2e per year are reduced through Organics Processing with 
Renewable Energy and Landfill Gas Utilization  
● 
50 per cent of the City-owned fleet is transitioned to zero-emissions vehicles  
● 
50 per cent of the TTC bus fleet is zero-emissions 
● 
Greenhouse gas emissions from food the City of Toronto procures are reduced by 25 per cent 
The City’s short-term actions to move toward these targets are summarized, below. A more detailed 
description of planned actions is available in the Short-Term Implementation Plan 2022-2025, attached to 
this Strategy. 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health Equity Resilie
nce 
Prospe
rity 
25 
  
  
  
  
Develop and apply a Climate Lens in 
decision-making 
Applying a climate lens to decision-making 
ensures that climate impacts, opportunities, 
risks and potential benefits and savings are 
systematically considered. 
  
  
  
  
A) Implement a Climate Lens Program 
A climate lens evaluates and considers the 
climate implications of all major City of Toronto 
decisions, guiding the City toward sound, long-
term decision-making and GHG reduction 
goals. 
  
  
  
  
B) Report on climate risks to assets 
Identifying and disclosing climate-related risks 
to assets enables the City to minimize risk, 
inform more efficient, long-term decision-
making and enhance accountability to meeting 
targets. 
  
  
  
  
C) Enhance Sustainable Procurement 
The City's purchasing power is one way that 
the City can make environmentally sustainable 
and equitable investments for today and the 
future. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health Equity Resilie
nce 
Prospe
rity 
D) Consider a carbon offset purchase 
policy and update the Carbon Credit 
Policy 
The use of carbon offsets can make or break 
an effective net zero strategy. Toronto's Net 
Zero Strategy will reduce local emissions 
before considering purchasing offset credits. 
An offset purchase policy will be developed 
with the spirit and intent of reaching net zero. 
  
  
  
  
26 
Design and implement a Toronto 
Carbon Budget 
A carbon budget is the current best practice for 
cities that are serious about ensuring 
transparency and accountability in their 
climate action work. 
  
  
  
  
27 
  
  
Ensure net zero City-owned buildings 
Buildings are the largest source of GHG 
emissions in Toronto. The Net Zero Carbon 
Plan demonstrates the City leading by example 
to achieve net zero emissions in both new and 
existing City buildings. 
  
  
  
  
A) Constructing new City-owned 
buildings to net zero on a go forward 
basis 
Design and construction of net zero emissions 
buildings supports the City's systematic 
approach to achieving City Council's emission 
reduction targets. 
  
  
  
  
B) Pursuing a Net Zero Carbon Plan 
for existing City-owned buildings 
The City can most significantly reduce GHG 
emissions through fuel switching in its existing 
buildings. The move away from carbon-
intensive equipment is a cost-avoidance action 
that reduces both operating expenditures and 
emissions. The City may be able to achieve 50 
per cent reduction in GHG emissions through 
the application of the Net Zero Carbon Plan for 
existing City buildings. 
  
  
  
  
28 
  
  
Reduce emissions from City and 
Agency-owned vehicles 
Transportation is a significant source of GHG 
and air pollutant emissions in Toronto. The City 
has a role to play in rapidly demonstrating 
success in moving toward net zero 
transportation. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health Equity Resilie
nce 
Prospe
rity 
A) Update and implement the 
Sustainable City of Toronto Fleets 
Plan to support the transition of 20 
per cent of City fleet to zero-emission 
by 2025 and 50 per cent by 2030. 
Starting in 2022, for any light duty 
vehicle being purchased by the City, 
the City will select only the electric 
version of this vehicle where 
operationally feasible. 
As the largest municipal fleet in Canada, City of 
Toronto fleets play an important leadership 
role in advancing technologies that aim to 
significantly reduce environmental impacts, 
and improve vehicle efficiency, reliability, and 
safety, while reducing life-cycle costs and 
associated impacts. 
  
  
  
  
B) Implement the TTC Green Bus 
Program to achieve target of 20 per 
cent of TTC buses zero emission by 
2025-2026 
Zero-emission buses replace diesel buses, 
reducing the demand for diesel fuel, reducing 
emissions of GHGs and air pollution. 
Transportation is the greatest source of air 
pollution in Toronto. 
  
  
  
  
29 
  
  
Encourage City staff to adopt 
sustainable and climate positive 
practices at work and in their 
commutes 
The City of Toronto is the largest employer in 
Toronto, and as such can introduce many 
people to sustainable practices and enable 
staff to lead while at work and at home. 
  
  
  
  
A) Implement Live Green @ Work 
Strategy 
City of Toronto employees provide service to 
the public and businesses across the city. City 
employees can act as climate leaders at work 
and at home. 
  
  
  
  
B) Encourage City staff to take transit, 
carpool, cycle or walk rather than 
drive alone to work, through the 
Smart Commute program 
Low- or zero-carbon commuting choices 
reduce emissions of GHGs and air pollutants 
and also help to alleviate congestion. Walking 
and cycling improve health through physical 
activity. 
  
  
  
  
30 
  
  
Lead by example in managing waste 
and producing renewable energy 
from biogas at City facilities 
Renewable energy reduces the demand for 
other forms of energy. It is important for the 
City to lead by example in managing waste. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
91 
 
 
Actions for implementation 
2022-2025 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Health Equity Resilie
nce 
Prospe
rity 
  
A) Begin development of a third 
organics processing facility with 
renewable energy, targeting 
completion by 2028 
Decarbonization of City operations is a critical 
way that the City can lead by example in the 
work toward net zero. The City operates one of 
the most progressive and sustainable waste 
management systems in North America. 
Ongoing innovation in our operations can 
serve as an industry standard for waste 
management. 
  
  
  
  
B) Produce renewable natural gas 
from the Disco Road Organics 
Processing Facility, Dufferin Organics 
Processing Facility and the third 
organics processing facility (target 
completion by 2028) and landfill gas 
control and utilization systems at 
Green Lane and Keele Valley Landfills 
(target completion by 2026). 
Renewable energy produced from biogas 
reduces the demand for other forms of energy. 
  
  
  
  
C) Produce renewable natural gas 
from wastewater 
Renewable energy produced from biogas 
reduces the demand for other forms of energy. 
  
  
  
  
D) Divert waste from landfill in City-
owned facilities 
It is important for the City to set a community-
wide example in increasing diversion of waste 
from landfill. Landfill emissions (particularly 
organics) generate methane, which has a 
higher global warming potential than carbon 
dioxide. Recycled materials also save resources 
and reduce energy and water use. 
  
  
  
  
 
Discussion 
The City of Toronto is taking a lead by reducing GHG emissions from its own operations. In addition to a 
series of community-wide emission reduction targets, TransformTO set a series of City of Toronto corporate 
leadership targets. Toronto is already a leader in green operations and has many sustainable operating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 
 
practices. In the Net Zero Strategy the City has committed to accelerating these targets to ensure that City 
buildings, workplaces, vehicles, energy, waste management, decision-making process and other practices 
contribute to reducing emissions and mitigating the impacts of climate change. These ambitious targets 
were adopted with an accelerated timeline to demonstrate a commitment to “walking the talk” and clearly 
signal to other organizations that Toronto is a leader in climate action. 
Climate Governance 
Strong, overarching “Climate Governance” fills the gap between ambitious GHG reduction and climate 
adaptation goals on the one hand, and robust policy roadmaps on the other hand. It provides an 
opportunity to ensure transparency, accountability and informed decision-making. Effective Climate 
Governance systems are now hallmarks of jurisdictions showing climate leadership. 
The City of Toronto does not currently institutionalize climate change mitigation and adaptation 
considerations into decision-making processes. Doing so requires standardization of practices, integrating 
coordinated oversight and building climate literacy across the corporation. 
CLIMATE LENS 
The City makes important decisions every day, for instance when it decides to remodel a road, construct a 
new building, update its vehicle fleet, and improve services. There are key opportunities for the City to look 
at these decisions with a “climate lens”. The City is developing a climate lens program to give staff the 
resources, tools and support to undertake meaningful GHG emissions and climate risk assessments on their 
initiatives, enabling climate-informed decision-making. 
The Climate Lens will spur an organizational culture shift at the City by facilitating the mainstreaming of 
climate considerations into operations and capital project planning. The Climate Lens program will aim to 
achieve the following objectives and outcomes: (1) Integrate climate considerations into strategic decision-
making; (2) Build staff climate competency and leadership; (3) Increase climate accountability; (4) Increase 
transparency through reporting; and (5) Monitor climate performance. 
The Climate Lens program will initially focus on new/enhanced operating programs and capital projects to 
ensure future investments are aligned with the City's GHG reduction goals and climate risk adaptation 
needs. The Climate Lens program resources will also be utilized to assess the GHG impacts of and climate 
opportunities and risks associated with all existing City assets as part of the asset management planning 
process pursuant to the Asset Management Planning for Municipal Infrastructure Regulation, O. Reg. 
588/17, and Toronto's Corporate Asset Management Policy (section 8.1.6 (iv)). This will be done in alignment 
with the regulated deadline for asset management planning, which is currently 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
93 
 
MANAGING CARBON LIKE MONEY: THE CARBON BUDGET 
Critical step to reach the 2030 GHG reduction target: 
Demonstrate carbon accountability locally and globally by establishing a carbon budget – Leading by 
example, the City will establish a carbon budget to track climate actions against annual emission limits and 
drive accountability. The City's actions will be measured against these limits each year until net zero is 
achieved, with any gaps in action identified and solutions proposed so we stay on course.  
The historical practice of carbon management has been to identify GHG emissions reduction targets for 
specific years, such as targets set for 2030 and 2050. The more recent best practice however, indicates that 
every tonne of GHG matters and, therefore, focuses on the trajectory of GHG emissions annually. 
A Toronto Carbon Budget would take the approach every municipality already uses to track, review, manage 
and control financial expenditures and apply it to GHG emissions. It allows decision makers to think of 
carbon in the same way as money, setting a budget and tracking annual expenditures against that budget, 
except in this case it is a carbon budget. A carbon budget for the City would set out annual emission 
reduction limits; identify and quantify governmental actions that reduce GHG emissions (everything from 
procurements of electric buses to by-laws regulating emissions from buildings); and project whether 
upcoming annual emission limits will be respected. For each emission reducing action the carbon budget 
would clearly state the costs and the City divisions and/or agencies accountable for implementation and 
reporting. Ideally the City's carbon budget would be reported in parallel with the fiscal budget, thereby 
increasing public awareness of climate action in Toronto which supports accountability. Finally, by 
highlighting gaps in Toronto's climate action on an annual basis, the City can make timely course corrections 
to ensure its GHG reduction targets do not slip out of reach. This latter point is critical as significant 
emission reductions are needed year-after-year to achieve net zero emissions by 2040. The modelled NZ40 
pathway sets a cumulative emissions target, or “budget” of 178 MtCO2e. If the city were to continue with its 
current emissions rate, this budget would be used up in 12 years.  
A Toronto Carbon Budget would also align with the City's financial budgets to determine the financial 
impacts of achieving or failing to achieve the annual GHG emission limit or other relevant key performance 
metrics. It encourages decision makers to monitor the City's overall progress in achieving its climate 
objectives, assess and manage organization-wide and community-wide risks, and establish accountability. 
Buildings 
In July 2021, City Council received Corporate Real Estate Management's Net Zero Carbon Plan. This Plan 
provides a road map to achieve net zero emissions in City buildings through fuel switching and efficiency 
retrofits, lower-carbon new builds, strategic divestment, on-site renewables and storage, training and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94 
 
education, enhanced use of building performance data and carbon offsets and off-site renewables. Work is 
underway, with detailed plans to be developed in 2022 as part of integrating the Plan into the capital 
planning process. Implementation of the Net Zero Carbon Plan will reduce GHG emissions from City-owned 
buildings by at least 80 per cent by 2040. 
  
For City-owned new developments, the Toronto Green Standard Version 4 will require net zero emissions in 
2022, in keeping with the City’s commitment to lead by example. 
Transportation 
CITY FLEET AND ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
As the largest municipal fleet in Canada, and one of the largest in North America, City of Toronto fleets play 
an important leadership role in advancing technologies that aim to significantly reduce environmental 
impacts, and improve vehicle efficiency, reliability, and safety while reducing life-cycle costs and associated 
impacts.  
The Pathway to Sustainable City of Toronto Fleets Plan set aims to transition 45 per cent of City-owned 
vehicles to low-carbon vehicles by 2030. Technical modelling and an accelerated approach to addressing the 
climate emergency has meant that City of Toronto fleets will now aim to transition 50 per cent of City-owned 
vehicles to zero-emission vehicles by 2030. 
One of the cornerstones of the accelerated plan is the Fleet Electrification Strategy, which outlines actions 
required to expand and maximize the use of EVs in City operations. Accelerating the transition of City Fleets 
to EVs requires a major expansion of the City’s corporate EV charging infrastructure, which is currently 
underway. The City’s corporate EV charging network will also help with the broader promotion and adoption 
of EVs in Toronto by providing EV charging for City staff and, where feasible, members of the public.   
SMART COMMUTE & WORK FROM HOME 
Smart Commute programs and services assist staff in greening their commutes by making it easier to take 
transit, carpool, cycle or walk rather than drive alone to work. The City's Smart Commute team works with 
staff volunteers and the Smart Commute Champions Network to help promote sustainable commuting at 
City worksites to create a network of sustainable transportation enthusiasts through events, guest speakers 
and seminars. The Smart Commute program also includes an Emergency Ride Home initiative, and staff are 
currently working on a Smart Commute online tool to assist staff in planning their commutes. The City is 
currently working on a study to determine the climate impacts of working from home. 
Continuing telework and institutionalizing it will help to reduce commuter trips, thereby reducing energy 
use, emissions and congestion. Through the City's ModernTO (Workplace Modernization) program, Toronto 
aims to be at the forefront of efforts to modernize office work, commuting and telework. ModernTO, and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
95 
 
equivalent initiatives in the private and not-for-profit sectors, will bring additional benefits to the city 
including smaller environmental impacts, reduced commute times, reduced GHG emissions associated with 
commuting and improved work-life balance for employees. 
LIVE GREEN @ WORK 
The Live Green @ Work strategy outlines how organizational citizenship behaviours directed toward the 
environment (OCB-Es) can be advanced at the City of Toronto through employee engagement. OCB-Es are 
voluntary environmental behaviours demonstrated at work. Through these behaviours, staff can help the 
City achieve environmental goals, while also contributing to health and well-being in the workplace.  
TRANSIT 
The Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) has made a commitment to be 50 per cent zero emissions by 2028-
2032 and 100 per cent zero emissions by 2040. An interim target is for 20 per cent of TTC buses to be zero 
emission by 2025-2026. The TTC is currently operating 60 battery-electric buses, the largest zero emissions 
fleet in North America, and will be purchasing another 300 electric buses between 2023 and 2025.  
When the entire TTC fleet is zero emissions in 2040, GHG emissions will be reduced by approximately 
250,000 tonnes of CO2 per year and local air quality will be improved due to the elimination of diesel 
emissions from buses. Bus reliability and availability will increase by an estimated 25 per cent, and the total 
life cycle cost of zero-emissions buses is estimated to be lower than any currently available fossil fuel 
alternative.  
Continuing investments to expand public transit infrastructure will contribute to the modal shift to public 
transit needed to meet the Strategy’s 2030 targets and achieve net zero. The City and Province continue to 
advance transit expansion as part of several intergovernmental agreements, including the most recent 
Toronto-Ontario Transit Partnership Preliminary Agreement. These light rail, heavy rail and subway projects 
will expand access to higher-order transit across the city and are all at various stages of planning, 
development, and construction. The City also continues to advance design and seek intergovernmental 
funding for its transit priority projects, namely the Eglinton East LRT and the Waterfront Transit Network. 
Waste 
The City has several initiatives to manage waste from its own facilities and produce renewable natural gas 
from biogas. The City is currently working at both the Dufferin and Disco Road organics processing facilities 
to produce renewable natural gas (RNG) from Green Bin Organic waste, which will be injected into the 
natural gas grid for City use. Through the Citywide Greenhouse Gas Reduction Strategy (Report 2020.IE14.7), 
the RNG produced will be blended with the natural gas that the City buys through the Natural Gas 
Purchasing Program to create a low-carbon fuel blend that will be used across the organization to power 
vehicles and heat City-owned facilities, allowing for a reduction in GHG emissions City-wide. The City will not 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
96 
 
start using the gas until the beginning of 2022 to ensure production capacity has stabilized. Until then, the 
gas will be stored in the grid. 
The City is also reviewing potential biogas and landfill gas upgrading opportunities at other City waste 
facilities including the Green Lane and Keele Valley landfills and a future third organics processing facility. All 
five sites combined would have the potential to produce enough gas to fulfill the City’s entire natural gas 
needs annually (and have a surplus, excluding City Agency, Boards and Commissions). 
 
Other initiatives include producing renewable natural gas from wastewater biogas and diverting waste 
generated at City facilities from landfill.  
Keys to Success 
The keys to the City’s success in meeting Lead by Example targets will be leadership and a sustained focus 
on climate-informed decision-making. Meeting these targets will also rely on having a net zero carbon 
electricity grid to power electrified vehicles and buildings. Success will require the availability of skilled 
labour familiar with net zero buildings as well as a supply of net zero-appropriate materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 
 
5. Looking Forward 
5.1 Summary of Challenges & 
Keys to Success 
(Dependencies) 
The City of Toronto cannot achieve net zero alone. In fact, with current authorities (powers) and systems in 
place, the City only directly controls a small portion of our community-wide emissions. The technical 
modelling demonstrates that achieving net zero by 2040 is technically feasible, but dependent upon 
significant acceleration of climate actions and well-coordinated efforts at local, regional, national and global 
levels. There are several challenges and keys to success (also called dependencies) that need to be 
addressed in order to realize a net zero future: 
1. Action must begin now and must focus on equity: Achieving the 2030 GHG target requires that all 
existing climate actions continue and for additional bold action to begin as soon as possible. A focus 
on equity in program and policy design and delivery will maximize participation of all Toronto 
residents so that benefits can be realized sooner and last longer. 
  
2. Action from all levels of government will also need to align and accelerate: Provincial and 
federal policy and resources are required to enable Toronto’s ability to realize a net zero future. 
Aligned action will also amplify local efforts so that financial returns are realized sooner and GHG 
emissions reductions start earlier. 
  
3. The electricity system needs to be carbon free: The emissions intensity (amount of GHG emitted 
per unit electricity) of Ontario's electricity grid is projected to increase. For Toronto to get to net 
zero, the grid needs to be carbon free.  Failing this, the city can only rely on the “net” part of the 
target and will need to purchase carbon offsets or renewable energy certificates, both of which add 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99 
 
significant cost to becoming net zero.  Ensuring that electricity generation does not produce carbon 
pollution also addresses the scale of the global challenge. 
  
At a local level, while it is important to decarbonize the grid (reducing the carbon or GHG emissions 
of Ontario’s electricity supply), the electricity system needs to be able to adapt to new demands as 
heating and transportation are electrified. Focusing on conservation first can reduce electricity 
consumption and is the most inexpensive way to provide additional electricity capacity; however, 
additional work will be necessary to fully understand how to enable large-scale electrification of 
transportation and buildings and manage peaks in electricity demand.  
  
4. The labour market must shift and local supply chains must be developed: The labour market 
must shift and new critical supply chains need to be developed to bring down costs. The skills mix 
and capacity of the labour force will need to scale up rapidly and new robust supply chains for new 
technologies, such as heat pumps and electric vehicles, will need to be in place in order to deliver 
the actions required to achieve net zero. 
  
5. Innovative and adaptive delivery mechanisms must be adopted to scale up: Although all 
actions presented in the Strategy are technologically feasible, conventional delivery mechanisms are 
likely too slow and costly to deliver the rapid transformation envisioned to achieve the 2030 target. 
City processes will need to be nimble, as already demonstrated in the quick implementation of new 
programs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. ActiveTO is one of those programs where 
dedicated road space facilitated active transportation for essential trips and physical activity keeping 
residents safe and healthy during the pandemic in 2020.  ActiveTO demonstrated a quick response 
to support a crisis by "instituting priority bus lanes, improved cycling infrastructure, expansion of 
bike share and weekend recreational street closures, among others."  
  
Similarly, quick action will need to be applied to the volume of building retrofits needed to reach 
Toronto's proposed targets.  The current model of retrofitting one house at a time will need to be 
replaced by a bulk retrofit program where many houses are improved at once. To do this, municipal 
processes and programs will need to adapt and be aligned in order to address barriers that 
households might face. For instance, a household wishing to undertake a retrofit or use an electric 
vehicle should not face any barriers in terms of information or action that might result from 
conflicting municipal, provincial or utility policies. 
  
6. Impacts on material and land resources should be accounted for: The economy will need to 
produce large numbers of electric vehicles and deliver building retrofits and renewable energy in 
short order. Supplying or manufacturing these resources creates demand for concrete, wood, 
insulation, batteries, and land. The environmental, social, and economic implications will need to be 
carefully considered to ensure this does not result in additional GHG emissions and negative 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100 
 
impacts to the environment. Indigenous worldviews and circular economy principles are required to 
minimize impacts on resources and ensure principles of global sustainability are maintained. 
 
5.2 Implementation & Next 
Steps 
The Net Zero Strategy provides a pathway to reach net zero GHG emissions for Toronto. The Strategy also 
provides solutions that can stimulate the economy, such as investments in infrastructure, building retrofits, 
electric mobility, and new energy technologies, providing opportunities and benefits for the residents of 
Toronto. 
Decarbonizing Toronto will require leadership from all levels of government and the private sector, as well 
as active participation from the community. It will require rapidly scaling up many programs and policies 
that the City and other governments already have underway, as well as new action by all parties.  
Many of the planned emission reduction actions also support achieving other City objectives, such as 
improved economic development and health outcomes. Holding equity as a central focus while designing 
and implementing the Net Zero Strategy will enable under-represented and equity-deserving groups to be 
more involved and better off. Thoughtful implementation of the Strategy will create quality jobs, improve air 
quality and health, and strengthen our resilience to extreme weather. 
The impacts and costs of climate change will be determined by how quickly action is taken and by how 
deeply GHG emissions are reduced leading up to 2030. Delay in taking action to address climate change 
increases the disruption to the economy and infrastructure. Each year that new investments are made in 
carbon-intensive infrastructure and technologies, we are locking in an expectation of long-term returns. 
Undoing these investments is costly. Delay also results in increased damages from extreme weather events.  
Achieving net zero GHG requires investments in building retrofits, solar panels, transit service, electric 
vehicles and other zero emissions technologies and infrastructure. These investments result in energy 
savings (for example, homes use less energy) and revenues (selling power from electricity generation or 
district energy). The analysis of modelled pathways indicates that initially investments exceed savings, but 
by 2040 savings start to exceed revenues on an annual basis, as the investments start to pay back. Achieving 
net zero by 2040 allows more savings than the net zero by 2050 pathway. Reducing emissions more quickly 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101 
 
also means that the City can collect the financial benefits of the avoided carbon costs and avoided energy 
costs more quickly.  
The City’s net zero GHG vision represents a transformation of the energy system, the built environment, and 
some of our behaviours, in line with cities around the world that are leading on climate. It will require a 
coordinated mobilization of the City and society at large for which there are few precedents. The Net Zero 
Strategy demonstrates that the technology is available, the financials are viable, and the broader societal 
benefits are extensive. Meeting the ambitious 2030 target on the path to net zero is the City’s opportunity to 
continue to be a climate leader, to do our part to address the climate emergency and to create a future 
Toronto that benefits all. 
 
Glossary 
Term 
Definition 
Baseline 
the starting point to measure changes in the amount of emissions produced over 
time 
Carbon-free grid 
an electricity grid where the power that is generated and distributed comes from 
only renewable sources 
Carbon 
sequestration 
the process of capturing and storing carbon from the atmosphere through natural or 
anthropogenic methods 
Consumption-
based emissions 
emissions from the volume of goods consumed by a population 
CO2e (Carbon 
dioxide 
equivalents) 
a single unit of measurement that allows for the impact of releasing different 
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere to be evaluated on a common basis. Carbon 
dioxide equivalents are calculated using Global Warming Potential factors that 
represent the impact of each greenhouse gas type (such as methane (CH4) and 
nitrous oxide (N2O)) relative to that of carbon dioxide 
Decarbonize 
to eliminate the release of GHGs into the atmosphere from a process or 
system.  This includes swapping out any fossil fuel sources for renewable energy 
GHGs 
(Greenhouse 
gases) 
compound gases that trap heat and emit longwave radiation in the atmosphere 
causing the greenhouse effect 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102 
 
Heat pump 
a highly efficient heating and cooling system that transfers thermal energy from the 
ground or air to warm a building during winter and cool it during the summer 
Mt (Megatonne) 
1,000,000 tonnes 
Near zero 
buildings 
a building that is designed to be highly energy efficient but still uses a small amount 
of non-renewable sources. A building constructed to Toronto Green Standard 
Version 4 Tier 3 is considered a near-zero emissions building 
Net zero 
a balance between the amount of greenhouse gases released and the amount taken 
out of the atmosphere 
Net zero building 
a building that is highly energy-efficient and produces on-site, or procures, carbon-
free and or renewable energy in an amount sufficient to offset the annual carbon 
emissions associated with its operations, or simply eliminates carbon emissions 
altogether 
Renewable 
energy 
a naturally-occurring energy source that is not finite or exhaustible. It includes 
sources such as sunlight, wind, and geothermal heat 
ZEV (Zero 
Emissions Vehicle) 
a vehicle that does not produce tailpipe emissions or other pollutants from the 
onboard source of power 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
103 
 
 
TransformTO Net Zero 
Strategy Short-term 
Implementation Plan 2022-
2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
104 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
2030 target: 100 per cent of new buildings are designed and built to be near zero greenhouse gas emissions 
1 
Ensure near zero 
emissions for all new 
construction 
CP, EED 
New construction activities 2022-2025 include: 
i. Implement the Toronto Green Standard, which 
requires net zero emissions for new development 
applications in 2030. 
ii. Review options to advance higher levels of uptake of 
Tier 2 and 3 buildings to facilitate transformation to net 
zero earlier than 2030. 
Buildings are the largest 
source of GHG emissions in 
Toronto. Net zero buildings 
are critical to achieving a net 
zero Toronto. Building 
emissions primarily come 
from burning natural gas to 
heat space and water. 
  
  
  
  
2 
Evaluate and limit 
impacts of embodied 
carbon in construction 
EED, CP 
More information is needed to understand what kinds 
of materials and construction techniques should be 
used for Toronto. The City will study the impacts and 
set embodied carbon limits for building materials and 
construction practices in new buildings. 
All materials and 
construction methods have 
an impact on our city. Using 
low-carbon materials, such 
as wood, and using low-
carbon construction 
techniques, will reduce our 
impacts on the environment. 
  
  
  
  
2030 target: Greenhouse gas emissions from existing buildings are cut in half, from 2008 levels 
3 
Advance 
Implementation of the 
Net Zero Existing 
Buildings Strategy. 
EED, TB, 
MLS, CP, 
SDFA 
The Net Zero Existing Buildings (ExB) Strategy presents 
nine recommended actions for the City to undertake, 
identifies key design and implementation 
considerations for each action, and presents the 
Buildings are the largest 
source of GHG emissions in 
Toronto, accounting for 
about 57 per cent of total 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
105 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
(Refer to the Net Zero 
Existing Buildings 
Strategy, adopted by 
City Council in July 
2021, for a detailed 
short-term 
implementation plan.) 
potential impacts on emissions, costs and co-benefits. 
The ExB Strategy takes the approach of introducing 
voluntary programs and policies in the near-term, 
followed by a transition to mandatory requirements in 
the medium to long-term. A detailed short-term 
implementation plan has been adopted, which can be 
accessed on the City's website. 
community-wide emissions 
(based on the 2019 GHG 
inventory). Natural gas 
accounts for 92 per cent of 
emissions from buildings. 
Residential natural gas use 
alone accounts for 54 per 
cent of building emissions. 
These statistics highlight the 
need to reduce natural gas 
use in buildings to meet 
future emissions targets. 
2030 targets:  
● 
50 per cent of community-wide energy comes from renewable or low-carbon sources 
● 
 25 per cent of commercial and industrial floor area is connected to low carbon thermal energy sources 
4 
Work with industry 
experts to explore 
limiting the expansion 
of natural gas systems 
and reversing system 
growth, where feasible, 
and limiting installation 
EED 
Over 2022-2025 staff will explore tools to phase out 
natural gas installation and connections, including but 
not limited to: 
i. Develop a framework with City divisions and industry 
experts to limit the expansion of natural gas systems 
and reverse system growth, where feasible, and limit 
installation of natural gas equipment, and report back 
Achieving net zero depends 
on quickly moving away from 
natural gas for space and 
water heating in buildings. 
Natural gas for buildings is 
the largest source of GHG in 
Toronto. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
of natural gas 
equipment 
by Q2 2022 on recommended tools to limit use of 
natural gas. 
ii. Expand district heating systems into communities.  
iii. District energy heating system ready processes.  
iv. Neighborhood impact assessments. 
5 
Support adoption and 
mainstreaming of net 
zero, resilient energy 
sources for new and 
existing developments 
EED, CP 
Activities in 2022-2025 include: 
i. Plan for net zero emissions districts and large 
developments, including secondary and precinct plan 
areas, academic and healthcare campuses, commercial 
real estate portfolios, brownfield sites, and civic 
clusters. 
ii. Support various City Divisions and Energy Developers 
in developing renewable thermal energy projects 
where City-owned assets are involved, including sewer 
heat recovery, lake-based exchange, and geothermal 
projects. 
iii. Provide power engineering services for low-carbon 
backup power systems at designated emergency 
reception centres, and support the Office of Emergency 
Management in planning for new emergency reception 
centres. 
Renewable thermal energy 
systems remove natural gas 
from the energy system, 
reduce annual maintenance 
costs, and increase resilience 
of the energy system 
through energy supply 
security. 
Low-carbon back-up power 
enables buildings to be 
available to provide essential 
services and act as 
community hubs during 
power outages due to 
extreme weather or other 
causes. 
  
  
  
  
6 
Address barriers and 
develop strategies to 
EED 
Activities to increase renewable energy over 2022-2025 
include: 
Decarbonizing buildings is 
only possible if there is a 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
increase the 
deployment of 
renewable energy and 
storage technologies, 
including but not 
limited to solar, wind, 
biomass, geothermal, 
waste heat recovery 
and heat pumps 
i. Environment and Energy and other relevant parties to 
develop a Renewable Energy Taskforce to address 
barriers and develop strategies for increasing 
renewable energy development including; 
- Investigate opportunities to encourage wider 
adoption of renewable energy through regulatory and 
incentives structures such as rebates, low-interest 
financing and credits; 
- Work with Toronto Hydro to enhance the Distributed 
Energy Resource interconnection process for 
renewable energy; 
- Review the building permitting process related to 
renewable energy and storage and explore 
opportunities for streamlining; 
- Review zoning requirements and identify restrictions 
that prohibit renewable energy development including 
solar photovoltaic, and assess opportunities for 
improvement; 
ii. Environment and Energy to report back in 2023 with 
findings from this work and identify specific budget 
requests, authorities and actions required for 
increasing renewable energy development, including 
but not limited to solar, heat pumps, geothermal, waste 
heat recovery and storage. 
supply of renewable energy. 
The City has a 
supporting role in increasing 
supply and a key role in 
facilitating local access to 
that energy. 
 
Resilient solar (solar plus 
storage) allows buildings to 
operate during power 
outages due to extreme 
weather and become 
resilience hubs that provide 
essential services to the 
community. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
7 
Actively support, 
advocate to and 
partner with 
Toronto Hydro, as well 
as the Provincial and 
Federal governments 
and agencies, to 
decarbonize the 
provincial electricity 
grid, promote energy 
conservation and 
enable local renewable 
energy generation 
CMO, EED, 
TH 
Activities include: 
i. Continue to advocate to the Government of Ontario 
the critical importance of lowering GHG emissions from 
the electricity grid in order to reach net zero targets, 
and work with the Province and other partners in this 
regard. 
ii. Collaborate with and advocate to all levels of 
government and related agencies and utilities to bring 
about the changes in energy consumption and 
generation that are needed to reach net zero. 
The City of Toronto cannot 
move Toronto to net zero on 
its own. Necessary 
collaboration will include re-
evaluating current limits to 
the City of Toronto's 
authorities, and the roles 
various organizations can 
play in moving Toronto to 
net zero. Achieving net zero 
through the electrification of 
buildings and transportation 
relies on zero carbon, 
renewable electricity. 
  
  
  
  
2030 target: 75 per cent of school/work trips under 5 km are walked, biked, or by transit  
8 
Expand biking and 
pedestrian 
infrastructure, 
including the rollout of 
cycling routes, bicycle 
parking and bike share 
at or near TTC stations 
TSD, TTC, 
BST 
The City will continue to expand active and multi-modal 
transportation infrastructure, building on progress 
made in accelerating ActiveTO, expanding Bike Share 
Toronto (including the pedal assist e-bike pilot 
program), and other initiatives. 
Gas and diesel vehicles are a 
major source of GHG in 
Toronto. Active 
transportation and low-
carbon transit reduce GHG 
emissions and benefit health 
by reducing air pollution and 
increasing physical activity. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
9 
Increase existing bus 
and streetcar service 
levels to encourage 
shifts to low-carbon, 
sustainable 
transportation 
TTC, TSD, CP 
The TTC’s 5-Year Service Plan and 10-Year Outlook aim 
to move people more efficiently on transit using 
enhanced service levels and priority bus lanes to 
improve reliability, speed and capacity on some of the 
busiest transit routes in the city. 
Increased transit service will 
improve access to 
employment, healthcare and 
community services, 
encourage shifts away from 
single-occupancy vehicles 
and improve transit equity. 
  
  
  
  
10 
Update and accelerate 
implementation of city-
wide Transportation 
Demand Management 
Strategy 
TSD, EED, 
CP, EDC 
 Activities 2022-2025 include: 
i. The City will update, accelerate implementation, and 
measure the impact of  the city-wide Transportation 
Demand Management (TDM) Strategy. 
ii. Pilot targeted residential TDM engagement in several 
of Toronto's communities to support the uptake of 
sustainable transportation and low-carbon commuting 
options. 
iii. Lead community outreach and engagement 
campaigns to support the uptake of more sustainable 
modes of transportation/ commuting (including, but 
not limited to, promoting public uptake of active 
transportation, transit, carpooling and telework). 
iv. Work with Toronto-based employers and businesses 
to implement TDM and other sustainable 
transportation best practices as a part of COVID-19 
recovery and rebuild process. 
Transportation Demand 
Management eases traffic 
congestion and reduces 
transportation emissions of 
GHGs and air pollutants 
through transportation 
alternatives, ride sharing, 
teleworking and other 
approaches. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
110 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
v. Convene a Transportation Demand Management 
leaders table, which would include relevant City of 
Toronto divisions and agencies and would promote 
uptake of TDM best-practices. 
11 
Develop tools to 
address emissions of 
greenhouse gases and 
air pollutants on an 
area or project level 
TSD, CP, EED 
The City will develop a framework to address emission 
reductions of greenhouse gases and air pollutants on 
an area or project level, including guidance documents 
and technical modelling, and report back in 2023 with a 
framework to be implemented in 2024. 
Many cities successfully 
assess potential GHG and air 
pollutant emissions from an 
area as a whole, rather than 
from each source in 
isolation, using these tools. 
  
  
  
  
2030 target: 30 per cent of registered vehicles in Toronto are electric 
12 
  
  
  
Align the City’s Electric 
Vehicle (EV) Strategy to 
the net zero goals and 
implement the EV 
Strategy 
EED, TSD, 
TPA, TH, CP, 
FS, MLS, 
SDFA, CREM, 
EDC 
The City, along with its partners, will implement the 
City’s Electric Vehicle Strategy and align it to the Net 
Zero Strategy goals. Activities planned for 2022-2025 
include: 
i. Relevant Divisions and Agencies will report to City 
Council in 2023 with options for how the City of 
Toronto can support and encourage provision of the 
home and workplace EV charging infrastructure 
needed to accommodate growth in EV ownership to 5 
per cent of registered personal vehicles in 2025 and 30 
per cent  in 2030. 
Internal combustion engine 
(ICE) vehicles are a major 
source of GHG in Toronto. 
Quickly transitioning these 
vehicles to electric vehicles, 
and shifting our electricity 
supply to net zero, 
renewable sources, are 
critical to achieve a net zero 
Toronto. Switching from 
fossil fueled to electric 
vehicles also reduces air and 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
111 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
ii. Relevant Divisions and Agencies will report to City 
Council in 2023 with a strategy to meet the 2025 
targets in the EV Strategy for public EV charging 
infrastructure and ensure that sufficient public EV 
charging infrastructure will be in place to accommodate 
growth in EV ownership to 30 per cent of registered 
personal vehicles in 2030. 
noise pollution and 
decreases vehicle energy 
costs. 
A) Increase public EV 
charging infrastructure 
TSD, TPA, 
TH, CP, EED, 
FS, CREM 
The City will develop a strategy and plans to meet the 
2025 targets in the EV Strategy for public charging 
infrastructure (220 Level 3 DCFC ports and 3,000 Level 
2 ports are installed in public locations) and to ensure 
that sufficient public charging infrastructure will be in 
place to accommodate growth in EV ownership to 30 
per cent of registered personal vehicles by 2030. Next 
steps 2022-2025: 
i. Identify high priority public charging areas. 
ii. Explore potential partnerships to support 
development of public charging infrastructure. 
iii. Apply for funding (e.g. ZEVIP) and secure match 
funding. 
In addition to active 
transportation and transit, 
electric vehicles are a key 
part of reaching net zero 
GHG emissions in Toronto. 
Public EV charging 
infrastructure alleviates 
range anxiety and provides 
charging options to people 
who need charging on the go 
or don't have charging at 
home. It can also support 
cargo and logistics, 
operational fleets, vehicles 
for hire and car sharing. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
B) Increase EV charging 
at residential, 
commercial, 
institutional and 
industrial buildings 
CP, EED, 
SDFA, TH 
2022-2025 activities to increase EV charging include: 
i. Mandate EV ready requirements for all new 
developments to ensure that buildings in Toronto will 
have sufficient EV charging infrastructure to 
accommodate growth in EV ownership to 30 per cent of 
registered personal vehicles and 35 per cent of 
commercial vehicles by 2030 and 100 per cent of all 
vehicles by 2050. 
ii. Provide incentives for charging infrastructure in 
home, public, workplace and fleet settings, as feasible 
and as needed to improve equity and spur EV adoption. 
iii. Expand financing options for charging infrastructure 
installation on private property, as feasible and as 
needed to improve equity and spur EV adoption. 
iv. Explore the feasibility of Toronto Hydro offering 
rebates for Electric Vehicle charging in residential 
properties during off-peak hours. 
v. Work with Toronto Hydro and the provincial 
regulator to remove barriers to the installation of EV 
charging by changing the regulations related to new 
electrical connections or requests for additional 
capacity. 
vi. Develop policies, regulations and/or programs to 
support provision of EV charging infrastructure in 
existing homes and workplaces. 
Sufficient EV charging where 
people live, work and play is 
necessary for widespread 
adoption of EVs. Together 
with walking, cycling and 
transit, electrification of 
transportation is an 
important part of the 
pathway to a net zero 
Toronto. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
C) Review the Electric 
Vehicle Strategy 
EED, TSD, 
TPA, TH, CP, 
FS, MLS, 
SDFA, CREM, 
EDC 
The City will conduct a comprehensive review of the 
Electric Vehicle Strategy in 2024-2025. 
EV technology, adoption and 
infrastructure change 
rapidly. Reviewing the EV 
strategy will keep our shared 
approach current and 
relevant. 
  
  
  
  
13 
Determine options to 
incentivize EV adoption 
and disincentivize use 
of gas and diesel 
vehicles 
EED, TSD, 
TPA, CP 
The City will determine options to incentivize EV 
adoption and disincentivize use of gas and diesel 
vehicles. Incentives and disincentives may be financial 
and/or non-financial. Activities 2022-2025 include: 
i. Advocate to other levels of government to 
provide/expand purchase incentives for new EVs. 
Advocate to both levels of government to provide 
incentives for purchase of used EVs. Advocate for 
additional taxes/fees on new internal combustion 
engine vehicles and use money collected to fund 
rebates for low-cost EVs, additional EV infrastructure 
and/or transit/active infrastructure (particularly in low 
income areas). 
Next steps: 
- Form a working group to determine the priority of 
preferred actions by the provincial and federal 
governments. 
Incentives are needed to 
accelerate the shift from 
gasoline and diesel vehicles 
to electric vehicles, transit, 
walking and cycling and 
reduce GHG emissions. 
Relative to fossil fuelled 
vehicles, electric vehicles 
have a low lifetime cost due 
to reduced fuel/energy costs 
as well as reduced 
maintenance. Financial 
incentives help people 
overcome the initial higher 
purchase price for an EV. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
- Advocate for governments to pursue EV enabling 
activities or policies. 
ii. Explore providing purchase incentives, including 
potential funding sources and equity considerations 
and measures to mitigate the potential for increasing 
auto ownership rates. Incentives for EVs should be 
offset by disincentives for internal combustion engine 
vehicles. 
iii. Explore other incentives such as those related to 
parking. 
14 
  
  
Encourage the 
adoption of electric 
commercial and freight 
vehicles, including EVs 
and e-bikes for last-
mile deliveries 
TSD, CP, 
TPA, TH, 
EED, FS 
The City will explore opportunities and develop policies 
to encourage the use of EVs and e-bikes for commercial 
and freight transportation. 
Reducing emissions from 
freight transportation also 
improves health and equity. 
Vulnerable populations are 
more often located near 
major freight routes and 
disproportionately 
experience traffic-related air 
pollution health impacts. 
  
  
  
  
A) Encourage the use of 
e-bikes and EVs for 
last-mile deliveries 
TSD, CP 
Activities: 
i. In consultation with the freight industry, develop 
policies to encourage and facilitate use of e-bikes, 
E-bikes including e-cargo 
bikes, and electric vehicles, 
reduce neighbourhood GHG 
and air pollutant emissions 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
cargo e-bikes and electric vehicles for last-mile 
deliveries. 
ii. Explore opportunities to facilitate provision of 
charging infrastructure and parking for e-bikes, cargo 
e-bikes and electric vehicles used for last-mile 
deliveries. 
caused by the "last mile" of 
delivery. E-cargo bikes also 
provide a more affordable 
transportation option for 
small businesses and 
individuals. 
 
B) Encourage adoption 
of electric commercial 
and freight vehicles 
EED 
Activities: 
i. Explore opportunities to encourage and support 
adoption of electric vehicles for commercial and freight 
use, including light-duty, medium-duty, and heavy-duty 
vehicles. 
ii. Explore opportunities to encourage increased 
availability of electric light-duty, medium-duty and 
heavy-duty commercial and freight vehicles in the 
GTHA. 
Heavy commercial and 
freight vehicles are 
predominantly fueled by 
diesel, a significant source of 
GHG and air pollutant 
emissions in Toronto. Air 
pollution and health impacts 
from transportation are 
inequitably distributed, with 
higher levels near major 
roadways. Switching to 
electric vehicles reduces 
emissions and helps protect 
health. 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
2030 target: Identify pathways to more sustainable consumption in City of Toronto operations and in Toronto's economy 
15 
  
  
  
Continue to pursue 
policy and 
programmatic 
interventions that help 
the City reach its 
aspirational goals of 
zero waste and a 
circular economy, and 
which identify 
pathways to more 
sustainable 
consumption in both 
municipal operations 
and in all sectors of the 
economy 
SWMS, other 
City divisions 
The City will identify and implement new policies and 
operational changes across City divisions, and enter 
into strategic partnerships where possible, to reduce 
waste, maximize resources and support positive 
environmental outcomes through circular and 
sustainable consumption. 
Cities are well-positioned to 
play a critical role in 
achieving climate neutrality 
and moving to more 
sustainable consumption 
models. Accelerating 
Toronto's circular city 
transition will contribute to 
the City's climate action goals 
and will play a key role in 
building a resilient, inclusive, 
green, and prosperous 
future for residents and 
businesses. 
  
  
  
  
A) Develop a City-wide 
governance structure, 
strategy and policy 
framework to establish 
a path to make the City 
the first municipality in 
the Province of Ontario 
SWMS, other 
City divisions 
SWMS, with involvement and leadership from other 
City Divisions, will develop a Circular Economy Road 
Map for Toronto that will help guide the City in 
becoming the first municipality in the province with a 
circular economy. Once finalized, Toronto's Circular 
Economy Road Map will inform policy and program 
Circular economy strategies 
consider sustainable 
resource consumption and 
material efficiency for their 
potential impacts on climate 
change, environmental 
degradation, and social 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
with a circular 
economy and to align 
with the Provincial goal 
as part of the Waste 
Free Ontario Act 
changes to advance the City's aspirational circular 
economy goals. 
outcomes. Continued 
relationship building and 
partnerships will be 
important to accelerate the 
City of Toronto's progress 
toward its aspirational 
circular economy outcomes 
and climate action targets. 
B) Conduct a 
consumption based 
emissions inventory 
and identify targets 
that would 
meaningfully reduce 
consumption based 
emissions 
EED 
The City will: 
i. Conduct a consumption based emissions inventory. 
ii. Set short- and long-term community-wide 
consumption emission reduction targets. 
iii. Report back by Q2 2023. 
Understanding and reducing 
GHGs released during the 
manufacture and transport 
of articles and services we 
use helps address Toronto 
residents' true climate 
impact. 
  
  
  
  
C) Enable Torontonians 
to reduce waste and 
engage in sustainable 
consumption by 
implementing the 
Single Use and 
SWMS, other 
City divisions 
The City will: 
i. Implement a voluntary measures program that 
enables and encourages businesses to reduce waste in 
their operations. 
ii. Introduce mandatory measures to reduce and 
prevent the generation of single-use and takeaway 
items in Toronto. 
It is estimated that 
approximately 400 million 
single-use plastic bags, 85 
million foam takeaway 
containers and cups, and 39 
million single-use hot and 
cold drink cups are 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
Takeaway Items 
Reduction Strategy 
generated annually by single 
family households in 
Toronto. Through 
consultation, the City 
identified strong public 
support for the 
implementation of 
mandatory measures (e.g. 
bylaws) restricting single-use 
and takeaway items. 
2030 target: 70 per cent residential waste diversion from the City of Toronto’s Integrated Waste Management System 
16 
  
Continue 
implementation of the 
City’s Long Term Waste 
Management Strategy 
which sets a goal of 
diverting 70 per cent of 
waste managed from 
City customers away 
from landfill, by 
focusing on waste 
reduction, reuse and 
recycling activities that 
SWMS 
Reduction, reuse and recycling activities include a food 
waste reduction strategy, textile collection and reuse 
strategy, supporting other reduction and reuse 
programs, exploring new technologies and creating a 
Circular Economy and innovation unit within SWMS 
help Toronto reach its goal of becoming the first 
circular city in Ontario.   
  
Within the scope of the Long Term Waste Management 
Strategy, opportunities to explore waste reduction 
outside of the integrated waste management system 
are identified and actioned where within the scope of 
There are challenges with 
achieving this target 
including the transition of 
the City's Blue Bin Recycling 
program to extended 
producer responsibility (EPR). 
Currently, the direct impact 
of diversion on the reduction 
of greenhouse gas emissions 
is not known. 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
119 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
promote resource 
conservation and 
reduce environmental 
impact 
  
control of SWMS, for example, the Community Reduce 
and Reuse Programs and public communications for 
waste related information.   
Also, weight-based metrics 
such as diversion do not take 
into account the evolving 
nature of packaging and limit 
the amount of control SWMS 
has to make an impact on 
the measure. The Long Term 
Waste Management Strategy 
5-year review is upcoming, 
and may result in changes to 
performance measurement 
and implementation 
strategies.   
A) Continue outreach 
and engagement on 
waste reduction and 
diversion, with a focus 
on food and organic 
waste 
SWMS, EED 
The City will continue to enable food and organic waste 
reduction and diversion among City waste customers 
through implementation of strategic action roadmaps 
such as the Long Term Waste Management Strategy. 
Outreach and engagement 
are critical to helping 
residents have the 
knowledge, opportunities, 
and passion for reducing 
waste. Organic (food) waste 
in particular creates powerful 
GHG emissions when it 
reaches the landfill so is a 
key area for engagement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
Develop and implement strategies to improve greenspace infrastructure to build climate resilience  
17 
  
Increase canopy cover 
and biodiversity and 
enhance greenspaces 
PFR 
Over 2022-2025 the City will continue to increase tree 
canopy cover including prioritizing tree planting 
programs on both public and private lands to help 
achieve a more equitable distribution of canopy cover 
across the city. In collaboration with multiple City 
divisions, the implementation of the Strategic Forest 
Management Plan, Parkland Strategy, Ravine Strategy 
and Version 4 of the Toronto Green Standard will 
continue to contribute to canopy, biodiversity and 
greenspace goals. 
Toronto's urban forest is a 
vital city asset that 
contributes to quality of life 
and healthy communities. 
The city’s tree population 
helps to filter air pollution 
and save energy by helping 
to cool neighbourhoods and 
buildings in the summer. 
Trees also sequester carbon 
as they grow. Equitable 
access to greenspaces, 
including trees, parks and 
ravines, and their benefits is 
important to creating a 
healthy, livable city. 
  
  
  
  
A) Achieve equitable 
distribution of the 
urban forest, 
increasing tree canopy 
and naturalized 
PFR 
In collaboration with other City divisions, Parks, 
Forestry and Recreation will continue to protect 
existing trees and increase tree canopy cover where it 
is currently lacking, creating more equitable 
distribution of the valuable services and benefits the 
urban forest provides. 
A well-managed urban forest 
is vital to quality of life and 
supports climate resilience, 
disaster risk reduction, 
ecosystems conservation, 
food security, poverty 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
greenspace where it is 
most needed 
alleviation, and improved 
quality of life. Equitable 
distribution of the City's tree 
canopy brings with it a more 
equitable distribution of the 
services and benefits 
provided by trees and 
greenspace. 
Ensure equitable implementation and ongoing improvement of engagement and reporting 
18 
  
  
Support resident-led 
climate action and 
engagement 
EED 
Over 2022-2025, the City will continue to implement 
city-wide climate action engagement under the Live 
Green Toronto banner. Outreach will be focused on 
those most impacted by climate change and equity 
deserving groups to lead and implement local climate 
action. 
Engaging and enabling the 
community to lead on 
climate issues is central to 
achieving a net zero GHG 
Toronto. 
  
  
  
  
A) Support resident-led 
climate action 
engagement through 
Climate Action Grants 
EED 
Over 2022-2025, the City will scale up and design new 
grant programs including those directed to Indigenous 
communities and youth. 
Funded projects will increase 
awareness and engagement 
on climate action at the local 
level. They also strengthen 
the efforts and capacity of 
local community agencies, 
grassroots groups and 
resident leaders. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
B) Expand 
Neighbourhood 
Climate Action 
Champions Program 
EED 
Over 2022-2025, the City will continue to implement 
city-wide climate action engagement, specifically 
continue and scale-up the Neighbourhood Champions 
program through 2030. 
Neighbourhood Climate 
Action Champions inspire, 
motivate and encourage 
residents to undertake 
community-focused actions 
to support TransformTO and 
reduce emissions to net zero. 
  
  
  
  
19 
  
Work with Indigenous 
rights holders and 
urban Indigenous 
communities to share 
knowledge and 
learnings 
EED, IAO 
The City will develop a plan for meaningful, in-depth, 
respectful, and ongoing engagement with local 
Indigenous communities to provide feedback on City's 
Strategy implementation. 2022-2025 activities include a 
climate action grants program as well as: 
i. Ensure TransformTO policies, programs and services 
are developed with and for Indigenous communities to 
ensure a just economic transition. 
ii. Ensure opportunities for Indigenous representation 
in TransformTO engagement and advisory processes. 
iii. Explore ways to measure and communicate 
progress that speaks to broader questions such as "Are 
we good ancestors?" or “How are we honouring the 
land, water, and all our relations?” 
iv. Implement Reconciliation Action Plan. 
Meaningfully working with 
members of Toronto's 
Indigenous communities, 
and including an Indigenous 
worldview in the Net Zero 
Strategy, are important to 
our ongoing relationship 
with Indigenous 
communities on climate 
issues and the successful 
implementation of the 
Strategy. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
123 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
v. Connect with Indigenous Affairs Office and 
Placemaking Advisory Circle on future placemaking and 
place-keeping initiatives. 
A) Develop and deliver 
Indigenous Climate 
Action Grants program 
EED 
Over 2022-2025, EED will work with the Indigenous 
Affairs Office to design and deliver a new grant 
program dedicated specifically to local  Indigenous 
climate action. 
Supporting local level 
Indigenous climate action 
projects is essential, and 
current funding models need 
adaptation to ensure 
accessibility to Indigenous 
communities. 
  
  
  
  
20 
  
Develop and 
implement youth 
engagement strategy 
EED 
Over 2022-2025 the City will develop and implement a 
youth engagement strategy, launch an academic 
innovation hub, and continue to involve youth in 
developing and implementing the Net Zero Strategy. 
Youth involvement is critical 
to the design and 
implementation of the Net 
Zero Strategy. Meaningfully 
including youth voices is 
important from an equity 
perspective, and the Strategy 
also benefits from this 
group's innovative thinking. 
  
  
  
  
A) Design and launch a 
City-academic 
innovation hub to 
support youth-led 
EED 
Over 2022-2025, the City will design and establish an 
innovation hub where City staff, youth, students, 
faculty, and community will work together to design 
innovative local projects. 
Supporting youth climate 
action projects is essential to 
inspire current and future 
climate action. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
climate initiatives and 
innovative student pilot 
projects 
21 
Design and launch a 
climate advisory group 
for 2022 and beyond to 
ensure implementation 
of the Net Zero 
Strategy is equitable 
and reflects  the 
priorities and interests 
of the community 
EED 
The Net Zero Advisory Group will be updated and 
refreshed as the City moves from design of the Net 
Zero Strategy in 2021 to implementation over 2022-
2025. 
Receiving advice from 
diverse sources is critical to 
the design and 
implementation of a robust 
Net Zero Strategy that 
reflects the priorities of 
residents and stakeholders. 
  
  
  
  
22 
Develop equity 
indicators to be 
reported on as part of 
the TransformTO 
implementation status 
update 
EED 
Staff will be developing equity indicators where 
possible and reporting on them regularly. 
Ensuring equitable 
implementation is an 
important goal of Net Zero 
Strategy. Measuring and 
reporting on indicators is an 
effective way to stimulate 
and track progress. 
  
  
  
  
23 
Encourage the growth 
of green industry to 
provide the products 
EDC 
The City and partners will encourage the growth of the 
green industries to enable net zero. 2022-2025 
activities: 
Developing green industry 
can create economic benefits 
to the region and provide the 
materials and services 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
125 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
and services needed to 
enable a net zero city 
i. Work with Toronto's green industries to undertake 
market research of key products and services required 
to achieve the Net Zero Strategy targets and goals and 
to provide a report to Council by Q3 2024. 
ii. Develop green industry growth roadmaps for each 
green sector, including a workforce development plan 
(a low-carbon job strategy), in partnership with 
Toronto's green industries and report back to Executive 
Committee – 2023 through 2024. 
iii. Consult with the local green industries on the 
opportunities to develop green industries cluster 
management organizations and identify the preferred 
form of the organization or organizations and the 
necessary steps to achieve implementation – by 2023. 
(The proposed timelines for these actions are 
contingent upon additional funding). 
needed to enable a net zero 
city. An industry's growth is 
generally controlled by six 
key drivers: Advocacy; 
Collaboration Building; 
Market Development; 
Marketing; Policies and 
Regulations; and Workforce 
Development. 
24 
Leverage Live Green 
Toronto to develop and 
implement a city-wide 
climate action 
awareness campaign 
EED 
Over 2022-2025 the City will develop and implement a 
city-wide climate action awareness campaign. 
Communication is key to 
creating understanding, 
enthusiasm and participation 
in moving our city to net 
zero. 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
2030 target: Lead by Example – Corporate emissions are reduced by 65 per cent over 2008 base year 
25 
  
  
  
  
Develop and apply a 
Climate Lens in 
decision-making 
EED, CFO 
The City will continue to advance a climate lens 
systematically including climate priorities, opportunities 
and risks in decision making. Activities over 2022-2025 
are outlined below. 
Applying a climate lens to 
decision-making ensures that 
climate impacts, 
opportunities, risks and 
potential benefits and 
savings are systematically 
considered. 
  
  
  
  
A) Implement a Climate 
Lens Program 
EED, CFO 
A Climate Lens Program integrates climate 
considerations in all new operating programs and 
capital projects and builds staff competency to assess 
both climate change mitigation and adaptation 
impacts. The City will: 
- Apply climate lens to all new operating and capital 
projects by 2022.  
- Apply climate lens to all existing programs, services, 
and assets by 2024. 
A climate lens evaluates and 
considers the climate 
implications of all major City 
of Toronto decisions, guiding 
the City toward sound, long-
term decision-making and 
GHG reduction goals. 
  
  
  
  
B) Report on climate 
risks to assets 
EED, CFO, AS 
The CFO to report on all major climate risks associated 
with existing programs, services and assets, identified 
via the Climate Lens Program, to Council by 2024, and 
Council to direct the appropriate Divisions/Agencies to 
address risks in future capital planning. The CFO is to 
also provide ongoing annual updates on the City's 
Identifying and disclosing 
climate-related risks to 
assets enables the City to 
minimize risk, inform more 
efficient, long-term decision-
making and enhance 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
127 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
climate risks as part of its annual consolidated financial 
statements. 
accountability to meeting 
targets. 
2030 target: Lead by Example in Procurement – Greenhouse gas emissions from food the City of Toronto procures are reduced by 25 per cent 
C) Enhance Sustainable 
Procurement 
PMMD 
Align procurement policies with the following climate 
lens objectives: 
1. Integrate climate considerations into strategic 
decision-making 
2. Build staff climate competency and leadership 
3. Increase climate accountability 
4. Increase transparency through reporting 
5. Monitor climate performance 
This action targets reporting in Q2 2022 and 
implementation into 2023. 
  
Enhancing sustainable procurement will also include 
working toward reducing emissions from food by 25 
per cent by 2030 relative to a 2015 base year as per the 
City's Cool Food Pledge, and in alignment with the City's 
C40 Good Food Cities Declaration. Staff will report back 
on the status of corporate food-related emissions and 
recommended actions through Net Zero's status 
update on implementation in Q2 2025. 
The City's purchasing power 
is one way that the City can 
make environmentally 
sustainable and equitable 
investments for today and 
the future. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
128 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
D) Consider a carbon 
offset purchase policy 
and update the Carbon 
Credit Policy 
CMO 
Consider a carbon offset purchase policy and review 
the Carbon Credit Policy in a way that prioritizes 
achieving local emission reductions 
The use of carbon offsets can 
make or break an effective 
net zero strategy. Toronto's 
Net Zero Strategy will reduce 
local emissions before 
considering purchasing 
offset credits. An offset 
purchase policy will be 
developed with the spirit and 
intent of reaching net zero. 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
26 
Design and implement 
a Toronto Carbon 
Budget 
EED, CFO 
Design a Toronto Carbon Budget and associated key 
performance metrics, which aligns with the City's 
financial budgets, to manage corporate and community 
GHG emissions within an absolute limit. 
A carbon budget is the 
current best practice for 
cities that are serious about 
ensuring transparency and 
accountability in their climate 
action work. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
129 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
2030 targets: Lead by Example in Buildings 
● 
All City Agency, Corporation and Division-owned new developments are designed and constructed to applicable Toronto Green Standard Version 
4 standard achieving zero carbon emissions, beginning in 2022 
● 
Greenhouse gas emissions from City-owned buildings are reduced by 60 per cent from 2008 levels; by 2040, City-owned buildings reach net zero 
greenhouse gas emissions 
27 
  
  
Ensure net zero City-
owned buildings 
CREM, CP 
Transitioning City-owned buildings to be net zero 
buildings. 
Buildings are the largest 
source of GHG emissions in 
Toronto. The Net Zero 
Carbon Plan demonstrates 
the City leading by example 
to achieve net zero emissions 
in both new and existing City 
buildings. 
  
  
  
  
A) Constructing new 
City-owned buildings to 
net zero on a go 
forward basis 
CREM, CP 
Update construction processes and design standards 
to include a requirement to construct new City 
buildings to Toronto Green Standard Version 4 Tier 4, 
to identify a net zero target in the design/construction 
procurement process and to identify planned facility 
construction projects for compliance. 
Design and construction of 
net zero emissions buildings 
supports the City's 
systematic approach to 
achieving City Council's 
emission reduction targets. 
  
  
  
  
B) Pursuing a Net Zero 
Carbon Plan for 
existing City buildings 
CREM 
In July 2021, City Council adopted CREM's Net Zero 
Carbon Plan. This Plan provides a road map to achieve 
net zero emissions in City buildings first and foremost 
The City can most 
significantly reduce GHG 
emissions through fuel 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
through changes to facility utilities consumption. It 
offers seven initiatives to reach this goal, including, fuel 
switching and efficiency retrofits, lower-carbon new 
builds, strategic divestment, on-site renewables and 
storage, training and education, enhanced use of 
building performance data and carbon offsets and off-
site renewables. The Plan focuses on making the right 
investments into City buildings in order to meet the 
targets set by City Council. The Plan would be delivered 
by CREM in collaboration with other City Divisions and 
Agencies. Work is underway to integrate the Plan into 
the capital planning process, with the expectation that 
the Plan will be incorporated into the 2023 budget 
process. 
switching in its existing 
buildings. The move away 
from carbon-intensive 
equipment is a cost-
avoidance action that 
reduces both operating 
expenditures and emissions. 
The City may be able to 
achieve 50 per cent 
reduction in GHG emissions 
through the application of 
the Net Zero Carbon Plan for 
existing City buildings.   
2030 targets: Lead by Example in Transportation 
● 
50 per cent of the City-owned fleet is transitioned to zero-emissions vehicles 
● 
50 per cent of the TTC bus fleet is zero-emissions 
28 
  
  
Reduce emissions from 
City and Agency-owned 
vehicles 
FS, TTC 
Over 2022-2025 the City will continue to reduce GHG 
and air pollutant emissions from City-owned and 
operated vehicles, fuels and practices. 
Transportation is a 
significant source of GHG 
and air pollutant emissions 
in Toronto. The City of 
Toronto has a role to play in 
rapidly demonstrating 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
131 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
success in moving toward 
net zero transportation. 
A) Update and 
implement the 
Sustainable City of 
Toronto Fleets Plan to 
support the transition 
of 20 per cent of City 
fleet to zero-emission 
by 2025 and 50 per 
cent by 2030. Starting 
in 2022, for any light 
duty vehicle being 
purchased by the City, 
the City will select only 
the electric version of 
this vehicle where 
operationally feasible. 
FS 
Activities include: 
i. Accelerate transition of City Fleets to sustainable, 
climate resilient, carbon-neutral operations by 2040. 
ii. Expand City's corporate EV charging infrastructure 
(1,200 charge ports by 2025, and 2,400 charge ports by 
2030). 
iii. Identify needs and opportunities for providing EV 
charging for City staff and members of the public.  
iv. Develop associated policies, operational procedures, 
training and instructional material, and promotional 
material. 
As the largest municipal fleet 
in Canada, City of Toronto 
fleets play an important 
leadership role in advancing 
technologies that aim to 
significantly reduce 
environmental impacts, and 
improve vehicle efficiency, 
reliability, and safety, while 
reducing life-cycle costs and 
associated impacts. 
  
  
  
  
B) Implement the TTC 
Green Bus Program to 
achieve target of 20 per 
cent of TTC buses zero 
emission by 2025-2026 
TTC 
Implement TTC Green Bus Program. 
Zero-emission buses replace 
diesel buses, reducing the 
demand for diesel fuel, 
reducing emissions of GHGs 
and air pollution. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
Transportation is the largest 
source of air pollution in 
Toronto. 
29 
  
  
Encourage City staff to 
adopt sustainable and 
climate positive 
practices at work and 
in their commutes 
EED 
Over 2022-2025 the City will encourage staff to adopt 
sustainable, low-carbon practices by implementing the 
Live Green @ Work Strategy alongside the Smart 
Commute Toronto program. 
The City of Toronto is the 
largest employer in Toronto, 
and as such can introduce 
many people to sustainable 
practices and enable staff to 
lead while at work and at 
home. 
  
  
  
  
A) Implement Live 
Green @ Work Strategy 
EED 
The Live Green @ Work Strategy: Staff engagement and 
organizational citizenship behaviour directed toward 
the environment encourage City employees to engage 
with climate action. This activity is important to the City 
as a green employer. 
 
 
 
 
City of Toronto employees 
provide service to the public 
and businesses across the 
city. City employees can act 
as climate leaders at work 
and at home. 
  
  
  
  
B) Encourage City staff 
to take transit, carpool, 
cycle or walk rather 
than drive alone to 
EED 
Update the online tool that assists staff in finding 
sustainable commute options (transit routes, cycling 
routes, carpool matching). 
Low- or zero-carbon 
commuting choices reduce 
emissions of GHGs and air 
pollutants and also help 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
133 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
work, through the 
Smart Commute 
program 
Conduct a commuter survey for City staff to identify 
current commuting practices and opportunities for 
assisting staff in reducing the carbon footprint of their 
commutes. 
 
 
 
alleviate congestion. Walking 
and cycling improve health 
through physical activity. 
2030 targets: Lead by Example in Managing Waste 
● 
Generate and utilize 1.5 Million Gigajoules of energy from biogas 
● 
Approximately 107,700 tonnes CO2e per year are reduced through Organics Processing with Renewable Energy and Landfill Gas Utilization 
● 
All City-owned facilities have achieved zero waste 
30 
  
  
  
Lead by example in 
managing waste and 
producing renewable 
energy from biogas at 
City facilities 
SWMS, TW, 
CREM 
The City will build on existing programs to lead by 
example in managing waste and producing renewable 
energy from biogas at City facilities, as described 
below. 
Renewable energy reduces 
the demand for other forms 
of energy. It is important for 
the City to lead by example 
in managing waste. 
  
  
  
  
A) Begin development 
of a third organics 
processing facility with 
renewable energy, 
targeting completion 
by 2028 
SWMS 
SWMS will build a third organics processing facility 
(OPF) with renewable energy. Diversion of organics 
from landfill and processing through the facility will 
contribute to a reduction in GHG emissions. In addition, 
Landfill gas control and utilization from Green Lane and 
Keele Valley landfills will contribute to this target. 
Decarbonization of City 
operations is a critical way 
that the City can lead by 
example in the work toward 
net zero. The City operates 
one of the most progressive 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
and sustainable waste 
management systems in 
North America. Ongoing 
innovation in our operations 
can serve as an industry 
standard for waste 
management. 
B) Produce renewable 
natural gas from the 
Disco Road Organics 
Processing Facility, 
Dufferin Organics 
Processing Facility and 
the third organics 
processing facility 
(target completion by 
2028) and landfill gas 
control and utilization 
systems at Green Lane 
and Keele Valley 
Landfills (target 
completion by 2026). 
  
SWMS 
SWMS will continue to capture biogas for beneficial 
use. 
 
The City has implemented renewable natural gas (RNG) 
processing at the Dufferin organics processing facility, 
and is currently working at the Disco Road organics 
processing facility to produce RNG from Green Bin 
organic waste, which will be injected into the natural 
gas grid for City use. The RNG produced will be blended 
with the natural gas that the City buys to create a low-
carbon fuel blend that will be used across the 
organization to power vehicles and heat City-owned 
facilities, allowing for a reduction in GHG emissions 
Citywide. 
  
The City has also identified potential biogas and landfill 
gas upgrading opportunities at other City waste 
Renewable energy produced 
from biogas reduces the 
demand for other forms of 
energy. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
135 
 
 
Actions for 
implementation 
2022-2025 
Divisions & 
Agencies 
Lead is listed 
first. Legend* 
below. 
Description of action 
Why it matters 
Benefits 
Healt
h 
Equit
y 
Resili
ence 
Prosp
erity 
facilities including the Green Lane and Keele Valley 
landfills and a future third organics processing facility. 
C) Produce renewable 
natural gas from 
wastewater 
TW 
Toronto Water will continue to make better use of 
biogas through production of renewable energy at its 
facilities. 
Renewable energy produced 
from biogas reduces the 
demand for other forms of 
energy. 
  
  
  
  
D) Divert waste from 
landfill in City-owned 
facilities 
CREM, 
SWMS 
Waste generated at City-owned facilities is diverted 
from landfill, reducing associated GHG emissions. 
It is important for the City to 
set a community-wide 
example in increasing 
diversion of waste from 
landfill. Landfill emissions 
(particularly organics) 
generate methane, which 
has a higher global warming 
potential than carbon 
dioxide. Recycled materials 
also save resources and 
reduce energy and water 
use. 
  
  
  
  
 
*Divisions & Agencies: 
AS – Accounting Services 
BST – Bike Share Toronto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
136 
 
CFO – Chief Financial Officer & Treasurer's Office 
CMO – City Manager's Office 
CP – City Planning 
CREM – Corporate Real Estate Management 
EED – Environment & Energy 
EDC – Economic Development & Culture 
FP – Financial Planning 
FS – Fleet Services Division 
IAO – Indigenous Affairs Office 
MLS – Municipal Licensing & Standards 
PFR – Parks, Forestry & Recreation 
PMMD – Purchasing & Materials Management 
SDFA – Social Development, Finance & Administration 
SWMS – Solid Waste Management Services 
TH – Toronto Hydro 
TSD – Transportation Services 
TTC – Toronto Transit Commission 
TW – Toronto Water 
