TECHNICAL REPORT 
December 2021
TransformTO 
Net Zero Strategy
Contents
Disclaimer
5
Acknowledgements
5
Acronyms
7
Glossary
8
How To Use This Document
10
Structure of the Net Zero Technical Report
10
Notes and Limitations
11
1. Executive Summary
13
	
	
Findings
20
PART 1: SETTING THE CONTEXT
26
2. The Imperative for Action
27
2.1 The Climate Emergency
27
2.2 Urgency for Immediate GHG Reductions to Limit Global Warming to 1.5°C
30
2.3 Toronto’s Climate Emergency Declaration
32
2.4 The Risk of Complacency
33
2.5 Cities as the Vanguard
34
2.6 Net Zero Gains Momentum
36
2.7 Managing the Financial Risk
37
2.8 A Climate-Safe City
38
2.9 A Green Recovery
40
3. Toronto’s Future: Net Zero
41
3.1 Defining Net Zero 
41
3.2 The Net Zero Vision Goals 
44
3.3 A Just Transition 
45
3.4 Guiding Principles
45
3.5 Indigenous Knowledge and Worldview for Net Zero
46
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
2 
PART 2: THE PATHWAY TO NET ZERO
48
4. Getting to Net Zero
49
4.1 Exploring the Future
49
4.2 A City as a System
49
4.3 Pathways to Net Zero
52
4.4 A Growing City
56
4.5 A Dirtier Electricity Grid
58
4.6 The Current Situation: A Snapshot
58
4.7 Low-Carbon Actions
61
4.8 The Pathway to Zero
67
4.9 The Challenge of the Provincial Grid
74
4.10 Early Action Needed for the 2030 Target
78
5. Green Buildings
79
5.1 Overview
79
5.2 Targets
85
5.3 Key Actions
86
6. Energy
87
6.1 Overview
87
6.2 Targets
93
6.3 Key Actions
94
7. Sustainable Mobility and Transportation
97
7.1 Overview
98
7.2 Targets
98
7.3 Key Actions 
99
8. Sustainable Consumption and Zero Waste
105
8.1 Overview
105
8.2 Targets
106
8.3 Key Actions
106
PART 3: THE OPPORTUNITIES
108
9. Financial Analysis
109
9.1 Financial Concepts
109
9.2 The Big Picture
111
9.3 A Mix of Abatement Costs and Savings
114
3 
December 2021
10. Co-Benefits
126
10.1 Advancing Health
128
10.2 Economic Prosperity
135
10.3 Biodiversity
140
10.4 Equity
141
10.5 Safety & Resilience
145
11. Implementation
147
11.1 The Question of Feasibility 
147
11.2 A Carbon Budget for the City of Toronto
149
11.3 Integrating Climate Resilience
151
11.4 The Cost of Inaction
159
11.5 Sensitivity 
161
12. Conclusion: Time is of the Essence
163
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
4 
Disclaimer
Reasonable skill, care, and diligence has been exercised to assess the information acquired during 
the preparation of this analysis, but no guarantees or warranties are made regarding the accuracy 
or completeness of this information. This document, the information it contains, the information 
and basis on which it relies, and the associated factors are subject to changes that are beyond the 
control of the author. The information provided by others is believed to be accurate, but has not 
been verified.
This analysis includes strategic-level estimates of capital investments and related revenues, energy 
savings, and avoided costs of carbon. The intent of this analysis is to help inform the City and its 
residents about the potential costs and savings that result from actions to decarbonize the city. 
It should not be relied upon for other purposes without verification. The authors do not accept 
responsibility for the use of this analysis for any purpose other than that stated above, and do 
not accept responsibility to any third party for the use, in whole or in part, of the contents of this 
document. 
This analysis applies to the city of Toronto and cannot be applied to other jurisdictions without 
further analysis. Any use by the City of Toronto, its sub-consultants, or any third party, or any 
reliance on or decisions based on this document, are the responsibility of the user or third party.
Acknowledgements
LAND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The City of Toronto acknowledges that we are on the traditional territory of many nations including 
the Mississaugas of the Credit, the Anishnabeg, the Chippewa, the Haudenosaunee, and the 
Wendat peoples and is now home to many diverse First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples. The City 
also acknowledges that Toronto is covered by Treaty 13 signed with the Mississaugas of the Credit, 
and the Williams Treaties signed with multiple Mississaugas and Chippewa bands.
5 
December 2021
GENERAL ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The City of Toronto (The City) would like to acknowledge the community members and staff from 
across the city that contributed to the development of the Net Zero Strategy. The City is grateful 
to all leaders and community members who have contributed their time to help advance the city’s 
efforts to address climate change. 
PROJECT TEAM
Cecilia Fernandez
Sarah Gingrich
Lindsay McCallum
Sophie Plottel
Andrew Plunkett
Linda Swanston
CONSULTING TEAM
Erik Frenette
Yuill Herbert
Julia Meyer-MacLeod
Bastian Straatman
Ralph Torrie
Marcus Williams
Sara Wilson
IMAGE CREDITS
Document design by Sustainability Solutions Group
Photos for cover pages were used under a Creative Commons license, from Unsplash.com
Cover page - Dawson Lovell
Executive Summary (p.13) - Jeffrey Eisen
Part 1 Setting the Context (p.26) - Victoria Rokita
Part 2 The Pathway to Net Zero (p.48) - Elise Petrovich
Part 3 The Opportunities (p.108) - Debora Fontana
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
6 
Acronyms
ACRONYM
DEFINITION
BAP
Business as Planned
CDR
Carbon dioxide removal
CICC
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices
CO2e
Carbon dioxide equivalents
CDD
Cooling degree days
DE
District energy
DNS
Do Nothing Scenario
EUI
Energy use intensity
EV
Electric vehicle
GDP
Gross domestic product
GHG
Greenhouse gas 
GPC
Global Protocol for Community-Scale GHG Emissions Inventories
GWP
Global warming potential 
HDD
Heating Degree Days
HVAC
Heating, ventilation, and cooling [equipment]
ICE
Internal combustion engine
IEA
International Energy Agency
IESO
Independent Electricity System Operator
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
MACC
Marginal abatement cost curve
Mt
Megatonne (1,000,000 tonnes)
MURB
Multi-unit residential building
NPV
Net present value
NTCF
Near-term climate forcers
NZS
Net Zero Strategy
NZ40
Net Zero by 2040
NZ50
Net Zero by 2050
REC
Renewable energy certificate
SCC
Social cost of carbon
7 
December 2021
ACRONYM
DEFINITION
TEDI
Thermal energy demand intensity
TGS
Toronto Green Standard
TORR
City of Toronto’s Office of Recovery and Rebuild
UN
United Nations
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
VKT
Vehicle Kilometres Travelled
Glossary
TERM
DEFINITION
Baseline
the starting point to measure changes in the amount of emissions produced over 
time
Carbon-free 
grid
an electricity grid where the power that is generated and distributed comes from 
only renewable sources
Carbon 
sequestration
the process of capturing and storing carbon from the atmosphere through natural 
or anthropogenic methods
Consumption-
based 
emissions
emissions from the volume of goods consumed by a population
CO2e (Carbon 
dioxide 
equivalents)
a single unit of measurement that allows for the impact of releasing different 
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere to be evaluated on a common basis. 
Carbon dioxide equivalents are calculated using Global Warming Potential 
factors that represent the impact of each greenhouse gas type (such as methane 
(CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O)) relative to that of carbon dioxide
Decarbonize
to eliminate the release of GHGs into the atmosphere from a process or system.  
This includes swapping out any fossil fuel sources for renewable energy
GHGs 
(Greenhouse 
gases)
compound gases that trap heat and emit longwave radiation in the atmosphere, 
thus causing the greenhouse effect
Heat pump
a highly efficient heating and cooling system that transfers thermal energy from 
the ground or air to warm a building during winter and cool it during the summer
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
8 
TERM
DEFINITION
Near zero 
buildings
buildings that are designed to be highly energy efficient but still use a small 
amount of non-renewable sources. A building constructed to Toronto Green 
Standard Version 4 Tier 3 is considered a near-zero emissions building
Net zero
a balance between the amount of greenhouse gases released and the amount 
taken out of the atmosphere
Net zero 
building
a building that is highly energy-efficient and produces on-site, or procures, 
carbon-free and or renewable energy in an amount sufficient to offset the annual 
carbon emissions associated with its operations, or simply eliminates carbon 
emissions altogether
Renewable 
energy
a naturally occurring energy source that is not finite or exhaustible. It includes 
sources such as sunlight, wind, and geothermal heat
ZEV (Zero 
Emissions 
Vehicle)
a vehicle that does not produce tailpipe emissions or other pollutants from the 
onboard source of power
9 
December 2021
How To Use This 
Document
STRUCTURE OF THE NET ZERO 
TECHNICAL REPORT
This Net Zero Technical Report presents a pathway to reach net zero greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions for the city of Toronto by 2050 or sooner. It presents solutions that can stimulate the city’s 
economy, including investments in infrastructure, building retrofits, electric mobility, and energy 
technologies that will reduce community-wide GHG emissions and create new jobs during the 
COVID-19 pandemic recovery. This Technical Report provides opportunities that will benefit the 
residents of Toronto as well as the City’s operations.
Underpinning the Net Zero Technical Modelling are the Net Zero by 2040 (NZ40) and Net Zero by 
2050 (NZ50) pathways. The pathways describe detailed transitions to net zero emissions by 2040 
and 2050, respectively. NZ50 is designed to meet the City’s 2050 emissions target, while NZ40 
pushes this target 10 years sooner to show what additional effort would be required to achieve this. 
The two pathways, alongside two ‘reference’ scenarios, were analyzed in a finance, energy, and 
emissions model to understand their impacts. The report’s findings are structured in three sections. 
PART 1: SETTING THE CONTEXT describes the state of climate action as it relates to 
Toronto, including the basis for the technical analysis. 
PART 2: THE PATHWAY describes the actions that were modelled and the resulting GHG 
emissions reductions. 
PART 3: THE OPPORTUNITIES evaluates co-benefits of the pathways, including 
considerations for economic development, health and well-being. 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
10 
NOTES AND LIMITATIONS
The modelling described in this paper uses CityInSight, an integrated, multi-fuel, multi-sector, 
spatially disaggregated energy systems, emissions, and finance model designed specifically for 
projects of this nature. CityInSight uses bottom-up accounting for energy supply and demand, 
including renewable resources, conventional fuels, energy consuming technology stocks (vehicles, 
appliances, dwellings, buildings, industry), and all intermediate energy flows. CityInSight allows 
for the evaluation of strategies for a specific area of geography, for a specific vintage of buildings, 
for a specific type of dwelling, for specific types of equipment within buildings, or for a specific 
technology for transportation or energy provision. CityInSight traces the flows and transformations 
of energy from sources through energy carriers (e.g. gasoline, electricity, hydrogen) to end uses 
(e.g. personal vehicle use, space heating) to energy costs and GHG emissions. An energy balance 
is achieved by accounting for efficiencies, conservation rates, and trade and losses at each stage 
in the journey from source to end use. CityInSight can be used to analyze energy and emissions 
associated with customized policies over time and includes modelled financial information which 
can inform financial decision-making related to energy and emissions actions. In this project, 
CityInSight was used to:
•  Evaluate pathways to decarbonize the City over a 30-year time horizon;
•  Explore diverse scenarios that represent a range of possible futures, including system 
transformations in energy using and emissions generating sectors;
•  Evaluate the feasibility of specific actions (physical transformations) to deliver GHG 
emissions reductions; 
•  Represent the spatial evolution of the City as a system that uses energy and generates 
emissions; and
•  Assess the societal costs and benefits of the pathways and actions. 
The analysis undertaken in this study does not: 
•  Evaluate the physical impacts of climate change and adaptive measures that will be 
required, although opportunities for implementing GHG mitigation actions that also 
increase resilience are noted;
•  Specify policies or incentives required to implement the actions. In many cases policies 
can be inferred from the actions; 
•  Use algorithms to optimize pathways for lowest cost, an approach which is more 
appropriate for a shorter time horizon with greater certainty over future costs of 
equipment, energy and capital and may rule out more expensive actions that result in 
compounding benefits. Analysts have designed the scenarios to optimize for social and 
economic benefits, prioritizing efficiency over new renewable generation; 
•  Assess individual actions from the perspective of a specific stakeholder, such as an 
11 
December 2021
investor or household, which would involve applying varying discount rates, according to 
a mapping of which entity makes which investment;
•  Evaluate the implications of decarbonization pathways on hourly demand (all electricity 
consumption is reported on an annual basis). This is an important consideration for 
electricity system planning, but involves a more complex analysis;
•  Assess consumption-based emissions. The analysis in this report applies a geographic-
based emissions approach, accounting primarily for emissions resulting from within 
Toronto’s geographic boundary; or 
•  Evaluate the economy-wide impacts on employment, prices or GDP of the scenarios. The 
analysis assesses the financial impacts on the specific sectors impacted by the analysis 
such as buildings, transportation, energy and others. 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
12 
1. Executive Summary
In May 2021, the International Energy Agency (IEA) released a milestone report titled Net Zero 
by 2050.1 Globally the IEA found that the path to net zero is narrow, requiring the massive 
deployment of all available clean energy technologies, including renewables, EVs, and energy 
efficiency building retrofits between now and 2030. IEA’s key findings echo those of the analysis 
in this report; the net zero pathways can bring jobs and growth, leaps in clean energy innovation 
are required, there must be a rapid shift away from fossil fuels, electricity becomes the core of the 
energy system, and new low-emissions industries flourish. Similar to the IEA, this Net Zero Technical 
Report describes a pathway to completely transform the energy system. 
For over three decades, the City of Toronto has demonstrated leadership in climate action. This 
Technical Report informs the development of the Net Zero Strategy, which is an extension of these 
efforts and a critical step in the City’s response to the climate emergency that was declared by 
the City Council in 2019. The Technical Report identifies technically feasible, evidence-based, and 
community-informed pathways for the entire community to achieve net zero greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions by 2040 and 2050, respectively. The Technical Report presents detailed pathways for the 
community’s decarbonization and recommends a set of near-term implementation milestones.
In July 2017, Toronto’s response to the Paris Agreement, TransformTO, was approved, with a target 
of reducing GHG emissions by 80% below 1990 levels by 2050. In 2018, the United Nations (UN) 
scientific body on climate change (the IPCC) released a report addressing the Paris Agreement’s 
objective of limiting global warming to 1.5°C. Titled Global Warming of 1.5°C, this report found 
that global GHG emissions need to decline by 45% below 2010 levels by 2030 and reach net zero 
by 2050. 
Given the urgency for immediate and deep cuts in GHG emissions in order to achieve the 2030 
target, Mayor John Tory and the Toronto City Council voted unanimously in October 2019 to 
declare a climate emergency “for the purpose of naming, framing, and deepening our commitment 
to protecting our economy, our ecosystems, and our community from climate change.”2 The 
Climate Emergency Declaration endorsed a new target to achieve net zero GHG emissions before 
2050 in an effort to align with limiting global average temperature rise to 1.5°C. 
In July 2021, Council passed a motion endorsing the Fossil Fuel Non-Proliferation Treaty, joining 
Vancouver, Barcelona and Los Angeles. The Treaty has three pillars: 
•  Non-proliferation: Preventing the proliferation of coal, oil, and gas by ending all new 
exploration and production;
•  Fair phase-out: Phasing-out existing stockpiles and production of fossil fuels in line 
with the 1.5ºC global climate goal; and
•  Just transition: Fast-tracking real solutions and a just transition for every worker, 
community, and country
1	
IEA (2021). Net Zero by 2050. Retrieved from: https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050 
2	
Declaring a Climate Emergency and Accelerating Toronto’ Climate Action Plan – by Mayor John Tory, seconded 
by Councillor Mike Layton. http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2019.MM10.3 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
14 
Toronto’s history of engagement on climate change, including increasingly concrete policies such as 
the updated Toronto Green Standard and the Net Zero Existing Building Strategy, set the stage for 
the Net Zero Pathways presented in this Technical Report, as did important statements such as the 
Climate Emergency Declaration and the endorsement of the Fossil Fuel Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
The objective of the Technical Report is to inform the development of the Net Zero Strategy, 
in order to update Toronto’s climate action plan, TransformTO, with the targets set out in the 
Climate Emergency Declaration, including the feasibility of actions to achieve net zero by 2040. 
Two scenarios were evaluated to analyze the most efficient and effective series of actions required 
to meet net zero by 2040 and 2050, respectively. The scenarios would also show the City what is 
needed to achieve its target of reducing GHG emissions by 65% (below 1990 levels) by 2030. The 
Technical Report includes an analysis of the technical, financial, and social/behavioural feasibility of 
the proposed climate actions.3 as well as climate mitigation and resilience recommendations. 
The modelling and analysis followed several steps. First, the drivers that contribute to Toronto’s 
current GHG emissions were identified. Secondly, four scenarios were defined as follows: 
1)	 A “Do Nothing” Scenario (which asks “what will happen if no additional policies or 
actions are put in place?”) was updated from the previous modelling to align with current 
policy contexts, including energy supply and new assumptions;
2)	 A Business as Planned (BAP) Scenario that evaluates the impacts of currently 
planned policies and actions;
3)	 A Net Zero by 2050 (NZ50) Pathway; and,
4)	 A Net Zero by 2040 (NZ40) Pathway.
Thirdly, actions were evaluated in regards to their contribution to environmental, social, and 
economic outcomes. 
Figure 1 and Figure 2 show a summary of the results, including GHG reductions, for all of the 
scenarios.
3	
Social and behavioural considerations were informed by literature reviews and discussions with City staff and 
stakeholders. In addition, transportation modelling incorporates consumer choices. 
15 
December 2021
L
i
n
e
 
gr
ap
h 
of
 the
 GHG
 emi
ssio
ns f
or t
hhe 
four
 pat
hway
s mo
dell
ed.
Figure 1. Pathways modelled.
MtCO
2e),
 and
 20
30 
and 
2050
 emi
ssi
ons
 ta
rge
ts 
(
8
.8
 M
tC
O2
e 
and 
0 Mt
CO2e
, re
spec
tively) and results fo
r the 
four s
cenarios. 
Onl
y the Net Ze
ro by 2040 scenario achieves the target in 2030, and falls shy of it at 1.8 MtCO2e in 2050.
Figure 2. Summary results, GHG emissions (Mt CO2e).
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
16 
Decarbonizing the city will require new investments that will provide multiple benefits, such as 
improved well-being and quality of life, as well as numerous economic opportunities. Both net 
zero pathways require rapidly scaling up many programs and policies that the City already has 
underway, as well as an unprecedented mobilization of new action by the City, businesses, financial 
institutions, other levels of government, and residents. Many of the proposed actions not only 
achieve GHG emissions reductions, they synergistically support other City objectives, such as 
improved economic development and health and equity outcomes.
The investments that the City makes today will have long-term implications, which can either lock in 
patterns of increasing or reducing GHG emissions. Therefore, in addition to considering the impacts 
of the proposed actions on GHG emissions reductions, the financial impacts of the scenarios were 
also analyzed. 
This report provides a comprehensive overview of:
•  the modelling process and updated scenarios from the previous analysis, including 
underlying assumptions, inputs, and results;
•  details on the technical, financial, and behavioural/social feasibility of actions to achieve 
net zero by 2040 versus net zero by 2050; 
•  updates to existing long-term and short-term sectoral goals, targets, and actions; and,
•  immediate actions that are required within the next one to two years to achieve the City’s 
interim targets for 2030.
17 
December 2021
Figure showing timeline of emissi
ons re
ductions efforts from 1990, as wel
l as targets from 2021 t
o 2050.
Figure showing timeline of emi
ssions reductions effo
rts from
 1990, as well as 
targets from 2021 to 2
050.
Figure 3. Toronto’s Roadmap to Net 
Zero (modelled targets).
Findings
ONLY THE NZ40 PATHWAY ACHIEVES THE CITY’S 2030 
TARGET
Of the scenarios modelled, only the NZ40 pathway meets or exceeds the City’s 2030 target of 8.8 
MtCO2e, as it drops to 7 MtCO2e by 2030. The expedited actions required to achieve net zero 
by 2040 result in a steeper emissions reduction trajectory than the NZ50 scenario. On average, 
emissions need to decline by nearly 1 MtCO2e per year between 2021 and 2030 in the 
NZ40 Scenario.
FOSSIL FUELS NEED TO BE PHASED OUT
In the NZ40 scenario, natural gas and gasoline need to be phased out by 2040. To achieve this 
target, 100% of new sales of long lasting equipment, including vehicles and furnaces, need to be 
electric by 2030, as it takes at least ten years for the stock to turn over. In order to hit the 2030 
target, the City needs to send clear signals to the market and the community starting now. 
TAKING EARLY ACTION NOW SAVES MONEY IN THE LONG 
RUN 
The net present value of NZ40 
is $135 million less than that of 
NZ50—a difference of 1% (Figure 4). 
In other words, achieving net 
zero by 2040 ends up costing less 
than achieving net zero by 2050. 
Reducing emissions more quickly 
also means that the city can collect 
the financial benefits of the avoided 
carbon costs and avoided energy 
costs sooner. 
The early investments required for 
NZ40 totals just 5% of Toronto’s 
annual GDP for the first ten years, 
before declining to zero and 
generating a net annual savings by 
2040.
Net p
resen
t va
lue 
of t
he N
Z40 
scen
ario
 ($57.26 billion
) and NZ 5
0 scenario ($57.40 billion).
Figure 4. Net present value of the NZ40 and NZ50 
scenarios.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
20 
THERE ARE MANY BENEFITS THAT GENERATE 
FINANCIAL RETURNS THAT HAVE NOT BEEN INCLUDED 
IN THE ANALYSIS OR QUANTIFIED
The NZ pathways generate a broad range of societal benefits with direct and indirect financial 
benefits that go beyond the financial analysis described in this report. For example, improved air 
quality as a result of electrifying transportation could deliver health benefits which this analysis 
valued at nearly $1 billion per year. Improved indoor air quality in dwellings and office space as 
a result of building retrofits will reduce health care costs and absenteeism at work. Reduced air 
pollution from the combustion of fossil fuels (on roads, in houses, and in electricity generation) 
will reduce health impacts, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Increased 
walking and cycling will reduce heart disease. The NZ40 scenario adds 1.5 million person-years of 
employment over the Do Nothing Scenario between 2020 and 2050—an average of 50,000 per 
year. In other words, there are opportunities to advance multiple city and society objectives while 
simultaneously achieving deep GHG emissions reductions, creating a win-win scenario.
THE IMPACT ON EQUITY IS LIKELY POSITIVE, BUT THE 
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS MATTER
The net zero pathways reduce transportation costs for households and increase accessibility 
to destinations as transit is expanded, which is particularly beneficial for households for which 
transportation costs are a larger share of their disposable income. Energy costs are also reduced for 
households that pay for energy, either directly or as renters; however these benefits may not occur 
in the first or second decade, depending on how the retrofits are financed. Because the scenarios 
involve investments, the mechanisms for financing the scenarios could generate disproportionate 
returns for investors, which could exacerbate inequality. It is therefore important to consider the 
impacts on various groups when designing net zero pathway policies.
21 
December 2021
TO ACHIEVE THE NET ZERO TARGET, THE PROVINCIAL 
GRID NEEDS TO DECARBONIZE
In the NZ40 and NZ50 scenarios, the remaining emissions in 2040 are from grid electricity 
(Figure 5). These emissions would be eliminated if the province were to decarbonize the grid. The 
City has alternative options to address these emissions, however they involve high costs and some 
have no returns. Options are to:
•  Create a new 100% renewable grid that may have an interconnection with the 
provincial grid;
•  Purchase Renewable Energy Certificates to cover the electricity demand, similar to a 
Community Choice Aggregation (CCA) arrangement;4 and/or
•  Purchase carbon offsets to address the remaining emissions. 
EXPANDED ACCESS TO TRANSIT IS AN EQUITY 
AND EFFICIENCY MEASURE AT THE HEART 
OF THE NET ZERO SCENARIOS
A major investment in the NZ scenarios is in transit system enhancements, totalling around $1.5 
billion per year. Free transit is introduced which also forfeits revenues of $2 billion per year on top 
of these investments by 2040. These costs are partially offset by road fees, which generate just 
over $1 billion per year. Providing free, widespread transit is a key equity measure, ensuring access 
to jobs and services for all in Toronto. Implemented correctly, the measure stands to increase 
4	
CCA would require regulatory approval. For more information, see: https://www.epa.gov/greenpower/
community-choice-aggregation 
Figure 5. The imperative of eliminating GHG emissions from electricity.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
22 
the efficiency of travel in the city through reduced congestion and car use, amongst many other 
potential benefits and paybacks.5
Figure 6. The financial impacts of transit actions.
EFFICIENCY FIRST
Rapidly reducing emissions in buildings and transportation is critical to achieving the net zero 
pathways. The pathways emphasize measures which achieve efficiency first, followed by fuel 
switching to electricity for transportation and heating. Efficiency measures in buildings (e.g., thermal 
retrofits, electrification, smaller buildings) and transportation (e.g., avoiding trips by working at 
home, shifting to active modes and transit, reducing trip length through land-use planning) reduce 
the requirement for new renewable electricity generation and generate cost savings that can be 
used to finance the actions. 
A WHOLE-CITY APPROACH TO CLIMATE ACTION
The next generation of climate action planning focuses on transformation of the built environment 
in a systematic approach, as opposed to a long list of actions. In particular, this means embedding 
consideration of climate into every policy and expenditure in alignment with the selected net zero 
pathway, a whole-city approach. This approach requires a cultural and organizational transformation 
so that the City itself is a climate mitigation mechanism, applying tools such as climate lens and an 
annual carbon budget. 
5	
Štraub, D.; Jaroš, V. Free fare policy as a tool for sustainable development of public transport services.Human 
Geography Journal of Studies and Research in Human Geography 2019,13, 45–59.
23 
December 2021
THE IMPACT OF COVID 
Energy consumption and GHG emissions declined as the world slowed down. In Ontario, 
electricity demand declined by 14% in 2020 over 2019,6 and Canadian civil aviation activities 
dropped by 72%.7 As the world slowed down in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, there were 
improvements in air quality, and a reduction in environmental noise.8 On the flip side, there was an 
increase in waste generation. Reductions in activity globally resulted in a 4% drop in global energy 
consumption in 2020 and a reduction of 5.8% in global emissions. This was the largest annual 
decline since World War II, and equivalent to removing all of the European Union’s emissions from 
the global total.9 However, GHG emissions have since bounced back and are projected to increase 
as economic recovery efforts gain momentum.10,11 Reductions of 7.6% per year for the next decade 
are required to prevent warming of more than 1.5 ºC, the target of the Paris climate agreement.12 
It is uncertain which—and to what extent—the trends that have emerged from COVID-19 will 
prove durable. These trends could include expanded online shopping, education and government 
services, greater social isolation, greater inequalities, out migration from cities, increased work 
from home, decreased transit use, increased regional manufacturing and agriculture, increased 
demand for larger homes, and increased emphasis on public spaces and active transportation 
infrastructure.13 
Assessments of the global response to COVID-19 have provided insights that can help shape 
the response to climate change,14 emphasizing the need for urgent action and the cost of delay, 
consideration of equity, and the need to get residents on board. 
6	
Abu-Rayash, A., & Dincer, I. (2020). Analysis of the electricity demand trends amidst the COVID-19 coronavirus 
pandemic. Energy Research & Social Science, 68, 101682.
7	
Abu-Rayash, A., & Dincer, I. (2020). Analysis of mobility trends during the COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic: 
Exploring the impacts on global aviation and travel in selected cities. Energy Research & Social Science, 68, 
101693.
8	
Zambrano-Monserrate, M. A., Ruano, M. A., & Sanchez-Alcalde, L. (2020). Indirect effects of COVID-19 on the 
environment. Science of the Total Environment, 728, 138813
9	
IEA (2021). Global energy review: CO2 emissions in 2020. Retrieved from: https://www.iea.org/articles/global-
energy-review-co2-emissions-in-2020 
10	 IEA (2021). After a steep drop in early 2020, global carbon dioxide emissions have rebounded strongly. 
Retrieved from: ​https://www.iea.org/news/after-steep-drop-in-early-2020-global-carbon-dioxide-emissions-have-
rebounded-strongly 
11	 Tollefson, J. (2021). COVID curbed carbon emissions in 2020—but not by much. Nature.
12	 United Nations Environment Programme (2019). Emissions Gap Report 2019. Retrieved from: https://www.unep.
org/resources/emissions-gap-report-2019 
13	 For example, see: Zhang, J., Hayashi, Y., & Frank, L. D. (2021). COVID-19 and transport: Findings from a world-
wide expert survey. Transport Policy, 103, 68-85.
14	 Klenert, D., Funke, F., Mattauch, L., & O’Callaghan, B. (2020). Five lessons from COVID-19 for advancing climate 
change mitigation. Environmental and Resource Economics, 76(4), 751-778.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
24 
Figure 7.  15 Illustrative diagram of social and economic impacts of the COVID-19 and climate 
crises in the presence and absence of preventative measures, with different timescales. In the 
case of COVID-19 and climate change, there is a social cost of failing to take preventative 
measures. Without prevention, the negative impact of COVID-19 is immediate, while the 
negative impact of climate change grows more slowly. Economic impacts follow a similar pattern. 
In the case of climate change, inaction can result in unimaginably high economic costs in the 
long term, while early action may entail a cost due to the economic transition but will prevent the 
large social costs of extreme events, water shortages, conflicts, etc. Uncertainties are highlighted 
as shaded areas around the curves.
15	 Manzanedo, R. D., & Manning, P. (2020). COVID-19: Lessons for the climate change emergency. Science of the 
Total Environment, 742.
Illustrative di
agram 
comparin
g the 
soci
al and economic
 impacts of COVID-19 
and climate crises
.
25 
December 2021
Part 1: Setting the 
Context
2. The Imperative 
for Action
2.1 THE CLIMATE EMERGENCY
Climate change is the greatest long-term global challenge that human society is facing. It is 
particularly complex because it occurs over a long time scale, has variable impacts globally and 
spatially, and requires rapid and radical changes to our energy, society, and economic systems. 
Human-induced climate change poses risks to health, economic growth, public safety, infrastructure, 
livelihoods, and the world’s biodiversity and ecosystems. As local and global greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions increase, the Earth continues to warm at an unprecedented rate. 
In December 2015, the Paris Agreement was adopted at the COP21 by 197 countries. This legally 
binding international treaty on climate change set a goal to limit global warming to well below a 
2°C, and preferably to a 1.5°C increase, above pre-industrial levels.16 However, current global GHG 
emissions are not on a trajectory to meet these goals (Figure 8). 
16	 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (2015) The Paris Agreement. Retrieved from: 
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement   
27 
December 2021
Like
liho
od o
f limiting w
arming to 1.5°C 
given a glob
al target
 of achieving 
net zero by 2040.
Figure 8. Likelihood of limiting warming to 1.5°C given a global target of achieving net zero
by 2040.17 
Despite a temporary decline in global emissions in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the world 
is heading for 3°C or more of warming.18 This degree of warming threatens human health, economic 
well-being, and the survival of the natural systems that humans and eight million other plant and 
animal species—already increasingly at risk—depend upon.19 
Given the short timeline to achieve the required transformative changes to our economic, 
transportation, infrastructure, financial, and energy systems, COVID-19 recovery plans provide a 
unique opportunity to invest in and accelerate toward limiting global warming to 1.5°C.
DEFINING NET ZERO CARBON EMISSIONS
Net zero carbon emissions are reached when GHG emissions released into the atmosphere are 
reduced nearly to zero, with any remaining emissions being removed from the atmosphere. 
Figure 9 illustrates a scheme for the City of Toronto’s net zero emissions target. 
17	  IPCC. (2018). Summary for Policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts 
of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, 
in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, 
and efforts to eradicate poverty. https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/spm/
18	 United Nations Climate Change (2021). New UNEP Synthesis Provides Blueprint to Urgently Solve Planetary 
Emergencies and Secure Humanity’s Future. https://unfccc.int/news/new-unep-synthesis-provides-blueprint-to-
urgently-solve-planetary-emergencies-and-secure-humanity-s 
19	 Ibid.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
28 
Schematic of ne
t zero emissions.
Figure 9. Schematic of net zero emissions.20 
20 Graphic modified from a version created for the City of Markham’s Net Zero Energy Plan. 
29 
December 2021
2.2 URGENCY FOR IMMEDIATE 
GHG REDUCTIONS TO LIMIT 
GLOBAL WARMING TO 1.5°C
Climate change is a wicked problem: the full impacts of GHGs are not felt until decades after they 
are emitted, the impacts are globally dispersed, and the global economy is dependent on fossil-
fuels. These factors are difficult to counter; election cycles, the built environment, and the financial 
system tend to reinforce systems and patterns that run counter to reducing emissions. 
A CHALLENGE AND AN OPPORTUNITY
Climate change is a symptom of a medley of other problems, ranging from the combustion 
of fossil fuels, to poverty and inequality, and from cultural norms to the structure of the 
economic system. This complexity, combined with disparate and often conflicting worldviews 
and perspectives, means that it is challenging to respond in a way that is proportionate to the 
magnitude of the problem. 
Strategies or activities that reflect this urgency will need to address core assumptions of 
culture, behaviour, economic norms, and governance. Dialogue between people with multiple 
perspectives, including Indigenous peoples, can reimagine foundational assumptions and give 
rise to unanticipated opportunities or solutions.21 Governance structures and adaptation strategies 
have to be nimble in order to adjust to constantly changing circumstances and support risk-taking. 
These characteristics are antithetical to most government institutions, which are premised on risk 
avoidance, and predictable and controlled outcomes. 
21	 For a more detailed discussion on transformative change, see: Termeer, C., Dewulf, A., & Breeman, G. (2013). 
Governance of wicked climate adaptation problems. In J. Knieling & W. Leal Filho (Eds.), Climate change 
governance (pp. 27–39). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
29831-8_3
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
30 
THE TRAGEDY OF THE HORIZON
“Climate change is the Tragedy of the Horizon,” according to Mark Carney, former Head of the 
Bank of Canada and former Governor of the Bank of England. “The catastrophic impacts of climate 
change will be felt beyond the traditional horizons — beyond the business cycle, the political 
cycle, and the horizon of financial institutions like central banks. Climate risks are a direct function 
of cumulative emissions, so earlier action will significantly decrease the cost of future adjustments. 
As such, it is in society’s best interest to restrict climate change to avoid global warming above 
1.5°C.”22 
In 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported that limiting global 
average warming to 1.5°C, rather than 2°C or greater, will temper the increasingly severe impacts 
and risks to human and natural systems.23 Globally the difference could result in “11 million fewer 
people exposed to extreme heat, 61 million fewer people exposed to drought, and 10 million fewer 
people exposed to the impacts of sea level rise.”24 For example, under 1.5°C of warming, almost 
14% of the world’s population would be exposed to severe heat waves at least once in five years; 
whereas under 2°C warming, 37% of the world’s population will be exposed to severe heat waves at 
least once in five years. 
According to the IPCC report Global Warming of 1.5°C, all available 1.5°C mitigation pathways 
from 2020 onwards require that global GHG emissions peak before 2030 and that emissions be 
reduced below 2010 levels by 2030.25 As of 2017, the remaining global carbon budget for 1.5°C 
was 420 GtCO2e. This global carbon budget will be reached within the next 6-8 years.26 The current 
trajectory of emissions as a result of pledges made under the Paris Agreement is expected to 
surpass 1.5°C, unless greater action is taken now.27 
22 Carney, M. (2015). Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon – climate change and financial stability.
bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2015/breaking-the-tragedy-of-the-horizon-climate-change-and-
financial-stability.pdf?la=en&hash=7C67E785651862457D99511147C7424FF5EA0C1A  
23	 IPCC. (2018). Summary for Policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts 
of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, 
in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, 
and efforts to eradicate poverty. https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/spm/
24	 Science Based Targets Initiative. (2019). 1.5ºC vs. 2ºC—a world of difference. Retrieved from: https://
sciencebasedtargets.org/blog/1-5-c-vs-2-c-a-world-of-difference 
25	 Ibid.
26	 Annual emissions are approximately 42 GtCO2e per year. The calculation is therefore: (420-42*3)/42=7. The 
Mercator Research Institute’s Climate Clock indicates that 6.5 years are remaining. See: https://www.mcc-berlin.
net/en/research/co2-budget.html
27	 Rogelj, J.D. et al. (2018). “Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5°C in the Context of Sustainable 
Development.” In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 
1.5°C  above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of 
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to 
eradicate poverty. Masson-Delmotte, V. et al. (eds.). Retrieved from: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/
sites/2/2019/05/SR15_Chapter2_Low_Res.pdf 
31 
December 2021
2.3 TORONTO’S CLIMATE 
EMERGENCY DECLARATION
Limiting global warming depends on significant reductions this decade. If global emissions reach 
net zero in 30 years, there is a one-in-two chance of limiting warming to 1.5°C; whereas, if net zero 
is achieved in 20 years, the probability increases to a two-in-three chance.28 
The imperative for immediate action to reach such deep reductions on a short timeline has led 
many jurisdictions to recognize that climate change needs an emergency response. Human-induced 
climate change poses risks to public health and safety, economic growth, infrastructure systems, 
water and food supplies, financial systems, and the natural world. The impacts of the changing 
climate, such as increases in temperature extremes, severe weather events, ocean warming, rising 
sea levels, thinning glaciers, and thawing permafrost, have been observed in Canada and abroad. 
Past and projected warming for Canada, on average, is about double the magnitude of projected 
global warming.29 According to the United Nations, small-scale, climate-related disasters now 
happen globally at the rate of one per week.30
In June 2019, Canada became the fourth nation to declare a climate emergency, following in the 
footsteps of Wales, Scotland, and the United Kingdom, as well as numerous cities around the world. 
Similarly, in October 2019, Mayor John Tory and the Toronto City Council voted unanimously to 
declare a climate emergency “for the purpose of naming, framing, and deepening our commitment 
to protecting our economy, our ecosystems, and our community from climate change.”31 The 
Climate Emergency Declaration endorsed a target to achieve net zero GHG emissions in line with 
maintaining a global average temperature rise below 1.5°C. The declaration included a request 
to report back on the feasibility of actions that could achieve net zero by 2040 and 2050. This 
Technical Report informs the development of the Net Zero Strategy, which is a critical step in the 
City’s response to the climate emergency that was declared by the City Council.
28	 Bazaz, A. et al. (2018). Summary for Urban Policy Makers. What the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 
1.5ºC means for Cities. C40. http://doi.org/10.24943/SCPM.2018 
29	 For a review of the impacts of climate change in Canada, see: Canada, & Environment and Climate Change 
Canada. (2019). Canada’s changing climate report. http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2019/eccc/
En4-368-2019-eng.pdf   
30	 Harvey, F. (July 7, 2019). One climate crisis disaster happening every week, UN warns. The Guardian. https://
www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/jul/07/one-climate-crisis-disaster-happening-every-week-un-warns 
31	 Declaring a Climate Emergency and Accelerating Toronto’ Climate Action Plan – by Mayor John Tory, seconded 
by Councillor Mike Layton. Retrieved from: http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2019.
MM10.3 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
32 
WHAT IS A CLIMATE EMERGENCY?
In January 2020, 11,000 scientists signed a report titled World Scientists Warning of a Climate 
Emergency.32 The scientists indicated that climate change is more severe than anticipated, 
threatening natural ecosystems and the fate of humanity. As of March 2021, 1,904 jurisdictions 
in 34 countries, including 15 national governments and the EU Parliament, had declared climate 
emergencies.33 An emergency requires immediate action; it is a moment when one phones 911 to 
request urgent help. By declaring a climate emergency, governments at all levels are signalling that 
the situation is dire and urgent. 
2.4 THE RISK OF COMPLACENCY
Delay increases the disruption to the economy and infrastructure of an inevitable transition. Each 
year new investments are made in carbon-intensive infrastructure and technologies locking in 
an expectation of long-term returns. Undoing these investments is costly. Delay also results in 
increased damages from extreme events. A recent estimate of the economic damage that the 
global economy could experience from climate change was estimated for a subset of impacts on 
agriculture, heat stress, human health, sea-level rise, tourism, and energy demand. The estimate 
found that a 2°C to 2.6°C temperature-rise scenario results in a 10% loss in GDP by mid-century 
compared to a scenario wherein the Paris Agreement and net zero emissions targets are achieved.34
32	 Ripple, W., Wolf, C., Newsome, T., Barnard, P., Moomaw, W., & Grandcolas, P. (2019). World scientists' warning 
of a climate emergency. BioScience.
33	 Climate Emergency Declaration. Climate emergency declarations in 1,904 jurisdictions and local governments 
cover 826 million citizens. March 14, 2021. Retrieved from: https://climateemergencydeclaration.org/climate-
emergency-declarations-cover-15-million-citizens/ 
34	 Swiss Re. (2021). The economics of climate change: no action not an option. Retrieved from: https://
www.google.com/url?q=https://www.swissre.com/institute/research/topics-and-risk-dialogues/
climate-and-natural-catastrophe-risk/expertise-publication-economics-of-climate-change.
html&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1619810463289000&usg=AOvVaw0h_rJ6xOqFMFzg22b4-E95 
33 
December 2021
Figure 10. Percent impact on GDP of climate change for different temperature rises relative to a 
no climate change world.35 
2.5 CITIES AS THE VANGUARD
Emission pathways that limit global warming to 1.5°C require significant changes in four systems: 
energy, land-use and ecosystems, urban areas and infrastructure, and industry. What does limiting 
temperature rise to 1.5°C look like for cities? Urban areas are home to more than 50% of the world’s 
population, as well as most built assets and economic activity. These densely populated urban areas 
are steadily growing. By 2050, cities are expected to comprise two-thirds of the global population.36 
The manner in which land-use, urban expansion, construction, buildings, and infrastructure are 
designed and built will be key determinants for reaching net zero and adapting to climate change. 
35	 Ibid.
36	 Bazaz, A. et al. (2018). Summary for Urban Policy Makers. What the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 
1.5 means for Cities. C40. http://doi.org/10.24943/SCPM.2018
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
34 
According to the IPCC, global GHG emissions from buildings will need to be 80–90% lower, energy 
use for transportation will need to be reduced by about 30%, and renewables will need to supply 
70–85% of electricity.37 In addition, improvement of green urban infrastructure, the use of nature-
based solutions, and effective land-use planning regulations and policies will be required. 
Cities will be key implementers of climate action strategies. Toronto is part of C40, a global network 
of megacities committed to addressing climate change that responded to the Paris Agreement 
by providing city-specific pathways for action for C40 cities to meet their COP21 commitments. 
Deadline 2020 identified C40 cities’ share of the remaining global carbon budgets to 2100, for 
1.5°C and 2°C temperature rise scenarios. Target emission trajectories were established for 84 
member cities, including Toronto. C40 used a contraction and convergence approach to allocate 
the global carbon budget to cities, identifying targets of 3.2 tCO2e per capita by 2030 and 0 tCO2e 
by 2050.
WHAT IS A FAIR SHARE?
There is a limited budget of remaining emissions if we are to limit warming to 1.5°C. What is 
Toronto’s fair share of the remaining budget? The countries of the world have spent decades 
seeking an agreement on what level of emissions reductions is expected from each country, 
primarily in the forum of the United Nations Framework Convention of Climate Change (UNFCCC). 
Two key principles influence what is the fair share of the remaining envelope of emissions: 
1.	 Responsibility is determined on the basis of both historic and current emissions, as well as the 
capability to act. In other words, wealthy countries that have emitted GHG emissions over their 
development trajectory have greater responsibility than countries which have only recently 
started to produce GHG emissions. In addition, countries that have access to more resources 
need to do more than those countries without resources. 
2.	 The right to sustainable development implies that all countries have the right to lift their 
peoples out of poverty and provide residents with sustainable living standards, meaning that 
countries with greater levels of poverty have the right to generate more emissions per capita 
than richer countries. 
37	 Masson-Delmotte, V., et al. (2018). Global warming of 1.5ºC. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global 
warming of, 1(5).Retrieved from: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2019/05/SR15_Chapter4_Low_
Res.pdf 
35 
December 2021
As a wealthy city, Toronto needs to reduce emissions more quickly than cities with fewer resources 
and fewer historical emissions. In practice, this means that if the world is targeting net zero by 2050, 
as indicated by the IPCC’s Global Warming of 1.5ºC report, Toronto’s responsibility is to achieve this 
target prior to 2050.38 
2.6 NET ZERO GAINS 
MOMENTUM
In December 2020, the federal government released A Healthy Environment and a Healthy 
Economy, a new economic plan to strengthen Canada’s climate action, and to create and restore 
jobs as part of the government’s COVID-19 pandemic economic stimulus. The plan includes 
investments that increase residential and commercial energy efficiency; provide incentives and 
infrastructure for electric mobility, transit, clean technology, and clean electricity; support a national 
active transportation strategy; and restore forests, wetlands, peatlands, and agricultural lands to 
boost carbon sequestration and climate resiliency.
In addition, the Canadian Net-Zero Emissions Accountability Act received Royal Assent on June 29, 
2021.39 The Act legislates Canada’s target of net zero GHG emissions by 2050. It also establishes 
a legally binding process to set five-year national emissions-reduction targets, science-based 
emissions reduction plans, and accountability and reporting requirements for 2030, 2035, 2040, and 
2045. The Act incorporates a new interim target of 40% to 45% emissions reductions below 2005 
levels by 2030.40
The number of net zero pledges by organizations and jurisdictions roughly doubled in less than a 
year. By 2019, about 11 regions, 100 cities, and roughly 500 businesses had established targets. 
As of September 2020, 823 cities, 101 regions, and 1,541 companies had committed to net zero 
targets. These governments and companies have pledged to fully decarbonize their emissions 
footprints and have adopted specific net zero targets or signed onto initiatives with net zero targets 
for 2020, 2030, 2040, or 2050.41 
38	 For a detailed review of effort sharing and its implications for GHG targets, see: Holz, Christian, Eric Kemp-
Benedict, Tom Athanasiou and Sivan Kartha (2019) “The Climate Equity Reference Calculator” in Journal of 
Open Source Software, 4 (35), 1273. DOI:10.21105/joss.01273
39 Government of Canada (2021). Government of Canada legislates climate accountability with first net-zero 
emissions law. Retrieved from: https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/news/2021/06/
government-of-canada-legislates-climate-accountability-with-first-net-zero-emissions-law.html 
40	 Prime Minister Trudeau announces increased climate ambition. April 22, 2021. Retrieved from: https://pm.gc.
ca/en/news/news-releases/2021/04/22/prime-minister-trudeau-announces-increased-climate-ambition 
41	 Data-Driven EnviroLab & NewClimate Institute. (2020). Accelerating Net Zero: Exploring cities, regions, and 
companies’ pledges to decarbonise. Retrieved from: http://datadrivenlab.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/
Accelerating_Net_Zero_Report_Sept2020.pdf 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
36 
The finance sector, particularly relevant for Toronto, has launched initiatives to support the goal of 
net zero GHGs by 2050. For example, in December 2020, the Net Zero Asset Managers Initiative 
committed to support net zero by 2050 or sooner, in line with global efforts to limit warming 
to 1.5°C. This initiative consists of a leading group of global asset managers representing over 
$9 trillion of assets under management.42 Their commitment includes prioritizing real economy 
emissions reductions for companies and sectors in which they invest, working with asset owner 
clients on decarbonization goals, and reviewing interim targets at least every five years to ratchet up 
the proportion of assets until 100% of assets are net zero.
AVOIDING DELAY: THE RISK OF THE “NET” IN THE NET ZERO TARGET
In an influential article, three climate scientists describe how net zero targets were developed 
because climate models could no longer identify safe pathways with GHG reductions alone; 
the only viable pathways also require removal of emissions from the atmosphere.43 They argue 
that these pathways are more theoretical than real as large scale carbon dioxide removal (CDR) 
technologies do not yet exist. As a result, a net zero pathway can mislead, conveying opportunities 
for reductions where they may not exist. For this reason, the scenarios analyzed in TransformTO 
focus solely on efficiency gains and emissions reductions, highlighting any remaining emissions as 
a gap that may need to be addressed using CDR or other strategies as they emerge. 
2.7 MANAGING 
THE FINANCIAL RISK
The City of Toronto is Canada’s financial hub and the second largest financial centre in North 
America, which creates an imperative for the City to evaluate the impact of climate-related financial 
risks on the City’s viability as a corporation and as a community. Assessments of the financial risk of 
climate change have, until recently, focused primarily on physical and economic impacts. A second 
category of impacts—the transition risk—refers to the impacts of a low-carbon transition on financial 
risk, such as the impact of new public policies in response to the climate emergency on investments 
and expenditures by households, businesses, and governments. Governments and regulators 
are increasingly requiring public companies to report on how they are managing these risks in a 
42	 Net Zero Asset Managers Initiative (2021).Net Zero Asset Managers Initiative. https://www.
netzeroassetmanagers.org/ 
43	 Dyke, J., Watson, R., and Knorr, W. (2021). Climate scientists: concept of net zero is a dangerous trap. Retrieved 
from: https://theconversation.com/climate-scientists-concept-of-net-zero-is-a-dangerous-trap-157368 
37 
December 2021
framework called the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD).44 The City has 
taken steps in this direction, including transparent reporting on climate in Corporate Financial 
Reporting and the release of an Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Report.45 In the TCFD 
framework, scenario planning is a foundational tool for disclosing risks and opportunities of climate 
change. The modelling described in this approach uses scenario analysis to explore a variety of 
future outcomes for Toronto, directly aligning with the TCFD disclosure requirements.
2.8 A CLIMATE-SAFE CITY
Climate resilience is often an indirect or co-benefit of mitigation actions. Figure 11 illustrates 
how climate hazards impact infrastructure and cultural and ecological systems and how there are 
feedback loops between these systems. In this analysis, efficiency measures reduce the stress on 
grid electricity demand and therefore the risk of blackouts during extreme weather conditions, 
relative to a less efficient system. Health benefits from reduced air pollution are an important co-
benefit of climate mitigation, which reduces the sensitivity of individuals to climate impacts such as 
extreme heat. Extreme heat is also mitigated by more efficient dwellings. 
44	 TCFD (2017). Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. Retrieved from: 
https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2020/10/FINAL-2017-TCFD-Report-11052018.pdf 
45 City of Toronto (2021). City of Toronto releases first-ever Environmental, Social and Governance Report. 
Retrieved from: https://www.toronto.ca/news/city-of-toronto-releases-first-ever-environmental-social-and-
governance-report/ 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
38 
Schematic o
n the rel
ationsh
ips betw
een mi
tigation action
s and increas
ed resilie
nce.
Figure 11. Schematic on the relationships between mitigation actions and increased resilience.46
46 SSG (2019). Benefits of actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in Toronto: Climate Resilience. Retrieved 
from: https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/971c-Benefits-of-Actions-to-Reduce-Greenhouse-
Gas-Emissions-in-Toronto-Climate-Resilience.pdf 
39 
December 2021
2.9 A GREEN RECOVERY
The COVID-19 pandemic has radically transformed the world’s societies, economies, culture, and 
city services, resulting in disruptions to work, education, and home life.47 COVID-19 has impacted 
most aspects of life, including the activities that drive energy use and GHG emissions. Global 
energy demand dropped by nearly 4% in 2020 due to changes in transportation use, shutdown of 
businesses, and work-from-home policies. As a result, global energy-related GHG emissions fell 
by 5.8% —the equivalent of removing all of the European Union’s emissions from the global total. 
It was the largest annual percentage decline since World War II.48 However, this was a temporary 
decline. Global GHG emissions are already on the rise again and concentrations in the atmosphere 
continue to climb as global temperatures increase.49
As Canada initiates efforts to recover from the impact of the coronavirus, investments that stimulate 
the economy can simultaneously address the climate crisis. Climate change is our greatest long-
term threat, but it also provides immense economic opportunities. Studies demonstrate the benefits 
of climate action, including new employment opportunities, greater productivity, and cleaner air. 
For example, the New Climate Economy estimates that low-carbon urban actions are an economic 
opportunity worth $17 trillion by 2050.
The City of Toronto’s Office of Recovery and Rebuild (TORR) prepared a report titled COVID-19: 
Impacts and Opportunities. The analysis highlighted the need to reduce the health and 
socioeconomic inequalities across the city; that existing plans and strategies can be utilized and 
in some cases accelerated for recovery and rebuild purposes; and that decision-makers need to 
consider the social and financial impacts of COVID-19 on Toronto businesses and residents.50 The 
report includes relevant sections on infrastructure and mobility, and climate change and resilience. 
47	 World Health Organisation (2020). World health statistics 2020: monitoring health for the SDGs, sustainable 
development goals. Retrieved from: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/332070/9789240005105-
eng.pdf 
48	 IEA (2021). Global Energy Review: CO2 Emissions in 2020. Retrieved from: https://www.iea.org/articles/global-
energy-review-co2-emissions-in-2020 
49	 World Meteorological Organisation (2020). The Global Climate in 2015-2019. Retrieved from: https://library.
wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=10251
50 Mowat, D. and Rafi, S. (2020). COVID-19 Impacts and Opportunities. City of Toronto. September 15, 
2020. Retrieved from: https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/9133-torr-covid19-impacts-
opportunities-2020.pdf 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
40 
TORONTO’S RECOVERY
“Toronto should continue to address climate change and improve resilience through its recovery 
and long-term rebuild efforts to ensure the momentum and ground gained through past strategies 
are not lost. The City’s existing efforts under the TransformTO Climate Action Strategy and the 
Resilience Strategy are generating ideas and partnerships that can help accelerate recovery 
and align rebuild with the City’s strategic goals.” – City of Toronto’s COVID-19 Impacts and 
Opportunities
3. Toronto's Future: 
Net Zero
3.1 DEFINING NET ZERO 
Net zero emissions is achieved when decarbonization of the economy reduces GHG emissions 
to as close to zero as possible, and any remaining human-driven emissions are balanced out by 
an equivalent amount of carbon removals. Carbon removals or sequestration can be achieved by 
restoring natural lands and soils, or through direct air capture and storage technology. 
For the City of Toronto, net zero will be achieved by decarbonizing rapidly and thereby reducing 
GHG emissions from how people move around, how residents operate buildings, how goods are 
produced and manufactured,51 and how people consume and dispose of waste. 
Table 1 presents a checklist that provides an overview of the scope of Toronto’s net zero strategy 
evaluated in this analysis.52 
51	 While consumption-based emissions are not addressed in this analysis, the City of Toronto is seeking to 
influence these emissions through additional projects.
52 Rogelj, J., Geden, O., Cowie, A., & Reisinger, A. (2021). Net-zero emissions targets are vague: three ways to fix.
41 
December 2021
Table 1. What does a net zero target mean for Toronto? 
QUESTIONS
RESPONSE BASED ON THIS ANALYSIS
Scope
What global temperature goal does 
this plan contribute to (to stabilize 
global temperature, or see it peak 
and decline)?
 1.5°C
What is the target date for net 
zero?
2040, 2050
Which GHGs are considered?
CO2, CH4, NO2 
How are GHGs calculated (GWP100 
or another metric)?
GWP100
What is the extent of the emissions 
(over which territories, time frames 
or activities)?
City of Toronto’s geographic boundary, 
with some exceptions 
What are the relative contributions 
of reductions, removals, and 
offsets?
To be determined 
How will risks be managed around 
removals and offsets?
To be determined
Fairness / Equity
What principles are being applied?
The City of Toronto is aiming to align with the 
Science-Based Climate Targets: A Guide for Cities.
Would the global climate goal be 
achieved if everyone did this?
Yes
What are the consequences for 
others if these principles are 
applied universally?
Cities with the highest levels of poverty would be 
allowed to increase their emissions to raise their 
populations out of poverty, while cities with lower levels 
of poverty would reduce their emissions.
How will your target affect others’ 
capacity to achieve net zero, and 
their pursuit of other Sustainable 
Development Goals?
By minimizing the demand for scarce low-carbon 
resources such as RNG and hydrogen, the pathway 
creates opportunities for other sectors and jurisdictions 
that are less flexible to use these resources. The 
pathway will also help reduce costs for low-carbon 
strategies which will have regional and international 
implications.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
42 
QUESTIONS
RESPONSE BASED ON THIS ANALYSIS
Roadmap
What milestones and policies will 
support achievement?
This report details milestones against which to measure 
progress but does not identify specific policies.
What monitoring and review 
system will be used to assess 
progress and revise the target?
An annual climate lens and carbon budget is proposed. 
Will net zero be maintained, or is it 
a step towards net negative?
This analysis provides a pathway to net zero which 
creates the possibility for going net negative. However, 
net negative strategies have not yet been evaluated. 
Limitations/Opportunities for Additional Investigation
Impacts on peak electricity demand
The impacts on peak demand and the required 
electricity capacity to support peak demand were 
outside of the scope of this analysis. Marginal emissions 
factors for electricity that result from using natural gas 
for peaks were also not assessed in the analysis.  
Consideration of embodied carbon
The impact of the production of equipment and 
materials for the City of Toronto was not evaluated. 
The choice of materials can have a significant impact 
on the GHG profile of building retrofits, for example. 
Or the benefit of a walking trip is much greater when 
the embodied carbon in infrastructure and vehicles is 
considered.  
43 
December 2021
3.2 THE NET ZERO VISION 
GOALS 
Net 
zero
 goals
 and trajec
tory. Note that in 
the image above
, it is assum
ed that t
he provincia
l grid i
s fully
 decarbonized
 by 2050 in t
he NZ40 Sc
enario.
Figure 12. Net zero goals and trajectory. Note that in the image above, it is assumed that the 
provincial grid is fully decarbonized by 2050 in the NZ40 Scenario.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
44 
3.3 A JUST TRANSITION 
Deep emission reductions require innovation, rapid diffusion of new technologies, and the 
reshaping of markets and socio-economic systems. The low-carbon transition is as much a social 
transition as a technological and economic shift. The key to success is the alignment of interests so 
that governments, business, and society support each other in a reinforcing feedback or “ambition 
loop”. 
Transitions are, by definition, disruptive. A just transition is an approach that aims to minimize the 
negative impact on workers and communities and maximize the positive impacts by identifying new 
opportunities and providing bridging mechanisms, such as income support and retraining for new 
occupations and technologies.  
While the primary objective of the Net Zero Strategy is to meet the targets that the City has set 
for net zero by 2040/2050, an integral component of city planning and a just transition is to apply 
a lens of health, equity, and prosperity. For example, the City can prioritize strategies and actions 
that deliver GHG emission reductions while meeting other City objectives related to health, 
equality, poverty alleviation, and reconciliation. The City recognizes equity as a fundamental issue of 
respect and fairness, as well as an economic driver that, “by unlocking increased human potential, 
ultimately increases everyone’s quality of life and income.”53 
The transition to a net zero economy offers opportunities to achieve social, economic, and 
environmental objectives. It also has the potential to provide a burst of economic growth. If the 
transition is managed well and rooted in the context of sustainable development, it can generate 
well paying green jobs and enterprises that can be inclusive across the population, reduce 
inequalities, and reduce poverty.
Policies and programmes will be required to provide an enabling environment for enterprises, 
workers, and investors. This will include anticipating the impacts on employment, adequate and 
sustainable social protection for job losses and displacement, skills development, and clear and 
open communications.
53 Mowat, D. and Rafi, S. (2020). COVID-19 Impacts and Opportunities. City of Toronto. September 15, 
2020. Retrieved from: https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/9133-torr-covid19-impacts-
opportunities-2020.pdf 
45 
December 2021
3.4 GUIDING PRINCIPLES
The Net Zero Strategy incorporates a robust process of best practices research, public engagement 
input from the City’s consultations, and technical modelling of future scenarios. The Strategy has 
been guided by the following principles:54Guiding principles for the Net Zero Strategy: Advance social equity, protect low-income residents, improve affordability particularly for vulnerable population, enhance and strengthen the local economy, maintain and create good quality jobs, improve public health, contribute to poverty reduction, and create resilient communities.
Figure 13. Guiding principles for the Net Zero Strategy.
3.5 INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE 
AND WORLDVIEW 
FOR NET ZERO
In 2018, the City collaborated with Indigenous Climate Action to convene a workshop to seek 
Indigenous communities’ input on the City’s climate strategies. The discussions were summarized 
54	 City of Toronto (2018). TransformTO: Climate Action for a Healthy, Equitable & Prosperous Toronto. 
Implementation Update. https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/92f8-TransformTO-Climate-
Action-for-a-Healthy-Equitable-Prosperous-Toronto-Implementation-Update-2017-and-2018.pdf 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
46 
in a report titled Indigenous Climate Action, prepared by the organization with the same name.55 
The paper described a need for more meaningful Indigenous engagement and to situate climate 
action in a broader framework on culture, while considering environmental racism and colonialism. 
The recommendations were also to consider emissions from consumption, to respect and engage 
meaningfully with Indigenous knowledge and practices, to find ways to accommodate urban 
Indigenous cultural resurgence, to reflect and relate to the realities of people “on the street,” and 
to support Indigenous relationships with urban land, water, and food. 
EXCERPT FROM INDIGENOUS CLIMATE ACTION SUMMARY REPORT56
Indigenous peoples will determine our own future—not merely as vulnerable people, but people 
with knowledge, who have ways to solve our own problems and contribute to broader strategies 
for addressing what is coming. Indigenous forms of knowledge need to be engaged with 
meaningfully in addressing climate change. The knowledge is misunderstood and incomplete 
if non-Indigenous researchers merely “extract the knowledge.” “We don’t need to change our 
knowledge and laws, even when the data changes” (for example, signs of when to harvest certain 
things may change, but the underlying knowledge structures and processes remain). Indigenous 
people need to deconstruct external, colonial forces and replace these with Indigenous presence 
from within. Our own prophecies and natural phenomena are informing us of changes, and we 
already know how to adapt. If the city does not account for and address colonization in its policies 
it will keep repeating the same problematic behaviours. So Toronto’s Biodiversity strategy, for 
example, needs “decolonizing.” We need to look at indicators for biodiversity differently—not 
just counting things, but rather asking, in a much wider way, questions that have a much more 
comprehensive focus: “Are we good ancestors?” “What do women’s economies look like that are 
not consumptive?” Our culturally rooted principles are fundamental truths or guideposts for right 
behaviour, and are legitimate unto themselves. Western Eurocentric values are not everybody’s 
values. For example, we need not centre individualism; we can centre collective wellbeing. We 
can and must consider how our children and the generations hundreds of years ahead can have a 
viable and safe future. In all these ways and more, the gifts of Indigenous peoples are vital to all 
people of all backgrounds.
55	 Indigenous Climate Action (2018). Indigenous Climate Action Summary Report: Indigenous Strategic 
Discussions on City of Toronto Climate Strategies. Retrieved from: https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/8eb4-2019-03-25_Indigenous-Climate-Report_final.pdf 
56	 Ibid. Extract from page 5. 
47 
December 2021
Part 2: The Pathway 
to Net Zero
4. Getting to
Net Zero
4.1 EXPLORING THE FUTURE
New scenario modelling was undertaken to align and update TransformTO’s climate action planning 
with the City’s Climate Emergency Declaration’s targets of achieving a 65% emissions reduction 
(relative to 1990 levels) by 2030, and achieving net zero emissions by 2050 or sooner. The results 
include:
•  GHG mitigation actions for key sectors, including buildings, energy, transportation, 
and waste;
•  A comparative financial analysis of the costs and benefits for each of the scenarios; 
•  Insights on the feasibility of implementing climate actions (i.e. technical, financial, 
and social/behavioural); and,
•  Recommendations on integrating climate resilience considerations into mitigation 
policies and measures. 
Modelling was completed using demographic, building, transportation, and energy use data, 
analyzed in the CityInSight model. This model is an integrated energy, emissions, and finance 
model that allows for a deeper understanding of the relationships between energy use, emissions, 
and population behaviour. CityInSight provides detailed analysis of the impacts of actions to 
reduce energy use and GHG emissions in both time and space, and evaluates complex interactions 
between actions to more accurately reflect the impact of potential actions on the future.
4.2 A CITY AS A SYSTEM
Toronto’s energy systems, with so many moving parts, are highly complex and require a 
sophisticated model to track all of the variables and their relationships. CityInSight, the model 
used for this project, is a comprehensive energy, emissions, and finance model developed by 
Sustainability Solutions Group (SSG) and whatIf? Technologies Inc.57 
57	 For detailed information on the modelling approach, refer to Modelling Toronto’s Low Carbon Future: Data, 
Methods and Assumptions Manual (DMA).
49 
December 2021
BASE YEAR
A representation of the City of Toronto’s energy and GHG emissions was developed for the base 
year of 2016 in order to align with a census year. This required a calibration of the components 
of the model with observed data. For example, the total electricity consumption from end-uses 
for each building (such as heating, cooling, appliances) was adjusted to equal the total electricity 
consumption reported by the electricity utility. This process of calibration was applied to each sector 
within the model, in which the representation of activity and the built environment is “tuned” in 
the model so that the modelled energy consumption aligns with observed energy consumption. 
It should be noted that the year 2020 was used as a more up-to-date base year for targets and 
trajectories throughout the report, which was established from the modelling projections.
STOCKS AND FLOWS
The modelling integrates the useful lifetimes of different capital assets based on the concept of 
stocks and flows, a method that highlights urgency and financial risk. For example, CityInSight 
tracks the stock of vehicles by type and vintage; the flow consists of the retirement of vehicles as 
they reach the end of their lifecycle and the addition of new vehicles to the stock. The concept of 
stocks and flows has significant implications for the cost of the net zero pathways. If a natural gas 
boiler at the end of its useful life is replaced with a heat pump, the associated cost is significantly 
lower than if the natural gas boiler is replaced prior to the end of its useful life. 
Different types of equipment turn over more quickly than others. For example, between now and 
2050, buildings are likely to last; however, equipment such as trains for the transit system and 
industrial boilers are likely to be replaced once, and light fixtures will be replaced about three to 
five times. Ensuring that the low-carbon option is introduced as soon as possible, particularly for 
the longer lasting assets, is therefore key to avoiding significant additional costs associated with 
incentivizing early replacement. 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
50 
Examples of
 stocks and 
flows. 
Populatio
n, births/d
eaths; ve
hicles, 
purcha
ses/disposa
ls; ho
mes, constr
ucti
on/d
emoli
t
ions.
Figure 14. Examples of stocks (light grey) and flows (dark grey).
MAKING CLIMATE-SAFE INVESTMENTS NOW
Every expenditure on infrastructure either locks in new GHG emissions or reduces GHG emissions. 
The longer the investment life (period over which it pays off) of a type of infrastructure that results 
in emissions, the more vulnerable it is to transition risk. In other words, if a natural gas boiler is 
projected to have an operating lifetime of 20 years, it will likely need to be replaced within the 
decade in order to stay within 1.5°C, forfeiting half of its planned lifetime. A new house that 
generates emissions will likely need to be retrofitted to be zero emissions within the next decade. 
As a result, if those decisions are climate-safe or climate-proofed moving forward, society can 
avoid significant transition costs. For example, retrofitting a house to zero emissions can cost 
between $70,000-$100,000, whereas building a new net zero home can have an incremental cost 
of less than $10,000.58  
58	 These costs are based on analysis completed by SSG for various projects. 
51 
December 2021
GHG ACCOUNTING FRAMEWORK
The GHG emissions accounting framework used by CityInSight is based on the Global Protocol 
for Community-Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories (GPC) framework,59 a global standard 
that is designed to enable comparability amongst cities in different countries. The baseline GHG 
inventory accounts for emissions from generating activities including buildings, transportation, 
energy production, and waste. GHG emissions and removals from land use and land cover change 
are not included.60,61
RESIDUAL EMISSIONS
“Residual emissions” are the emissions remaining after all opportunities to maximize reductions 
have been implemented. Technical scenario modelling shows that in 2050 in Toronto, it may 
be difficult to eliminate some residual emissions from landfills, industrial processes, and older 
buildings. The net zero carbon pathway assumes there will be approximately 2 megatonnes of 
residual emissions in 2050.
Although Toronto's net zero strategy prioritizes efforts to maximize GHG emission reductions 
through climate actions that limit the amount of emissions created, it is recognized that there will be 
a need to compensate for remaining residual emissions to achieve a balance of net zero.
Toronto will need to reduce or eliminate remaining emissions using strategies such as encouraging 
or creating natural carbon sequestration, applying negative emissions technologies such as carbon 
capture and storage if they become viable, and/or purchasing offsets.
4.3 PATHWAYS TO NET ZERO
The development of actions and the approach to modelling was informed by a framework of 
Reduce-Improve-Switch-Generate. The framework is adapted from similar approaches such as 
Reduce-Reuse-Recycle (from the waste sector) and Avoid-Shift-Improve (from the transportation 
sector). 
In general, emissions reductions are realized through actions that reduce energy use (e.g. behaviour 
change, building envelope improvements), that improve the use of energy (e.g. appliance 
efficiencies, lighting), and that switch from the use of carbon-intensive fuels to low- or zero-carbon 
59	 WRI, C40 Cities & ICLEI. (2014). Global protocol for community-scale greenhouse gas emission inventories—An 
accounting and reporting standard for cities. Retrieved from http://www.ghgprotocol.org/city-accounting 
60 Changes in land cover (from greenfield to brownfield) to 2050 is assumed to be negligible; new growth is 
targeted to already developed areas in the form of densification/infill. 
61	 Annual net carbon sequestration of the City’s urban forest accounts for 36,500 tCO2e, less than 0.2% of baseline 
emissions (Every Tree Counts, City of Toronto, 2013).
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
52 
fuels (e.g. electric vehicles). When a steep decline in emissions is needed, actions in all three areas 
are required, accompanied by the generation of local renewable or low- or zero-carbon energy. 
The logic of this approach is that reducing and improving energy use not only reduces emissions 
directly, but also reduces the amount of renewable energy generation that will be needed, a 
necessary step towards deep decarbonization.
Figure 15 provides a visualization for the steps taken to determine the City’s net zero scenarios.
O
v
e
r
v
ie
w 
of
 t
he n
et z
ero 
scen
ario
 dev
elop
ment
 pro
cess
.
Figure 15. Overview of the net zero scenario development process.
53 
December 2021
Step 1: Base year: The year 2016 was used as the baseline, in order to align with the most 
recent Canadian census year. Bottom-up data for buildings (i.e., size, shape) and transportation (i.e., 
driving distances) were calibrated with observed energy consumption data from utilities and other 
sources for this year to ensure that the model portrays the existing energy system in Toronto.
Step 2: Do Nothing Scenario: The Do Nothing scenario was designed to reflect what 
would happen if the City itself put little to no additional effort or investment into climate action.  
It captures anticipated population growth as well as current patterns of activity and deployment 
of technologies. Existing climate actions at upper levels of government are considered, including 
provincial building code, federal fuel efficiency standards, and the national carbon levy. The impact 
of climate change on heating and cooling requirements in buildings is also captured.
Step 3: Business as Planned (BAP) scenario: The BAP scenario reflects what 
the City has “in the books,” incorporating its projects and plans that are already approved. Projects 
considered include district energy expansion, transit expansion, personal vehicle and City fleet 
electrification, and rollout of the Toronto Green Standard (TGS).
Step 4: Actions to Reduce GHG Emissions: The NZ40 and NZ50 pathways were 
informed by extensive research of low-carbon actions and best practices to reduce GHG emissions 
at the city scale, as well as consultations with City divisions on what aggressive action on climate 
could be deployed. 
The city-based actions were reviewed by the City of Toronto staff to ensure that: 
1.	 actions that were not applicable to Toronto were excluded;
2.	 actions that the City was already undertaking were included in the BAP; and, 
3.	 actions that were relevant and aligned with the outcomes of the TransformTO engagement 
process were included.
Following these considerations, the modelling included all possible and relevant actions, regardless 
of the impact on emissions reductions with one caveat: the scenarios emphasize actions that 
incorporate existing and available technologies, or what the Canadian Institute for Climate Choices 
(CCIC) defines as “safe bets.”62 This approach aligns with best practices for identifying net zero 
pathways and reduces the transition risk, or indeed, failure risk that comes with relying on untested 
technologies. A further caveat is that, while the technologies are generally tested and proven, their 
deployment at scale will require innovation in policy, financing, and workforce deployment.
62	 Canadian Institute for Climate Choices (2021). Canada’s Net Zero Future: Finding Our Way in the Global 
Transition. Retrieved from: https://climatechoices.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Canadas-Net-Zero-Future_
FINAL-2.pdf 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
54 
SAFE BETS VERSUS WILD CARDS63
The CICC defines safe bets as emission-reducing technologies and solutions that are already 
commercially available and face no major constraints to widespread implementation. Wild cards 
are solutions that may come to play a significant and important role on the path to net zero, but 
whose ultimate prospects remain uncertain. The actions explored in the Technical Report are 
primarily safe bets with a few exceptions. Given the emphasis of the Canadian and European 
governments on green hydrogen,64 a limited deployment was modelled in order to explore 
the implications of hydrogen relative to electrification and position Toronto to be able to take 
advantage of green hydrogen if this becomes a viable option. 
Step 5: Net Zero by 2050 Pathway (NZ50): Two net zero pathways were 
devised to explore potential routes to achieving Toronto's 2050 target. The Net Zero by 2050 
(NZ50) pathway involved the modelling and quantification of GHG reductions of key low carbon 
actions to support this effort. Actions identified included switching to renewable energy sources, 
increasing energy efficiency, and reducing or altering emissions-producing activities. Their energy, 
emissions, and financial impacts were compared to the BAP and Do Nothing scenarios. The 
design of the two net zero pathways include Toronto's BAP context plus new recommended GHG 
mitigation policies, actions, and initiatives to reach the City’s net zero target by 2050.
Step 6: Net Zero by 2040 Pathway (NZ40): The Net Zero by 2040 (NZ40) 
pathway explored an alternate pathway for the city to achieve net zero emissions on an earlier 
schedule that would also result in lower overall cumulative GHG emissions. The modelling and 
quantification of low-carbon actions were similar to the NZ50 pathway, but with shorter timelines 
and greater and deeper immediate and near-term actions.
Step 6: Gap to Reaching 1.5°C (net zero emissions): For each scenario, the 
gap between emissions reductions resulting from policies and actions and the reductions needed 
to reach 1.5°C was calculated. These emissions would mostly be eliminated by securing access to 
100% clean electricity. Otherwise, they would need to be reduced through some combination of 
emerging technologies, purchasing renewable energy certificates, carbon credits or offsets, or by 
carbon dioxide removal (CDR).
Step 7: Cleaning the Grid: Most of the remaining GHG emissions in the system are the 
result of the combustion of natural gas in the electricity grid. A key strategy is securing access to 
100% clean electricity.
63	 Ibid. 
64	 Government of Canada. (2020). The Hydrogen Strategy. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/the-hydrogen-
strategy/23080 
55 
December 2021
WHAT IS CDR?
Pathways to stay within 1.5°C are now reliant on negative emissions, which means extracting 
emissions from the atmosphere using carbon dioxide removal (CDR) strategies.65 However, CDR 
is needed less in pathways with an emphasis on efficiency. CDR can include enhancement of 
terrestrial and coastal carbon storage in plants and soils, such as afforestation and reforestation; 
capturing atmospheric carbon dioxide and storing it in geological formations; and chemically 
extracting carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Each CDR approach has different social, financial, 
energy, and environmental impacts. While “most CDR technologies are largely unproven to 
date and raise substantial concerns about the adverse side-effects on environmental and social 
sustainability,”66 there are opportunities available today. For example, CarbonCure’s technologies 
currently inject CO2 into concrete at the rate of 17 kgCO2 per m3.67 
4.4 A GROWING CITY
Demographics provide important information in establishing a community’s energy and emissions 
baseline. Population trends, rate of employment, and expected number of dwellings are the basis 
for documenting current—and estimating future—energy use and emissions production. To ensure 
comparability, they are held constant across all of the scenarios. The National Census (performed 
every 5 years) provides this information for past years. For future years, growth projections to 2041 
were used,68 and then carried forward to 2050 using the same rate of growth as expected from 
2016 and 2041. Based on these assumptions, Toronto’s population is expected to increase from 
approximately 3 million (2020) to 3.7 million by 2050, increasing by 638,566 people. Dwellings 
are expected to increase with population growth, with 322,000 added between 2020 and 2050. 
Similarly, employment numbers increase from 1.7 million to over 2.2 million, with a total of 490,552 
new jobs to be added between 2020 and 2050, slightly increasing per-capita employment from 
0.57 to 0.61 jobs per resident. Personal vehicle numbers are expected to increase by 41% over the 
65 Rogelj, J., D. Shindell, K. Jiang, S. Fifita, P. Forster, V. Ginzburg, C. Handa, H. Kheshgi, S. Kobayashi, E. Kriegler, 
L. Mundaca, R. Séférian, and M.V. Vilariño, 2018: Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5°C in the Context 
of Sustainable Development. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global 
warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the 
context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and 
efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. 
Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. 
Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.
66	 Ibid, section 2.3.4
67	 CarbonCure (n.d.). CarbonCure’s Path to the Decarbonisation of Concrete. Retrieved from: http://
go.carboncure.com/rs/328-NGP-286/images/CarbonCure%27s%20Path%20to%20the%20Decarbonization%20
of%20Concrete%20eBook.pdf 
68 Strategic Regional Research Alliance. City of Toronto Population Projections by Traffic Zone, 2011–2041. 
Note: The Low Scenario was used. 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
56 
time period, following a similar rate of vehicles owned per household by dwelling unit type as in 
2020. Since most of the new dwelling units added are apartments and these have lower rates of 
vehicle ownership than other dwelling types (such as single-family and semi-detached homes), city-
wide vehicles owned per household decrease slightly over the time period.
Table 2. City of Toronto demographic trends underlying the scenarios, 2020 and 2050.
 
2020
2050
CHANGE  
2020-2050
% CHANGE 
2020-2050
Population
3,030,486
3,669,051
638,566
+21%
Employment
1,729,892
2,220,444
490,552
+28%
Dwellings
1,156,643
1,478,389
321,747
+28%
Personal 
vehicles
1,175,400
1,655,055
479,655
+41%
Figure 16. Key drivers of GHG emissions by the numbers.
57 
December 2021
4.5 A DIRTIER ELECTRICITY GRID
Ontario’s electricity system is relatively clean compared to other provinces, but is projected to 
become more GHG-intensive per unit of electricity generated (Figure 17) due to nuclear retirements 
and the addition of gas generation.69 This trend has wide-ranging implications for Toronto’s ability 
to rapidly reduce GHG emissions, as electrification of transportation and heating is the primary 
pathway. 
Figure 17. Projection of the GHG emissions intensity of the Ontario grid. 
4.6 THE CURRENT SITUATION: 
A SNAPSHOT
In 2019, Toronto’s community-wide GHG emissions were 15.6 megatonnes (Mt) CO2e, 38% lower 
than 1990 levels (Figure 18). Emissions from buildings remain the highest contributors, followed by 
emissions from transportation and waste.70
69	 IESO (2020). Annual Planning Outlook- Ontario’s electricity system needs: 2022-2040. 
70	 City of Toronto 2018 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory. Retrieved from: www.toronto.ca/transformto  
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
58 
Figure 18. GHG Emissions by Sector, 1990-2019.71
The three dominant sources of GHGs in Toronto are: 
•  energy use in buildings: 57% of GHG emissions come from homes and buildings, 
primarily from burning natural gas to heat indoor spaces and water;
•  transportation fuels: 36% of GHG emissions are generated by transportation (73% of 
which are attributed to personal vehicles); and,
•  waste in landfills: 7% of emissions are generated by waste, with organics, yard waste, and 
wastewater treatment processes being the primary sources.
Figure 19 shows GHG emissions by source, indicating that natural gas consumption to heat 
buildings is the largest source of community-wide emissions (approximately 53% of all emissions). 
Gasoline accounts for almost 26%, while 7% result from the release of methane from landfills. 
Electricity consumption accounts for about 5% of city-wide emissions.
71	 From the City of Toronto’s 2019 GHG Inventory.
59 
December 2021
Figure 19. Greenhouse gas emissions by source (2019).72
72	 From the City of Toronto’s 2019 GHG Inventory.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
60 
4.7 LOW-CARBON ACTIONS
Table 3 summarizes the key actions that were modelled for the net zero scenarios and their contributions to GHG emissions reductions. 
Table 3. Key net zero scenario action targets and proportion of GHG emission reductions by sector.
Action
Business as Planned 
(BAP) Target
0x50 Target
0x40 Target
Emissions reductions 
compared to 
previous scenario 
(2050) (kt)
Cumulative emissions 
reduction of BAP 
(2020- 2050) (Mt)
% of total cumulative 
emissions reductions
Cumulative emissions 
reductions over 
DN (2020- 2050), 
all scenarios
% of total cumulative 
emissions reduced
BAP
NZ 
50
NZ 
40
Buildings- residential
Improved 
performance 
for new 
buildings
TGS Tier 4 for 
new residential 
buildings by 2031
100% Tier 2 by 2021
100% Tier 3 by 2022
100% Tier 4 by 2027
 -
385
44
-
6.0
2%
7.1
3%
Retrofit 
existing 
buildings
Retrofit 6,000 
units per year 
Annual electricity 
percent savings per 
building - 10%
Annual thermal 
demand percent 
savings per 
building - 35%
Retrofit 100% of existing buildings by 
2050. Savings of 15% electricity, and 75% 
thermal energy consumption
 -
147
1029
-
2.2
1%
24.4
9%
Electrify 
heating and 
appliances
 -
Convert 100% of residential water and 
space heating to heat pumps by 2050
Phase out residential natural gas 
appliances by 2050
Convert 100% of 
residential water 
and space heating 
to heat pumps by 
2040
Phase out 
residential natural 
gas appliances by 
2040
-
1468
77
-
-
41.4
16%
61 
Nov 2021
Action
Business as Planned 
(BAP) Target
0x50 Target
0x40 Target
Emissions reductions 
compared to 
previous scenario 
(2050) (kt)
Cumulative emissions 
reduction of BAP 
(2020- 2050) (Mt)
% of total cumulative 
emissions reductions
Cumulative emissions 
reductions over 
DN (2020- 2050), 
all scenarios
% of total cumulative 
emissions reduced
BAP
NZ 
50
NZ 
40
Smaller homes
 -
30% increase in floorspace intensity  per 
person) from 2016 by 2040 (for all new 
dwellings)
 
-
59
-
-
0.7
0%
Buildings- industrial
Improve 
industrial 
buildings
 -
Industrial new buildings energy intensity 
reduction (45% from base year) reached 
by 2031 and applies to lighting, space 
heating and water heating end uses
Retrofit all industrial buildings by 2050 
to achieve 50% reduction of industrial 
energy use intensities for lighting and 
space and water heating end uses
 -
 -
145
-
-
2.4
1%
Industrial 
process 
improvements 
and fuel 
switching
 -
Reduce natural gas consumption by 30% 
by 2030 and 60% by 2050
Convert 100% of remaining natural gas 
for process heat to hydrogen by 2050
Capture 90% of waste heat from industry
Use hydrogen for 
100% of process 
heating by 2040
 -
761
0
-
-
15.0
6%
Buildings- commercial
Improved 
performance 
for new 
buildings
TGS Tier 4 for 
new commercial 
buildings by 2031
100% Tier 2 by 2021
100% Tier 3 by 2022
100% Tier 4 by 2027
 -
850
44
-
17.1
7%
18.4
7%
Retrofit 
existing 
buildings
Retrofit 4,500 
buildings by 2050
Retrofit 100% of existing buildings by 
2050. Savings of 15% electricity, and 75% 
thermal energy consumption
 -
144
1029
-
2.3
1%
24.4
10%
Electrify 
heating
 -
100% electric heat pumps for space 
and water heating in non-residential 
buildings by 2050
Convert 100% of 
non-residential 
heating to heat 
pumps by 2040
 -
319
10
-
-
9.6
4%
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy
62 
Action
Business as Planned 
(BAP) Target
0x50 Target
0x40 Target
Emissions reductions 
compared to 
previous scenario 
(2050) (kt)
Cumulative emissions 
reduction of BAP 
(2020- 2050) (Mt)
% of total cumulative 
emissions reductions
Cumulative emissions 
reductions over 
DN (2020- 2050), 
all scenarios
% of total cumulative 
emissions reduced
BAP
NZ 
50
NZ 
40
Intensify office 
space per 
employee
 -
Reduced office floorspace per employee 
by a 'mobility factor' of 1.7 (i.e. 20 
people per 12 desks), then allocate 
new commercial floorspace along lines 
of employment projection. Results in 
reduced growth in commercial/office 
floorspace (for new office)
 -
 -
23
-
-
-
0.6
0%
Energy
Wastewater 
RNG
Generate RNG 
from wastewater
 -
 -
29
-
-
0.7
0%
0.7
0%
District Energy
Maintain 2016 DE 
+ build planned/
contracted DE 
systems
All DE systems are 100% renewable by 
2030—natural gas and electric cooling 
are replaced by RNG and cold water. 
All of the city's currently planned DE 
expansions are installed
 -
71
116
-
1.4
1%
4.9
2%
Renewable 
energy
 -
Wind capacity scaled up to 200 MW by 
2050
Onsite battery storage scaled up to 2000 
MW by 2050
Ground mount PV on 50% of parking 
lots
100% of buildings have solar PV installed 
by 2050, where feasible
10% hydrogen incrementally blended 
into natural gas in residential and 
commercial buildings by 2050
 -
-
966
-
-
-
12.4
5%
63 
Nov 2021
Action
Business as Planned 
(BAP) Target
0x50 Target
0x40 Target
Emissions reductions 
compared to 
previous scenario 
(2050) (kt)
Cumulative emissions 
reduction of BAP 
(2020- 2050) (Mt)
% of total cumulative 
emissions reductions
Cumulative emissions 
reductions over 
DN (2020- 2050), 
all scenarios
% of total cumulative 
emissions reduced
BAP
NZ 
50
NZ 
40
Transportation
Increase and 
encourage 
transit and 
alternative 
travel modes
Active and transit 
mode shares 
improved through 
as-planned 
infrastructure 
improvements
Convert one lane of traffic to exclusive 
bus lanes on all arterials
Increase service frequency on all transit 
routes: bus by 70%, streetcar by 50%, 
subway off-peak service increased to 
every 3 mins
Tolls of $0.66/km on all arterial roads
No transit fares
 -
0
63
-
0
0%
3.4
1%
50% of professional/management/
technical and general office/clerical 
workers in the GTHA work from home 
on any given day
Shift 75% of car and transit trips under 
5km to bikes or ebikes by 2040
Shift 75% of trips under 2km to walking 
by 2040
Electrify transit
50% of fleet electric 
by 2030; 100% by 
2050
100% electrification 
of GO by 2025
Electrify 100% of transit by 2040
 -
362
0
-
6.2
2%
7.7
3%
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy
64 
Action
Business as Planned 
(BAP) Target
0x50 Target
0x40 Target
Emissions reductions 
compared to 
previous scenario 
(2050) (kt)
Cumulative emissions 
reduction of BAP 
(2020- 2050) (Mt)
% of total cumulative 
emissions reductions
Cumulative emissions 
reductions over 
DN (2020- 2050), 
all scenarios
% of total cumulative 
emissions reduced
BAP
NZ 
50
NZ 
40
Zero emissions 
City fleet
Transition 45% of 
City-owned fleet to 
low-carbon vehicles 
by 2030; 65% 
greenhouse gas 
reduction by 2030 
(from 1990 levels)
Electrify 100% of City fleet by 2050
In 2025, begin purchasing renewable 
diesel for diesel vehicles and equipment 
(30% renewable diesel for City fleet)
 -
31
16
-
0.7
0%
1.0
0%
Electrify 
personal 
vehicles
Electrify 98% of 
personal vehicles 
by 2050 (achieved 
from 100% EV sales 
in 2040)
Switch all remaining ICE vehicles 11 
years or older to electric from 2040 
onwards
Electrify 100% of 
personal vehicles 
by 2040
2125
26
17
33.4
13%
52.8
21%
Electrify 
commercial 
vehicles
Light duty 
commercial - 50% 
new sales EV by 
2040
Long-haul - 
background 2.5% 
electrification rate
Electrify 100% of commercial vehicles by 
2050
Electrify 100% 
of commercial 
vehicles by 2040
469
557
29
5.7
2%
19.7
8%
Biofuels in rail 
and aviation
 -
Aviation runs on 100% low emissions 
fuels by 2050
Rail runs on 100% biofuel by 2050
 -
17
-
-
-
0.3
0%
Waste/Water/Wastewater
Increase 
efficiency of 
water pumps
Increase 
efficiency of water 
distribution pumps
 -
 -
3
-
-
0.1
0%
0.1
0%
65 
Nov 2021
Action
Business as Planned 
(BAP) Target
0x50 Target
0x40 Target
Emissions reductions 
compared to 
previous scenario 
(2050) (kt)
Cumulative emissions 
reduction of BAP 
(2020- 2050) (Mt)
% of total cumulative 
emissions reductions
Cumulative emissions 
reductions over 
DN (2020- 2050), 
all scenarios
% of total cumulative 
emissions reduced
BAP
NZ 
50
NZ 
40
Waste 
reduction and 
diversion
Increase waste 
diversion rate to 
70% by 2025
Increase waste diversion rates beyond 
the 70% by 2026 target, to 95% by 2050.
Zero by 2050 
Scenario targets, 
plus:
Zero organics in 
landfills by 2025
95
276
117
1.9
1%
9.5
4%
Sequestration
Increase tree 
canopy cover
Increase tree 
canopy cover city-
wide to 40% by 
2050
 -
 -
14
-
-
0.2
0%
0.2
0%
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy
66 
GHG EMISSIONS FROM NATURAL GAS
GHG emissions from natural gas are commonly reported based on the carbon dioxide (CO2) 
released as a result of combustion, however the impact of natural gas on climate change is more 
serious when the lifecycle impacts are considered. Natural gas primarily consists of methane and 
methane escapes or is released during production, processing, transmissions, and storage and 
distribution.
Near-term climate forcers (NTCF) refers to those gases that impact the climate most significantly 
in the first decade after their release. The current default reporting practice is to report on the 
GHG impact of the NTCFs over a 100-year period, a choice of time horizon that originated 
with administrators responsible for the development of the Kyoto Protocol. The impact of each 
NTCF is reported in terms of its Global Warming Potential (GWP), which translates its impact on 
warming relative to carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere through slow 
geological processes such that 40% of the carbon dioxide emitted will remain after one hundred 
years, and approximately 20% will remain after two thousand years. On the other hand, NTCFs 
such as methane make very strong contributions to global warming, but over relatively short time 
scales. Given the current imperative to avoid exceeding 1.5°C in global warming, planning to 
reduce GHG emission reductions over the next 20 years is of greater importance than the next 100 
years. Given this timeline, calculating the short-term impact of methane becomes more important.
Table 4. How the choice of time horizon affects Global Warming Potential (GWP) for methane.
TIME HORIZON (YEARS)
1
10
20
50
100
Global Warming Potential of 
methane
120
104
84
49
34
When the releases of methane are accounted for and multiplied by a 20-year GWP (84) instead 
of the 100-year GWP (34), the global warming impact of using natural gas as a fuel is much more 
significant, and the need to rapidly reduce and eliminate natural gas consumption becomes more 
urgent.
4.8 THE PATHWAY TO ZERO
The actions evaluated constitute a pathway to virtually eliminate all GHG emissions generated 
within the city by 2040 and 2050, respectively. There is one major remaining source of emissions: 
the provincial electricity grid. 
67 
December 2021
Figure 20 illustrates curves for the total annual GHG emissions for each scenario between 2020 and 
2050. The NZ40/NZ50 scenarios achieve 64%/74% reduction from 2018 levels by 2030, 93%/92.6% 
by 2050 with approximately 2.0 MtCO2e annual emissions remaining in 2050 in both scenarios.
T
o
t
a
l
 G
HG
 e
mi
ssio
ns f
or e
ach 
of t
he s
cena
rios
.
Figure 20. Total GHG emissions for each of the scenarios.
Figure 21 demonstrates the GHG reductions per person (i.e., per capita) achieved by the net zero 
scenarios for the city. The net zero scenarios reduce per capita emissions by 5 tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) from 5.5 tCO2e in 2016 to 0.5 per capita in 2050. The per capita GHG 
emissions are reduced more quickly in the NZ40 scenario. In comparison, the BAP reduces per 
capita emissions by 2.8 tCO2e (to 2.7 tCO2e) by 2050, whereas the Do Nothing scenario reduces 
per capita emissions by 1.6 tCO2e (to 3.9 tCO2e) by 2050.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
68 
GHG
 em
iss
ion
 pe
r p
ers
on 
ach
i
e
v
e
d
 
b
y th
e ne
t ze
ro s
cena
rios
.
Figure 21. GHG emission per person achieved by the net zero scenarios.
69 
December 2021
Figure 22. Net Zero Scenario by 2050 Wedge Summary: The relative impact of the key 
actions modelled.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
70 
Figure 23. Net Zero Scenarios Wedge Summary: The relative impact of the actions modelled.
Table 5. Net Zero by 2040 Scenario (NZ40): the numbers in 2016, 2030, and 2050.
INDICATOR 
RESULT
2016
2030
2050
UNITS
Annual GHG 
emissions 
16.2
7.0
1.
MtCO2e
Annual GHG per 
person
5.5
2.2
0.5
tCO2e
Average floor area 
per dwelling 
123
118
109
m2
71 
December 2021
INDICATOR 
RESULT
2016
2030
2050
UNITS
Total non-residential 
space per person
37
35
32
m2
Annual percent of 
trips made by car
63%
56%
51%
%
Annual VKT 
per person 
5,700
6,500
6,400
km
Energy costs 
per dwelling
$2,900
$1,550
$890
$/year
Annual solid waste to 
landfill per person
190
14
15
kg
Table 6. Net Zero by 2050 Scenario (NZ50): the numbers in 2016, 2030, and 2050.
INDICATOR 
RESULT
UNITS
2016
2030
2050
Annual GHG 
emissions 
16.2
10.0
2.0
tCO2e
Annual GHG per 
person
5.5
3.1
0.5
tCO2e
Average floor area 
per dwelling 
123
118
109
m2
Total non-residential 
space per person
37
35
32
m2
Annual percent of 
trips made by car
63%
56%
51%
%
Annual VKT per 
person 
5,700
6,500
6,400
km
Energy costs per 
dwelling
$2,900
$1,760
$880
$/year
Annual solid waste 
to landfill per person
190
93
15
kg
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
72 
tor, 2016-2050.
Figure 24. GHG emissions by scenario and sector, 2016-2050.
73 
December 2021
4.9 THE CHALLENGE 
OF THE PROVINCIAL GRID
In order to achieve net zero emissions, the city requires clean electricity. Currently, there are no 
commitments to ensure that the provincial electricity grid in Ontario will become zero emissions by 
2050 or sooner.73 Figure 25 illustrates four different ways in which this scenario could play out. 
Descriptions of scenarios 
for
 rea
chin
g net zero emissions based on
 variation
s in the provincia
l grid emissions fa
ctor and ext
ent of deployment of l
ocal renewable 
energy.
Figure 25. Descriptions of scenarios for reaching net zero emissions based on variations in the 
provincial grid emissions factor and extent of deployment of local renewable energy.
Objectively, Scenario 3 is the most desirable, because the flexibility of demand and supply 
on the provincial grid means that it is likely a lower cost option than local generation for zero 
emissions electricity. In Scenario 1, if the provincial grid is not clean, the City generates 100% 
renewable electricity to meet its electricity requirements. This objective could be achieved through 
community choice aggregation (CCA)74 or a similar approach in partnership with Toronto Hydro, 
given regulatory approval, or through direct purchase of new renewable generation through the 
development of a large “micro-grid.” An increasingly common strategy in the US, CCA allows local 
governments to procure power on behalf of resident, businesses, and municipal accounts from an 
73	 During the drafting of this report, the IESO launched a consultation on phasing out natural gas generation in 
Ontario. For more information, see: https://www.ieso.ca/en/Learn/Ontario-Supply-Mix/Natural-Gas-Phase-Out-
Study 
74	 For more details on CCA, see: NYSERDA (n.d.). Community Choice Aggregation. Retrieved from: https://www.
nyserda.ny.gov/All-Programs/Programs/Clean-Energy-Communities/How-It-Works/Toolkits/Community-Choice-
Aggregation 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
74 
alternative supplier while still receiving transmission and distribution services from their existing 
utility provider.
In Scenario 2, the City continues to use electricity from the provincial grid but purchases carbon 
offsets to address the incremental emissions. The downside of this scenario is the ongoing cost 
of the emissions and ongoing questions about the integrity of carbon offsets as a substantive 
carbon mitigation strategy. Carbon offsets act as an additional “carbon tax” on emissions, as 
every additional tonne requires the purchase of an offset at an assumed minimum cost of $25 
per tonne. Achieving NZ40 implies offset costs of $607 million (purchasing offsets for a decade) 
while achieving NZ50 (offsetting emissions just in 2050) requires a purchase totalling $53 million 
(Figure 26). For comparison, the cost of offsetting emissions in the BAP scenario just for 2050 is 
$245 million, and if BAP emissions were to be offset from 2040-2050 this would cost $2.8 billion.
Scenario 4 implies high levels of local renewable generation, while the provincial grid emissions 
factor is clean. This scenario imagines a rapidly increasing deployment of net zero buildings 
and local decentralized generation. In this case, local generation is a major contributor to the 
decarbonizing of the grid.  
C
a
r
b
o
n 
of
fs
et
 cos
ts f
or t
he N
Z40,
 NZ5
0, a
nd B
AP s
cena
rios
.
Figure 26. Carbon offset costs for the NZ40, NZ50, and BAP scenarios.
75 
December 2021
THE CHALLENGES OF CLEAN HYDROGEN
Full electrification of heating is a major challenge and will likely create stranded assets for natural 
gas distributors. Other possible options that are being broadly explored include the deployment of 
hydrogen and renewable natural gas, both of which are included to a limited extent in the net zero 
scenarios, particularly for sectors such as industries in which electrification is difficult (Figure 27). The 
clean hydrogen future is constrained by the low efficiencies of manufacturing clean hydrogen, which 
results in electricity generation requirements that are 2–14 times higher than direct electrification, 
and a risk that hydrogen could lock in requirements for continued fossil fuel production with the use 
of grey hydrogen. A recent paper in Nature Climate Change explains: “Betting on the future large-
scale availability of hydrogen and e-fuels risks a lock-in of fossil-fuel dependency if their upscaling 
falls short of expectations. Hydrogen and e-fuels are a potential distraction from the urgent need for 
an end-use transformation towards wide-scale direct electrification, which is cheaper, more efficient 
and generally part of well-advanced available technology in many sectors, such as light-duty 
vehicles or low-temperature heating in buildings and industry.”75  
75	 Ueckerdt, F., Bauer, C., Dirnaichner, A. et al. (2021). Potential and risks of hydrogen-based e-fuels in climate 
change mitigation. Nature Climate Change. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-021-01032-7 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
76 
Illustration of 
the energy s
ystem flows in 
2016 (top)
 and NZ40 in 205
0 (bottom). The
 dark grey ba
rs show the amo
unts of energ
y with the
ir valu
es indic
ated in PJ,
 and the thickn
ess of the light gr
ey flowing lines
 show the quant
ities o
f energ
y tha
t are distr
ibuted 
for 
different us
es. Hydrogen is h
ighlighted in bl
ue.
Figure 27. Illustration of the energy system flows in 2016 (top) and NZ40 in 2050 (bottom). The 
dark grey bars show the amounts of energy with their values indicated in PJ, and the thickness of 
the light grey flowing lines show the quantities of energy that are distributed for different uses. 
Hydrogen is highlighted in blue.
77 
December 2021
4.10 EARLY ACTION NEEDED 
FOR THE 2030 TARGET
Early action to cut emissions by at least 50% is required to meet the IPCC’s recommendation to 
limit global warming to 1.5°C. The City of Toronto’s 2030 target is to reduce GHG emissions by 
65% (below 1990 levels), which translates to a goal of reducing total emissions to approximately 8.8 
MtCO2e (Figure 28). Both the Do Nothing and BAP scenarios do not meet this target. Total GHG 
emissions for these scenarios in 2030 are projected to be 14.6 and 12.9 MtCO2e, respectively. The 
NZ50 scenario just misses the City’s target with total GHG emissions at 9.6 MtCO2e, however, the 
NZ40 is well below the target with total GHG emissions at 7.0 MtCO2e. The earlier action in the 
NZ40 scenario therefore must be taken to achieve the 2030 target. These actions are summarized 
in Table 3 and in the following sections and include, amongst others, electrifying vehicles sooner, 
retrofitting buildings sooner, and eliminating organic materials from landfills sooner.
T
o
t
a
l
 G
HG
 e
mi
ssio
ns f
or e
ach 
of t
he s
cena
rios
, 20
20-2
050.

Figure 28. Total GHG emissions for each of the scenarios, 2020-2050.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
78 
5. Green Buildings
5.1 OVERVIEW
According to the 2019 GHG Inventory, emissions from energy use in buildings (residential, 
commercial, and industrial) accounted for 57% of Toronto’s community GHG emissions. Natural gas 
used to heat buildings continues to be the largest emissions source at approximately 8.9 MtCO2e. 
Modelled GHG emissions indicated that in 2020 buildings emissions were 6.6 MtCO2e. Each 
scenario outcome for the sector in 2050 is illustrated by Figure 29. The Do Nothing scenario results 
in annual emissions of 8.1 MtCO2e; BAP results in 6.6 MtCO2e; and, the NZ40 and NZ50 result in 
1.0 MtCO2e remaining annual emissions. The cumulative GHG reduction potential between 2020 
and 2050 is 134 MtCO2e.
CUMULATIVE GHG REDUCTION POTENTIAL 2020-2050	
	
134 MtCO2e
Figure 29. GHG emissions from buildings in 2050, by scenario.
The GHG reduction actions for the buildings sector by scenario are provided in Table 7. This section 
details the interventions needed to increase the efficiency of the building stock and fuel switch from 
fossil fuels to renewables.
79 
December 2021
Table 7. Description of GHG reduction actions for the buildings sector.
 SECTOR
  WEDGE
  WEDGE DESCRIPTION
SCENARIO
Buildings- 
residential
TGS version 3 Tier 4 for 
new residential buildings 
by 2032
All new buildings for which the TGS applies are built to TGS version 3 
Tier 4 for new residential buildings by 2032.
Passive house scaling up to 100% by 2040.
Fuel switching to electric heat pumps for all new dwellings.
BAP
BAP residential retrofits
Retrofit 6,000 units per year. Annual electricity percent savings per 
building: 10%.
Annual thermal demand per cent savings per building: 35%.
Decrease size of new 
dwellings
30% increase in floorspace intensity from 2016 by 2040 (for all new 
dwellings).
Net Zero by 
2050
New high performance 
residential buildings
Rows and apartments: 
100% TGS version 3 Tier 2 by 2021.
100% Tier 3 by 2022.
100% Tier 4 by 2027.
Retrofit residential 
buildings by 2050
Retrofit 100% of existing buildings by 2050 (~29,000 per year). Savings 
of 15% electricity, and 75% thermal energy consumption.
Residential heat pumps 
by 2050
Convert 100% of residential water and space heating to heat pumps 
by 2050.
Electrify residential 
appliances by 2050
Phase out residential natural gas appliances by 2050.
Residential heat pumps 
by 2040
Convert 100% of residential water and space heating to heat pumps 
by 2040.
Net Zero by 
2040
Electrify residential 
appliances by 2040
Phase out residential natural gas appliances by 2040.
Buildings- 
industrial
New industrial buildings 
improved performance
100% TGS tier 4 in 2032.
BAP
Industrial building 
retrofits
Apply OBC requirements for retrofits that require building permits, 
and similarly to any buildings not covered by TGS. Rate of retrofits: 
~2,300 C/I retrofits per year
New industrial buildings 
improved performance
Industrial new build energy intensity reduction (45% from base year) 
reached by 2031 and applies to lighting, space heating, and water 
heating end uses.
Net Zero by 
2050
Industrial building 
retrofits
Retrofit all industrial buildings by 2050 to achieve 50% reduction 
of industrial energy use intensities for lighting and space and water 
heating end uses.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
80 
 SECTOR
  WEDGE
  WEDGE DESCRIPTION
SCENARIO
Industrial process 
improvements
Reduce natural gas consumption by 30% by 2030 and 60% by 2050.
Convert 100% of remaining natural gas for process heat to hydrogen 
by 2050.
Capture 90% of waste heat from industry.
Hydrogen for process 
heating by 2040
Use green hydrogen for 100% of process heating by 2040.
Net Zero by 
2040
Buildings- 
commercial
TGS version Tier 4 
for new commercial 
buildings by 2032
TGS version 3 Tier 4 for new commercial buildings by 2032.
BAP
BAP commercial 
building retrofits
Retrofit 4,500 buildings by 2050.
Decreased office space 
per employee
Reduce office floorspace per employee by a “mobility factor” of 
1.7 (i.e., 20 people per 12 desks), then allocate new commercial 
floorspace along lines of employment projection. Results in reduced 
growth in commercial/office floorspace (for new office space).
Net Zero by 
2050
High performance new 
commercial buildings
100% TGS version 3 Tier 2 by 2021.
100% Tier 3 by 2022.
100% Tier 4 by 2027.
Retrofit non-residential 
buildings by 2050
Retrofit 100% of existing buildings by 2050. Savings of 15% electricity, 
and 75% thermal energy consumption annually.
Non-residential heat 
pumps by 2050
100% electric heat pumps for space and water heating in 
non-residential buildings by 2050.
Non-residential heat 
pumps by 2040
Convert 100% of non-residential heating to heat pumps by 2040.
Net Zero by 
2040
Buildings- 
commercial 
and 
residential
Green hydrogen in 
buildings
10% hydrogen blended into natural gas in residential and commercial 
buildings by 2050.
Zero by 
2050
In order to reach net zero by 2050, the following measures for the building sector will be required:
•  reduce floorspace per person by 30% for all new dwellings by 2040;
•  high performance standards for new residential and commercial buildings:
 -
100% TGS version 3 Tier 2 by 2021
 -
100% Tier 3 by 2022
 -
100% Tier 4 by 2027;
•  retrofit 100% of existing buildings (residential, commercial, industrial);
81 
December 2021
•  convert 100% of building water and space heating to heat pumps;
•  phase out residential natural gas appliances by 2050; 
•  decrease energy intensity by 45% for new industrial buildings by 2031;
•  reduce industrial process natural gas consumption by 30% by 2030, and 60% by 2050;
•  convert 100% of remaining natural gas for process heat to hydrogen by 2050;
•  capture 90% of waste heat from industry;
•  decrease office space per employee; and
•  blend 10% green hydrogen in remaining natural gas use by residential and commercial 
buildings by 2050.
And in order to reach net zero by 2040, several key actions need to be implemented faster, 
including:
•  convert 100% of building water and space heating to heat pumps by 2040;
•  phase out residential natural gas appliances by 2040; and
•  use hydrogen for 100% of process heating in industrial buildings by 2040. 
WHAT CONSTITUTES A DEEP RETROFIT? 
Toronto’s Net Zero Existing Buildings Strategy defines a GHG reduction retrofit as meeting two 
criteria:76
1.	 A minimum upgrade package performance of 50% reduction in GHG emissions, reflecting 
established best practice in retrofit activities. 
2.	 A near-net zero pathway of at least an 80% reduction in GHG emissions, including a complete 
or near-complete fuel switch to electricity or other zero carbon fuel source. 
A deep retrofit typically includes improvements to the envelope and fuel switching from natural 
gas to electricity. The combination of the efficiency of heat pumps and the improved performance 
in the thermal envelope can reduce total electricity consumption. An additional benefit is that 
the improved performance of the building envelope can reduce the size of the HVAC equipment 
required and therefore reduce capital costs, to “tunnel through the cost barrier”.77 
76	 Integral, WSP, Windfall Ecology Centre and Reep Green Solutions (2021). The City of Toronto’s Net Zero Existing 
Buildings Strategy. Retrieved from: https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2021/ie/bgrd/backgroundfile-168402.
pdf
77	 Hawken, P., Lovins, A. B., & Lovins, L. H. (2013). Natural Capitalism: The Next Industrial Revolution. Routledge.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
82 
Figure 30. Wedge diagram of buildings GHG reduction actions.
NEW BUILDINGS
The Technical Report envisions an incremental transition to high-performance, net zero energy new 
construction by 2030. Net zero buildings are super insulated, have efficient HVAC systems, and take 
advantage of passive solar heating, ambient heat sources (e.g., air source heat pumps), and thermal 
mass. More high-performance buildings completed sooner means fewer retrofits later on. 
83 
December 2021
EXISTING BUILDINGS
Improving energy performance in existing buildings is a greater challenge given that the building 
design is already “locked in.” Up-front costs of deep retrofits can be high, but this investment can 
be recovered over time through avoided energy costs. The Technical Report envisions building 
retrofits in all sectors, achieving an average of 15% electrical and 75% thermal energy savings by 
2050.
In 2016, natural gas accounted for 81% of the GHG emissions in the buildings sector, which is 
primarily used for space and water heating. To decarbonize buildings, this energy source must be 
phased out and replaced with electric heat pumps. The rapid decline in emissions from natural gas 
requires that the installation of natural gas furnaces be prohibited by 2030 at the latest in order to 
phase out the stock of natural gas furnaces by 2040.
While natural gas is phased out by 2040, there are still emissions remaining from electricity. 
Ensuring that 100% clean electricity is available is necessary to remove these remaining emissions. 
The combination of the improved performance of the building stock due to retrofits and the 
efficiency of heat pumps reduces overall energy consumption in the city over the period, most 
notably for space heating. Solar PV is integrated into many buildings, increasing the resilience of 
the electricity system and enabling many buildings to achieve net zero emissions.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
84 
 
E
mi
ssi
ons
 an
d e
nerg
y us
e fr
om b
uild
ings
 for
 NZ40.
	
	
   EMISSIONS	 	
	
                 ENERGY
Figure 31. Emissions and energy use from buildings for NZ40.
5.2 TARGETS
Targets for the building sector are provided in five-year increments for the next decade and then 
85 
December 2021
subsequently for each decade until 2050 (Table 8). The targets serve as indicators against which the 
City can track performance over time. 
Table 8. Targets for Buildings Sector
2021-2025
2026-2030
2031-2040
2041-2050
Percent of new buildings that 
achieve TGS level X
100% T2
100% T3
100% T4
100% T4
Average EUI/TEDI  (MJ/sqm) of 
new non TGS buildings
450/180
450/180
434/172
430/170
Number of dwelling units built 
prior to 2016 that are retrofit
128,059
150,012
298,881
292,632
Non-residential buildings 
constructed prior to 2016 that are 
retrofit
2,580
2,640
4,010
2,240
Non-residential floor area 
constructed prior to 2016 that is 
retrofit (m2)
11,746,000
14,619,000
17,767,000
6,090,000
5.3 KEY ACTIONS
The key actions for the building sector will include the following:
1.	 Retrofit existing buildings: Retrofit 100% of existing residential and commercial buildings 
by 2050 will reduce cumulative emissions by 19%, (10% for residential and 9% for 
commercial). 
•  Average of 29,000 residential units per year;
•  Average of 400 commercial/institutional buildings per year.
2.	 Conversion of 100% of residential water and space heating to heat pumps and a phase 
out of residential natural gas appliances by 2050 will reduce cumulative emissions by 
16% in the NZ50 scenario, with additional cumulative reductions if completed by 2040. This 
action can be bundled with the retrofits in #1 Retrofit existing buildings, listed above.
3.	 Improved performance for new buildings: 100% Tier 4 by 2027 will achieve a total of 10% 
in cumulative GHG emission reductions.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
86 
INDUSTRIALIZATION OF RETROFITS
In both Europe and North America, the industrialization of retrofits is an increasingly common 
solution to rapidly retrofit the building stock in order to achieve GHG reduction targets. 
Energiesprong, a Dutch public-private partnership, has pioneered a semi-industrialized net 
zero energy retrofit package and applied this approach to approximately 5,000 low- and mid-
rise multifamily retrofits, with roughly another 100,000 units of multifamily demand aggregated 
across Europe.78 Similar projects are under development in New York State, California, and 
Massachusetts.79 The EU has advanced retrofit industrialization programs underway.80 The City of 
Seattle has developed a mechanism to transform deep retrofits into power purchase agreements, 
described as Energy Efficiency as a Service (EEaS) contracts. A pilot project for thirty commercial 
buildings is currently underway.81 Efficiency Canada has identified policies to scale up retrofits in 
Canada, including integrated design and project delivery, prefabrication of building facades and 
HVAC systems, mass customization tools that manage distinct building characteristics with greater 
ease, and aggregation of retrofit projects into single portfolios.82
6. Energy
6.1 OVERVIEW
Municipalities have a persistent impact on the level of GHG emissions in the community. 
Community energy and emissions planning begins by developing a quantitative inventory of the 
community’s GHG emissions and systematically identifying the ways in which municipalities can 
influence the level of community emissions.
Figure 32 shows that energy is a cross-cutting theme, which includes buildings, transportation, and 
industry. In sum, modelled GHG emissions from energy account for 92% of the City’s emissions in 
2020. The actions in this section focus on the generation of energy, while other sections focus on 
78	 Egerter, A., & Campbell, M. (2020). Prefabricated zero energy retrofit technologies: A market assessment (DOE/
GO-102020-5262, 1614689). https://doi.org/10.2172/1614689
79	 The hub of the US work is a project called REALIZE: https://rmi.org/our-work/buildings/realize/ 
80	 An example of one project that is a partnership of major industries is BRESAER: http://www.bresaer.eu/
81	 A description of the City of Seattle’s program is available here: https://www.bdlaw.com/publications/seattle-
launches-energy-efficiency-as-a-service-program-encouraging-deep-energy-efficiency-building-retrofits/
82 Haley, B and Torrie, R.  (2021). Canada’s Climate Retrofit Mission. Retrieved from: https://www.efficiencycanada.
org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/Retrofit-Mission-FINAL-2021-06-16.pdf  
87 
December 2021
electrification and the efficiency of its use. The cumulative GHG emissions reduction of improving 
emissions from energy (efficiency, electrification, and renewable energy generation) in the NZ40 
scenario totals 252 MtCO2e. This reduction is primarily from displacing both fossil fuels and 
relatively clean electricity with 100% clean electricity. 
CUMULATIVE GHG REDUCTION POTENTIAL 2020-2050	
	
252 MtCO2e
Figure 32. GHG emissions from energy.
The key actions in the energy sector include wastewater, renewable natural gas, district energy 
systems (DES), and scaled up wind, solar, and onsite battery storage, and hydrogen83 (Table 9).
Table 9. Description of GHG reduction actions for the energy sector.
  WEDGE
  WEDGE DESCRIPTION
SCENARIO
RNG from waste and 
wastewater
RNG facilities at Green Lane and Keele Valley. All wastewater 
plants include biodigesters by 2050.
BAP
Install contracted 
district energy systems
Existing district energy systems in 2016 plus district energy 
systems with contracts to the Enwave expansion (Well, 100 
Queens Quay and One Yonge), Mirvish Village. The existing 
DE system at University of Toronto is switched to renewable 
sources. 
83	 Note that clean hydrogen is blended with natural gas, which contributes to GHG emissions reductions until 
2050 when heating in the residential and commercial sectors is electrified. 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
88 
  WEDGE
  WEDGE DESCRIPTION
SCENARIO
Renewable energy 
plus storage
Wind capacity scaled up to 200 MW by 2050.
Onsite battery storage scaled up to 2000 MW by 2050.
Ground mount PV on 50% of parking lots.
100% of buildings have solar PV installed by 2050, where 
feasible.
Zero by 
2050
Renewable and 
expanded district 
energy
All existing DE systems are 100% renewable by 2030- natural 
gas and electric cooling are replaced by RNG and deep 
lake cooling. The City's planned DE expansion targets are 
achieved using ambient DE systems.
CLIMATE ACTION PLANNING
A key aspect of community energy planning includes prioritizing interventions in terms of a 
hierarchy based on what lasts longest.84 The first priority is land-use planning and infrastructure, 
including density, mix of land uses, energy supply infrastructure, and transportation infrastructure. 
The second is major production processes, transportation modes, and buildings, including 
industrial process, choice of transportation modes, and building and site design. The final priority 
is energy-using equipment including transit vehicles, motors, appliances, and HVAC systems. 
84	 Jaccard, M., Failing, L., & Berry, T. (1997). From equipment to infrastructure: community energy management 
and greenhouse gas emission reduction. Energy Policy, 25(13), 1065–1074.
89 
December 2021
Figure 33. Reducing GHG emissions from a systems perspective.85
The hierarchy of climate action interventions shown in Figure 33 and described in the Climate 
Action Planning box prioritizes higher-impact interventions where there are fewer options to 
intervene between now and 2050, above easier interventions which are likely to have greater short 
term returns. The World Bank defines this consideration in terms of urgency,86 posing the question: 
“Is the option associated with high economic inertia such as a risk of costly lock-in, irreversibility, or 
higher costs, if action is delayed or not? If the answer is yes, then action is urgent; if not, it can be 
postponed.” From this perspective, land-use planning is likely the more urgent mitigation option 
because of its durability and how difficult it is to undo.
The Reduce-Improve-Switch approach is complementary to community energy planning. This 
approach, which has been adapted from similar well-known approaches such as Reduce-Reuse-
85	 Based on a method developed in: Dobbelsteen, A., Tillie, N., Joubert, M., de Jager, W., & 
Doepel, D. (n.d.). Towards CO2 neutral city planning—The Rotterdam Energy Approach and 
Planning (REAP). Retrieved from https://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTURBANDEVELOPMENT/
Resources/336387-1342044185050/8756911-1342044630817/V2Chap08.pdf 
86	 Fay, M., Hallegatte, S., Vogt-Schilb, A., Rozenberg, J., Narloch, U., & Kerr, T. M. (2015). Decarbonizing 
development: three steps to a zero-carbon future. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
90 
Recycle (from the waste sector) and Avoid-Shift-Improve87 (from the transportation sector), seeks to 
consider the energy system as a whole across sectors. It focuses on the concept of reducing energy 
consumption and improving the efficiency of the energy system (supply and demand), and then fuel 
switching to low-carbon or zero-carbon renewable sources.
The energy system is complex and the linear application of reduce-improve-switch is not simple, 
neither should it be the only approach considered. Many actions have cross-cutting impacts; for 
example, building retrofits can reduce the amount of energy required for space heating (through 
envelope improvements) and improve the efficiency of the energy used in the building (through 
equipment upgrades). Additionally, solar PV could be installed on the roof, facilitating a switch to a 
zero-carbon renewable source. In general, whether it be buildings, transport, or waste, the idea is 
to first reduce the amount of energy needed by as much as possible (through reduced consumption 
and efficiencies) and then to fuel switch away from fossil fuels to low- or zero-carbon fuel source to 
supply the remainder of the demand.
The concepts of reduce-improve-switch and community energy planning guided the analysis 
and identification of a final list of actions for modelling, as well as the sequencing of actions in 
modelling. 
Figure 34 illustrates the transformation of the energy system in Toronto across the relevant sectors, 
while Figure 35 shows a point in time comparison by sector and fuel. Fossil fuels are phased 
out by 2040 (light and dark blue) and total energy consumption is more than cut in half due to 
efficiency gains in transportation and buildings. By 2050, the energy system has been electrified, 
some of which is locally generated, while the majority is provided by the provincial grid. The charts 
illustrating end-use highlight the importance of retrofits and the efficiency of the electric engine in 
limiting growth in electricity consumption as electrification occurs.
87	 GIZ. (2011). Sustainable urban transport: Avoid-shift-improve. Retrieved from http://www.sutp.org/files/
contents/documents/resources/E_Fact-Sheets-and-Policy-Briefs/SUTP_GIZ_FS_Avoid-Shift-Improve_EN.pdf 
91 
December 2021
G
HG
 em
iss
ion
s a
nd 
ene
rgy 
redu
ctio
ns b
y en
ergy
 typ
e, s
ecto
r, and action
 type (2
016 to 205
0), N
Z40.
	
	
   EMISSIONS		
	
               ENERGY
Figure 34. GHG emissions and energy reductions by energy type, sector, and action type (2016 
to 2050), NZ40.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
92 
Figure 35. Total energy for NZ40, 2016 and 2050.
6.2 TARGETS
Targets for the energy sector are provided in five-year increments for the next decade and then 
subsequently for each decade until 2050 (Table 10). The targets serve as indicators against which 
the City can track performance over time. 
Table 10. Selected Targets for Energy Sector Actions.
2016
2017-2025
2026-2030
2031-2040
2041-2050
District energy: 
Non-residential floor area 
connected to zero-emissions 
District Energy Systems 
(DES (m2))
6,989,600
421,612
514,100
707,600
703,000
District energy: Residential 
floor area connected to 
zero-emissions DES
763,800
246,000
144,400
167,300
115,500
Renewable energy: 
Groundmount solar PV 
installed  (MW)
-
62.9
70.0
140
112
Renewable energy: 
Wind turbines (MW)
0.4
-
-
100
100
93 
December 2021
2016
2017-2025
2026-2030
2031-2040
2041-2050
Renewable energy: 
Storage installed (MW)
-
0.1
-
1000
1000
Renewable energy: Rooftop 
solar PV installed (MW)
72
138
1,368
2,367
1,783
6.3 KEY ACTIONS
Figure 36 illustrates the recommended actions for the energy sector in order to achieve net zero 
emissions. The wedge diagram also includes decarbonization of the grid as an additional action that 
addresses the gap in getting to zero. The key actions for reducing GHG emissions in the energy 
section for the NZ40 and NZ50 scenarios include:
1.	 Scale up renewable energy and storage: Wind capacity scaled up to 200 MW; onsite 
battery storage to 2,000 MW; ground mount PV on 50% of parking lots; PV solar installed 
on 100% of buildings (where feasible). These actions result in 5% reduction in cumulative 
GHG emissions by 2050.
2.	 Renewable and expanded DES: All planned DE systems are installed and 100% renewable 
by 2030; natural gas and electric cooling are replaced by renewable natural gas and cold 
water, which achieves 2% reduction in cumulative GHG emissions by 2050.
3.	 Decarbonize the grid: Electrification of heating and transportation is a key strategy; for 
this effort to reduce GHG emissions to nearly zero, the system needs a source of clean 
electricity. The provincial grid is the most likely candidate. 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
94 
 
2
0
2
0
-2
05
0.

Figure 36. Wedge diagram of energy GHG reduction actions, NZ40, 2020-2050.
DECARBONIZATION AND PEAK ELECTRICITY DEMAND
Electrifying two of the most significant energy consuming activities in society—heating and 
transportation—has broad implications for the electricity grid. The way in which electrification is 
implemented and whether or not this process is accompanied by other actions will influence the 
impact of decarbonization on the capacity of the electricity grid needed for peak demand, the 
speed at which the grids can be decarbonized, and the cost to society of the transformation. 
95 
December 2021
While the analysis for Toronto did not evaluate the impact on peak demand on an hourly basis, 
an analysis of the aggregate impact of deep retrofits and fuel switching on a major portfolio of 
buildings in Ontario provides insight on the electrification of heating.88  For natural gas heated 
buildings, electricity demand of the portfolio currently peaks at 70 MW in the middle of the summer 
in the afternoon. After full electrification and retrofitting, these same buildings peak at 74 MW on 
a winter morning when the buildings are ramping up for the workday. It is the effect of improving 
the thermal envelope—the insulation and window upgrades—that keeps the peak from being much 
higher as a result of the electrification of heating.  
The portion of the simulated portfolio that is electrically heated has a baseline peak that already 
occurs in the winter. While the shape of the load in the electrically heated buildings does not 
change very much as a result of the retrofits and heat pump transition, the peak drops by 26%, 
reflecting the impact of the heat pump efficiencies on electricity consumption for heating.Daily peak demand of simulated natural gas heated buildings, baseline (blue) and post-retrofit and heat pump conversions (orange). 
Figure 37. Daily peak demand of simulated natural gas heated buildings, baseline (blue) and 
post-retrofit and heat pump conversions (orange). Daily peak demand of simulated electrically heated buildings, baseline (blue) and post-retrofit and heat pump conversions (orange).
Figure 38. Daily peak demand of simulated electrically heated buildings, baseline (blue) and post-
retrofit and heat pump conversions (orange).
88	 Torrie, R. and Herbert, Y. (2021). ​The Implications of Deep Decarbonization Pathways for Electricity Grids. 
Retrieved from: https://emi-ime.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/EMI-2020-Herbert_report_The-Implications-of-
Deep-Decarbonization-Pathways-for-Electricity-Grids.pdf 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
96 
The buildings included in these two portfolios have similar occupancy patterns and end uses, 
and including residential dwellings or other types with different demand patterns (e.g., hospitals, 
supermarkets) will result in additional opportunities for balancing peaks to minimize the impact 
of electrification of heating on the grid. The variability of changing requirements for heating and 
cooling as a result of climate change will also have an influence on the peak demand.
7. Sustainable 
Mobility and 
Transportation
According to the 2019 GHG Inventory, emissions from transportation accounted for 36% 
of Toronto’s community GHG emissions, 73% of which are attributed to personal vehicles. 
Transportation is the second greatest source of GHG emissions for the city, after energy use by 
buildings, with approximately 5.6 MtCO2e. 
GHG emissions projections indicate that, in 2020, emissions from transportation were 5.9 MtCO2e. 
Each scenario outcome for the sector in 2050 is illustrated by Figure 39. The Do Nothing scenario 
results in annual emissions of 4.4 MtCO2e; BAP results in 1.5 MtCO2e; and, the NZ40 and NZ50 
result in 0.6 and 0.7 MtCO2e, respectively. The cumulative GHG reduction potential between 2020 
and 2050 is 86 MtCO2e.
97 
December 2021
7.1 OVERVIEW
CUMULATIVE GHG REDUCTION POTENTIAL 2020-2050	
  	
      86 MtCO2e
Figure 39. GHG emissions from transportation. 
7.2 TARGETS
Targets for the transportation sector are provided in five-year increments for the next decade 
and then subsequently for each decade until 2050 (Table 11). To illustrate the impact of the NZ 
scenarios, the results for the other scenarios are included as reference. The results may not sum to 
100% due to rounding. 
Table 11. Targets for Transportation Sector Actions. 
2016
2025
2030
2040
2050
Share of total 
personal 
vehicles 
which is 
electric
Negligible
2% (DN)
2% (BAP)
2% (NZ50)
4% (NZ40)
4% (DN)
9% (BAP)
10% (NZ50)
31% (NZ40)
9% (DN)
67% (BAP)
67% (NZ50)
100% (NZ40)
23% (DN)
98% (BAP)
100% (NZ50)
100% (NZ40)
Share of 
total energy 
used for 
transit which 
is electric
Negligible
48% (DN)
56% (BAP)
59% (NZ50)
59% (NZ40)
50% (DN)
71% (BAP)
91% (NZ50)
91% (NZ40)
49% (DN)
90% (BAP)
100% (NZ50)
100% (NZ40)
49% (DN)
100% (BAP)
100% (NZ50)
100% (NZ40)
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
98 
2016
2025
2030
2040
2050
Mode share 
(NZ40)89 
Bike/e-bike: 
4%
Walk: 9%
Transit: 25%
Vehicle: 63%
Bike/e-bike: 
8%
Walk: 13%
Transit: 26%
Vehicle: 54%
Bike/e-bike: 
14%
Walk: 16%
Transit: 24%
Vehicle: 47%
Bike/e-bike: 
23%
Walk: 23%
Transit: 22%
Vehicle: 32%
Bike/e-bike: 
23%
Walk: 23%
Transit: 23%
Vehicle: 32%
7.3 KEY ACTIONS 
The recommended actions for the transportation sector are illustrated in the wedge diagram 
(Figure 40) and in Table 12. The key actions recommended for reaching net zero include:
1.	 Electrify personal vehicles: Electrify 100% of personal vehicles by 2040. This means that 
100% of vehicles sold are electric by 2030. Achieves 21% of cumulative GHG emission 
reductions.
2.	 Electrify commercial vehicles: Electrify 100% of commercial vehicles by 2050 (by 2040 for 
NZ40). Achieves 8% in cumulative GHG emission reductions.
3.	 Electrify transit: Electrify 100% of transit by 2040, which results in 3% of cumulative GHG 
emission reductions.
89	 Mode share targets are the same in NZ50 and NZ40 scenarios.
99 
December 2021
Figure 40. Wedge diagram of transportation GHG reduction actions, NZ scenarios.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
100 
Table 12. Description of GHG reduction actions for the transportation sector.
WEDGE
WEDGE DESCRIPTION
SCENARIO
Electrify transit by 
2050
50% of fleet electric by 2030; 100% by 2050.
100% electrification of GO Transit by 2025.
BAP
Active and transit 
infrastructure/ 
service
Active and transit mode shares improved through as-planned 
infrastructure improvements.
City fleet 45% 
electric by 2030
Transition 45% of City-owned fleet to low-carbon vehicles 
by 2030; 65% greenhouse gas reduction by 2030 (from 1990 
levels).
Electrify personal 
vehicles by 2050
Electrify 98% of personal vehicles by 2050 (achieved from 100% 
EV sales in 2040).
BAP commercial 
vehicle electrification
Light duty commercial: 50% new sales EV by 2040.
Long-haul: background 2.5% annual electrification rate.
Increased bus 
lanes and service 
frequency
Convert one lane of traffic to exclusive bus lanes on all arterials.
Increase service frequency on all transit routes: bus by 70%, 
streetcar by 50%, subway off-peak service increased to every 
3 mins.
Zero by 
2050
Road tolls
Tolls of $0.66/km on all arterial roads.
Free transit
No transit fares.
Work from home
50% of professional/management/technical and general office/
clerical workers in the GTHA work from home on any given day.
Switch remaining 
personal ICE 
vehicles to electric
Switch all remaining ICE vehicles 11 years or older to electric 
from 2040 onwards.
Electrify transit by 
2040
Electrify 100% of transit by 2040.
E-bikes
Shift 75% of car and transit trips under 5km to bikes or e-bikes 
by 2040.
Increase walking and 
cycling
Shift 75% of trips under 2km to walking by 2040.
Electrify city fleet by 
2050
Electrify 100% of the city fleet by 2050.
101 
December 2021
WEDGE
WEDGE DESCRIPTION
SCENARIO
Biofuels city fleet
In 2025, begin purchasing renewable diesel for diesel vehicles 
and equipment (30% renewable diesel for city fleet).
Electrify commercial 
vehicles by 2050
Electrify 100% of commercial vehicles by 2050.
Biofuel aviation
Aviation runs on 100% low-emissions fuels by 2050.
Biofuel rail
GO rail runs on 100% biofuel by 2050.
Electrify personal 
vehicles by 2040
Electrify 100% of personal vehicles by 2040.
Zero by 
2040
Electrify commercial 
vehicles by 2040
Electrify 100% of commercial vehicles by 2040.
The transformation of the transportation system is evident in Figure 42 as emissions decline rapidly 
beginning in 2023. By 2030, no more internal combustion engines are sold, but the s-curve of 
the adoption rate means that the private vehicle fleet turns over rapidly between 2026 and 2034 
(Figure 41). S-curves describe the diffusion of innovations90 in which a technology is adopted by 
pioneers, it then becomes mainstream experiencing rapid growth, before slowing down as laggards 
are slow to adopt; the trajectory of EV adoption is similar in the BAP and NZ50 scenarios. To 
achieve the GHG reduction targets in NZ40, internal combustion engines are retired early, resulting 
in a steep s-curve and then a drop-off before the earlier vehicles reach their end-of-life and need to 
be replaced. 
90	 Rogers, E. M. (2010). Diffusion of innovations. Simon and Schuster.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
102 
Figure 41. Private EV sales in each of the scenarios, using S-curves.
In 2016, emissions are split between cars and light trucks, while heavy trucks and urban buses have 
progressively smaller slivers of emissions. The efficiency improvements resulting from the switch to 
electric vehicles are apparent from the fourfold decline in energy consumption. Gasoline and diesel 
are phased out by 2038, so that the remaining emissions after 2040 are the result of natural gas 
combustion in the provincial grid from electric vehicle charging. 
103 
December 2021
E
mi
ssi
ons
 an
d e
nerg
y us
e fr
om b
uild
ings
 for
 NZ40, 2016 a
nd 2050.
	
	
   EMISSIONS	 	
	
                 ENERGY
Figure 42. Emissions and energy use from buildings for NZ40, 2016 and 2050.
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
104 
8. Sustainable 
Consumption and 
Zero Waste
8.1 OVERVIEW
According to the 2019 GHG Inventory, emissions from waste, water, and wastewater accounted for 
7% of Toronto’s community GHG emissions, with organic waste being the primary source when it 
is landfilled. The analysis does not include upstream emissions associated with manufacturing the 
products.
GHG emissions projections indicate that in 2020 emissions from these sectors were 1.2 MtCO2e (8% 
of total). Each scenario outcome for the sector in 2050 is illustrated by Figure 43. The Do Nothing 
scenario results in annual emissions of 0.6 MtCO2e; BAP results in 0.5 MtCO2e; and the NZ40 and 
NZ50 result in 0.1 and 0.2 MtCO2e, respectively. The cumulative GHG reduction potential between 
2020 and 2050 is 10 MtCO2e.
CUMULATIVE GHG REDUCTION POTENTIAL 2020-2050	
	
       10 MtCO2e
Figure 43. GHG emissions from waste, water, and wastewater. 
105 
December 2021
8.2 TARGETS
Targets for the waste sector are provided in five-year increments for the next decade and then 
subsequently for each decade until 2050 (Table 13). The targets serve as indicators against which 
the City can track performance over time. 
Table 13. Targets for waste and sustainable consumption sector actions, NZ40.
2016
2025
2030
2040
2050
Waste diversion
52%
70%
73%
85%
96%
Waste generation 
(tonnes per capita)
0.39
0.44
0.45 
0.46 
0.46
Increase efficiency 
of water pumps 
(w.r.t. 2022)
0%
7.5%
20%
20%
20%
8.3 KEY ACTIONS
The recommended actions for the waste, water, and wastewater sector are illustrated in the wedge 
diagram (Figure 44) and in Table 14. The key actions recommended for reaching net zero include:
1.	 Waste reduction and diversion: Increase waste diversion rate beyond 70% by 2025 target 
to 95% by 2050 (NZ50). Zero organics in landfills by 2025 and zero waste by 2050 (NZ40 
target). Results in 4% of cumulative GHG emission reductions.
2.	 Increase efficiency of water pumps: Increase efficiency of water distribution pumps. 
City of Toronto Net Zero Strategy – Technical Report
106 
Figure 44. Wedge diagram of waste GHG reduction actions, 2020-2050, NZ40.
Table 14. Description of GHG reduction actions for the waste sector.
  WEDGE
  WEDGE DESCRIPTION
SCENARIO
Waste diversion BAP
Increase waste diversion rate to 70% by 2025.
BAP
Increase efficiency 
of water pumps
Increase efficiency of water distribution pumps.
Waste diversion 
Increase waste diversion rates beyond the 70% by 2026 
target, to 95% by 2050.
Zero by 
2050
Ban landfill organics
Zero organics in landfills by 2025.
Zero by 
2040
107 
December 2021
