A RISING TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
1
Turning the tide
Authors: Erik Sparling (Climate 
Risk Institute), Jimena 
Eyzaguirre (ESSA Consulting), 
Janna Wale (Canadian Climate 
Institute) 
Contributors: Glenn Milner 
(JLL), Jenna Rines (Dot 
Connector Studio), Ryan Ness 
(Canadian Climate Institute), 
Jenessa Doherty (Climate Risk 
Institute), Megan Symonds 
(Climate Risk Institute), Chad 
Nelson (Infrastructure Canada), 
Dan Sandink (Institute for 
Catastrophic Loss Reduction)
 
This scoping paper is part of a series 
commissioned by the Canadian Climate 
Institute that explores key opportunities 
for public policy to advance rapid, 
effective, and just climate change 
adaptation in Canada.
CANADIAN
CLIMATE
INSTITUTE
L’INSTITUT
CLIMATIQUE
DU CANADA
How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada
Introduction
Climate change is increasing the likelihood of more frequent and 
severe pluvial, fluvial, and coastal flooding. Flooding is Canada’s most 
common natural hazard, with 80 per cent of Canadian cities built in part 
on flood plains and 10 per cent of homes at high risk of flooding (Public 
Safety Canada 2019; D’Souza et al. 2021). Floods cause loss and damage 
to community-sustaining infrastructure, including properties, homes 
(Henstra and Thistlethwaite 2017), and critical infrastructure like power, 
road, and telecommunications networks (Kidd 2011). In the next few years, 
flood disasters are projected to cost $673 million annually in disaster 
financial assistance programs (PBO 2016). They also directly affect people’s 
mental and physical health and well-being through temporary, repeated, 
or permanent displacement (Levine et al. 2007; Burton et al. 2016; Carroll 
et al. 2010; Henstra and Thistlethwaite 2017). 
As climate change continues to worsen flood risks in communities across 
Canada, the need for effective actions that build resilience to flooding is 
more pressing than ever. Absent enhanced adaptation and resilience 
measures, flood damage to homes and buildings alone in Canada could 
increase five-fold in the next few decades and ten-fold by the end of the 
century, costing as much as $13.6 billion annually (Ness et al. 2021).
December 11, 2014: Children with their grandmother look at the flooding 
from an overpass in Moncton, New Brunswick after torrential rain dumped 
more than 70mm of rain. THE CANADIAN PRESS/Marc Grandmaison
All bolded terms in this report are defined in the glossary.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
2
Positionality statement
The authors acknowledge that systemic injustices and inequalities stemming from 
historical colonization and ongoing discrimination have positioned certain people and 
communities at greater risk of physical, social, and economic impacts from climate 
change and climate policy. This includes Black, Indigenous, and people of colour, lower-
income people, 2SLGBTQI+ people, people with disabilities, and others. These groups and 
their experiences are often not adequately represented in climate policy development 
and implementation even though they have considerable stake in the outcomes.
We also acknowledge that our work is predominantly rooted in western ways of 
thought, that there are many different ways of knowing and being. We recognize 
our responsibility to strive towards creating policy recommendations that reflect and 
integrate diverse and underrepresented experiences, values, and worldviews.
We are an interdisciplinary group of individuals with varied life experiences and 
privileges. We encourage making space for equity-deserving groups to lead and 
collaborate on this important research moving forward. Engagement with equity-
deserving groups should inform community needs and determine priorities for action.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
3
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
3
Improved flood risk transparency entails the mapping, disclosure, and pricing of flood risk to help 
individuals and communities decide how best to avoid, mitigate, or absorb damages and losses due 
to flooding. Flood risk transparency has a crucial role to play in Canada’s efforts to protect people and 
communities from the worsening impacts of climate change. 
However, in many instances, flood risk transparency practices can have disproportionately negative 
impacts on equity-deserving groups.1 Perversely, while many equity-deserving communities are more 
likely to live in flood prone areas, they may be less able to access or use disclosed flood risk information, 
less likely to trust it, and more likely to be disadvantaged by the flood risk pricing that can make insurance 
or decent housing unaffordable. 
In this paper we consider the current state of knowledge on flood risk transparency practices and their 
impacts for equity-deserving groups in Canada. Our research was primarily informed by a literature 
review, with insights supplemented by four semi-structured interviews conducted between April 4 
and May 10, 2022, with targeted knowledge holders (see Appendix 1). We conclude by considering 
policy interventions that could advance social equity in flood risk transparency and move towards 
transformative adaptation—removing inequities and unintended consequences for equity-deserving 
groups by reorienting or replacing existing approaches and transforming the structures and institutions 
that shape them (Schlosberg et al. 2017; Burlace et al. 2021; Heck 2021; Burlace et al. 2021). 
The paper is structured around three main questions: 
1.	
What are the impacts on equity-deserving communities of widespread implementation of flood 
risk transparency practices in Canada? (Section 3)
2.	 How can governments best ensure flood risk transparency practices result in more socially equitable 
outcomes? (Section 4)
3.	 What policies might be introduced to help improve outcomes of flood risk transparency for equity-
deserving groups? (Section 5)
This paper is focused on what governments can do to help ease the disproportionate and inequitable 
impacts of flood risk transparency on equity-deserving people. More specifically, it focuses on 
government influence in three specific areas of practice: flood risk mapping, disclosure, and pricing, or 
how information about flood risk is represented, shared, and acted upon. As such, government actions 
and policies related to direct investments in flood risk mitigation measures such as flood protection 
infrastructure or relocation of at-risk households—a vital area of involvement—fall outside the scope 
of this paper.
1  Members of equity-deserving groups are highly diverse. A broad-based scoping paper such as this one does not capture differences of opinion and 
experience among all such groups and individuals. We consider this review a starting point for further research.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
4
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
4
To fully understand the impacts of flood risk transparency for equity-
deserving groups, we start by describing key concepts that are foundational 
to the rest of the paper. 
2.1 Flood risk transparency
Flood risk transparency, as discussed, consists of flood risk mapping, 
disclosure, and pricing. Flood risk maps characterize and illustrate risks 
in flood-prone areas. Flood risk mapping can help reduce the impacts 
of future floods by informing purchasing, investment, and adaptation 
decisions (Council of Canadian Academies 2022; Henstra and Thistlethwaite 
2018b). Flood risk disclosure is the formal practice of ensuring flood 
risk maps and other flood risk information are made available to parties 
involved in specific types of financial transactions. Flood risk disclosure 
facilitates flood risk pricing—the reflection of flood risk levels in the cost 
of real estate, rentals, insurance, and financing. 
Canada’s approach to flood risk management is cross-jurisdictional, and 
complex, as it involves Indigenous, municipal, provincial, territorial, and federal 
levels of government. Governments influence the flood risk transparency 
practices of flood risk mapping, disclosure, and pricing through policies, 
regulatory and legislative actions, and investments. Government decisions 
can also determine whether and how the issue of equity is addressed through 
policy choices that prioritize and shape adaptation and risk mitigation efforts, 
and that either address or ignore any inequitable outcomes that may stem 
from these efforts. Governance of flood risk involves so many actors and 
agencies, that at times governments are unclear about their responsibilities 
for flood risk management (CCA 2022; Feltmate et al. 2020; Interview 1), let 
alone how climate change and equity issues fit in (Table 1). 
Key concepts
May 4, 2022: Rebecca Sutherland of 
Pequis First Nation and Shaine Paul 
from Red Rose sandbag a home 
at risk of flooding in Peguis First 
Nation, Manitoba. THE CANADIAN 
PRESS/David Lipnowski
2
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
5
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
5
Table 1: 
Examples of flood risk mapping, disclosure, and pricing
Flood risk mapping
Flood risk disclosure
Flood risk pricing 
	
▶Government flood hazard and risk 
modelling and mapping
	
▶Maps and databases of historic flood 
damage 
	
▶Publicly accessible flood hazard and 
risk mapping and information portals
	
▶Real estate tools that incorporate 
flood risk information into listings
	
▶The regulated sharing of information 
about flood risk or prior flood damage 
to a property by the person or entity 
seeking to either sell or lease that 
property
	
▶The regulated sharing of information 
about flood risk and prior flood 
damage by parties seeking to access 
funding through the capital markets, 
or by insurance companies
	
▶Changes in property resale values 
that reflect disclosed flood risk
	
▶Changes in property and flood 
insurance premiums
	
▶Changes in terms and interest rates 
for home mortgages
	
▶Changes in terms and rates for 
municipal loans and bonds 
2.2 Climate change vulnerability and risk
Climate change vulnerability is “the propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected” by a 
changing climate. It reflects the sensitivity of an individual, community, or asset to one or more climate 
change-related hazards, and the capacity to adapt (IPCC 2022). Climate change risk describes the 
potential impacts of climate change to an individual, community, or asset; it reflects both the likelihood of 
exposure to a climate-related hazard and the consequence of that exposure (Figure 1). The consequence 
is largely a function of vulnerability, as more vulnerable individuals, communities, or assets are less able 
to withstand the effects of the hazard and recover afterwards. 
Human vulnerability to climate change is not intrinsic to individuals or specific groups. It is a product 
of societal choices, structures, and values, and how they interact with a changing climate. In other 
words, climate change vulnerability reflects both society’s acceptance of the explicit decisions made 
to address risk in some areas, as well as the implicit decisions associated with inaction on or the 
deprioritization of other risks (Klein 2009; Nightingale 2017; Scoville-Simonds et al. 2020; Nightingale 
2017; Thomas and Warner 2019; Webber 2015). In western societies, the governments and stakeholders 
responsible for prioritizing specific geographical areas for risk reduction, and investing in specific risk 
reduction measures, do not proportionately represent the values, priorities, or interests of equity-
deserving communities (Ikeme 2003). As a result, social, economic, political, and decision-making 
processes can produce dramatically different outcomes across society by leaving certain communities 
less able than others to plan for, cope with, or adapt to the eventual impacts of climate change-related 
hazards (Oulahen 2021). 
 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
6
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
6
2.3 Structural drivers of inequity
Marginalization is the process by which people from equity-deserving groups experience disadvantages, 
discrimination, and “othering” as a result of the ignorance, racism, and socio-cultural bias present within a 
society (Partners for Resilience 2020; Chakraborty et al. 2022; Abdillahi and Shaw, 2020). Marginalization is 
a result of how accepted cultural norms, institutions, and socially constructed systems influence political 
decision making and resource allocation to favour the well-being of the dominant (non-marginalized) 
group. Marginalization can drive climate change vulnerability by increasing sensitivity to hazards while 
limiting adaptive capacity through the inequitable distribution of resources (Interview 2, Partners for 
Resilience 2020; Chakraborty et al. 2022; Shi et al. 2016). It can also increase exposure to hazards (Box 1). 
Figure 1: 
Relating climate vulnerability and risk (IPCC, 2014) 
SOCIOECONOMIC  
PROCESSES
RISK
Vulnerability
Hazards
Exposure
CLIMATE
Socioeconomic 
Pathways
Natural  
Variability
Adaptation and 
Mitigation Actions
Anthropogenic 
Climate Change
Governance
IMPACTS
EMISSIONS 
and Land-use Change
In 2021, Indigenous communities across British Columbia experienced catastrophic 
flooding. Communities like Shackan Indian Band and Cook’s Ferry in the Interior 
of B.C., who had been forcibly relocated onto floodplains under the Indian Act of 
1876, were inundated (Brend 2021; Murphy et al. 2022). The forced relocations have 
simultaneously increased exposure to flooding and eroded adaptive capacity, since 
communities are no longer within their traditional territories where knowledge is 
held (Yumagulova 2020; Savard et al. 2016; Murphy et al. 2022).
Similarly, anti-Black racism in Atlantic Canada has shaped settlement and 
development patterns in ways that increase vulnerability and risk. Black 
communities are more likely to be situated near industrial and chemical sites, 
while being under-provisioned with social services and public infrastructure (e.g. 
clean drinking water and transportation) through exclusion from more desirable 
settlement areas (Jean-Pierre 2021; Waldron 2020; Faber 2015; Interview 1). 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
7
March 24, 2022: Paulus Velt, far right, whose home was washed away 
and farm destroyed during the November floods, speaks with former 
Assembly of First Nations National Chief RoseAnne Archibald as he shows 
her and Shackan Indian Band Chief Arnie Lampreau (Swakum), second 
left, where his home once stood on his property on the Nicola River, west 
of Merritt, British Columbia.THE CANADIAN PRESS/Darryl Dyck
Marginalization driving 
vulnerability and risk
BOX 1
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
8
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
8
2.4 Social justice
Social justice centres on principles of fairness, equality, equity, rights, and participation (Khechen 2013). 
Adopting a social justice lens acknowledges that; i) the distribution of benefits, resources, and rights is 
unequal; ii) historical and ongoing marginalization and discrimination have resulted in and entrenched 
these inequalities, creating significant disadvantages for equity-deserving populations (Shi et al. 2016); 
and iii) the redistribution of resources and rights is necessary as a result (Schlosberg et al. 2017). We 
adopt the following three social justice principles to both identify problems and lay out solutions with 
respect to flood risk transparency and equity.
Processes that actively recognize 
and tackle rooted inequities, by 
recognizing and legitimizing 
different identities as well 
as histories of oppression 
(Mohtat and Khirfan 2021).
The fair distribution of  resources, 
benefits, and costs (Burlace et al. 2021; 
Mason and Rigg 2019), inclusive 
of fair spatial and temporal 
distributions of resources, 
regardless of socio-
economic status, 
adaptive capacity, and 
political voice (Mohtet 
and Khirfan 2021).
PROCEDURAL JUSTICE
The opportunity and ability to participate in 
decision-making and the power to refuse if 
agreements are not met  
(Burlace et al. 2021; Heck 2021). 
 
 
 
E
Q
U
A
L
I
T
Y
 
 
 
E
Q
U
I
T
Y
 
 
 
R
I
G
H
T
S
 
 
 
F
A
I
R
N
E
S
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
A
R
T
I
C
I
P
A
T
I
O
N
RECOGNITIONAL 
JUSTICE
DISTRIBUTIVE 
JUSTICE
SOCIAL 
JUSTICE 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
9
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
9
This section focuses on the impacts of flood risk mapping, disclosure, 
and pricing for members of equity-deserving groups. The process of 
evaluating the equity impacts of current flood risk transparency practices 
in Canada requires a critical look at the inequalities embedded in social 
systems, and how entrenched racism, marginalization, and exclusion 
have contributed to invalidating the experiences and identities of equity-
deserving communities. In so doing, this section seeks to embody the 
practice of recognitional justice. 
3.1	 Impacts of flood risk mapping  
	
for equity-deserving groups
Flood risk maps are increasingly recognized as a critical tool for 
understanding and mitigating flood risks (Minano and Peddle 2018; Pralle 
2019). Timely and accurate flood mapping is an effective and cost-efficient 
adaptation tool that can provide communities with insights into how 
climate change impacts may affect their lives and livelihoods. However, 
issues related to the availability, accuracy, and accessibility of flood risk 
maps, and to the ways in which these products characterize risk, can 
further contribute to the marginalization of equity-deserving groups.
i. 	 The availability and accuracy of public flood maps is 	
poor for many areas where equity-deserving groups 
are overrepresented. 
While the availability of publicly developed flood maps is generally patchy 
in Canada, areas in which equity-deserving groups are overrepresented 
tend to have especially large gaps. For example, rural and remote areas 
Impacts of flood risk 
transparency practices  
for equity-deserving groups
Timely and accurate flood 
mapping is an effective and 
cost-efficient adaptation 
tool that can provide 
communities with insights 
into how climate change 
impacts may affect their 
lives and livelihoods.
Nov. 23, 2021: In Abbotsford, British 
Columbia, a farm manager’s son 
walks past items he and his father 
salvaged from inside the lower floor 
of their rented house on a farm that 
flooded. THE CANADIAN PRESS/
Darryl Dyck
3
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
10
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
10
have not been prioritized for flood mapping, due to the lower concentrations of people and lower 
numbers of government-owned assets in these areas (Yumagulova 2020; Mcclearn 2019). Even in urban 
areas, where maps are generally more available, poorer and marginalized communities often don’t 
have access to up-to-date maps. Evidence from other jurisdictions suggests a need to guard against 
more affluent urban neighbourhoods disproportionately benefiting from accelerated flood mapping 
efforts (Song et al. 2019). 
For many communities across Canada where flood maps do exist, those maps may be 25 years or more 
out of date (Macdonald 2019). In 2020, the federal government announced it would begin updating 
available maps, and committed to updating flood maps nationwide in the National Adaptation Action 
Plan, under the Flood Hazard Identification and Mapping Program (ECCC 2023; Insurance Bureau of 
Canada 2023a). However, some experts say this process may take up to 10 years (Macdonald 2019; Reuters 
2020). Also, there is no indication that the updated maps will reflect the influence of climate change. Yet, 
as the impacts of climate change accelerate, demand for higher-resolution maps of current and future 
flood hazards and risks will increase. In the meantime, many communities continue to lack maps or 
settle for outdated mapping products that inaccurately portray local risks, detracting from their capacity 
to adapt, make informed decisions about property ownership or renting, and prepare for emergencies. 
Though missing or inaccurate flood maps can be problematic for any community, communities in 
which equity-deserving groups are disproportionately represented can face a more difficult path to 
recovery once impacted by flooding; individuals in these communities are generally less able to rely on 
savings to smooth over the impacts and tend to lose a greater share of their overall wealth (Hallegatte 
and Rozenberg 2017). 
ii.	 Flood maps remain inaccessible for many equity-deserving communities. 
A range of factors compromise the accessibility of flood maps for equity-deserving communities. To 
begin with, compared to other jurisdictions, in Canada most flood maps remain physically difficult to 
access, often requiring a visit to the local government office to obtain a paper copy (Mcclearn 2019). In 
contrast, in the U.S., England, and France, citizens can enter a postal code on a government website 
and access information about a property’s susceptibility to flooding (FEMA 2016; GOV.UK 2019; Ministry 
of Ecological Transition and Terrestrial Cohesion 2022. Based on this obstacle alone, it is not surprising 
that a cross-country survey of property owners affected by flooding revealed fewer than one in ten 
respondents had prior knowledge of living in a floodplain (Henstra and Thistlethwaite, 2018b). Because 
certain equity-deserving groups experience restricted mobility, if a map is only available in hard copy, 
this can pose a significant barrier to accessing it.
Furthermore, the content of flood maps is generally targeted to audiences with technical skills and 
specialized backgrounds, like hydrologists and engineers; they can be difficult for people without 
scientific and technical knowledge to fully understand (Mcclearn 2019). Since many equity-deserving 
groups are underrepresented among scientific and technical specialists (Engineers Canada 2020), they 
are also less likely than other Canadians to understand currently available flood maps or have someone 
in their networks capable of supporting them to understand.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
11
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
11
Language issues, coupled with the use of disempowering messages, can also detract from how equity-
deserving groups access, perceive, and therefore use flood risk maps (Lechowska 2018; Partners for 
Action 2019). Few, if any maps in Canada, are available in languages other than English or French, posing 
potential barriers for those with other mother tongues. Meanwhile, hazard and risk messages included 
in maps have been shown to lead to increased mental stress, a sense of decreased safety and belonging, 
and a reduced sense of well-being unless accompanying information is provided about how to manage 
the risks (Bakos et al 2022; Berry et al. 2022). Unfortunately, such information is rarely provided. Negative 
reactions to hazard and risk information in maps may be particularly strong among equity-deserving 
groups already contending with the negative effects of marginalization.
iii.	Current flood risk maps are not generally informed by equity considerations. 
Until recently, Canada’s federal flood mapping framework had not included justice and equity 
considerations in determining values and priority areas within the mapping process. Most flood maps 
in Canada are hazard maps, which do not characterize the people or assets at risk (Interview 3; Cutter 
et al. 2013; Guillard-Goncalves et al. 2015; Lianxiao and Morimoto 2019; Török 2018). Where flood risk 
maps are developed or where flood hazard maps are used for flood risk assessments, risk is usually 
assessed based on the value of buildings and real estate alone. As such, flood maps usually lead to the 
identification of areas with the biggest economic risks, and not necessarily the areas where equity-
deserving or vulnerable people are most at risk.
To effectively build equity considerations into mapping, public engagement processes are required. 
Not only is skillful engagement with stakeholders and rights holders needed to understand local 
context—by making use of the experiential knowledge of affected communities and individuals—it is 
also required to establish awareness among the engaged parties, and to build trust and buy-in to the 
mapping process and products, including messaging related to risk management interventions (Box 
2). Meanwhile, engagement processes must pay particular attention to the challenges equity-deserving 
communities can face in participating (Interview 2), including financial limitations, workloads, and care 
responsibilities (Respondents; Butler and Adamowski, 2015). 
 
July 23, 2023: Ron Crawford climbs up a ladder onto a washed-out bridge after checking on stranded neighbours near 
McKay Section, Nova Scotia.  A long procession of intense thunderstorms dumped record amounts of rain across a wide 
swath of Nova Scotia, causing flash flooding, road washouts and power outages. THE CANADIAN PRESS/Darren Calabrese
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
12
Funded by Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern 
Affairs Canada, flood plain maps of the Deshkan Ziibi 
(Antler River) in the vicinity of Lake St. Clair were 
co-developed by First Nations, conservation authorities, 
and community organizations. The maps were created 
according to community processes and worldviews 
while also considering Western science, to be used by 
community members in preparing and adapting to 
flooding, using a two-eyed seeing approach and Shared 
Waters Approach (Green Communities Canada 2022; 
Charles 2022). Two-eyed seeing is a process of co-creating 
knowledge using both Indigenous and Western 
sciences. Applied to the Deskkan Ziibi watershed, the 
resulting Shared Waters Approach centres Indigenous 
knowledge, values, and participation through the sharing 
of information, interests, and needs related to flooding 
included a focus on the impacts of flooding for the well-
being of the First Nations communities (Leon 2022). 
Participants in the project included the Chippewas of 
the Thames First Nation, Oneida Nation of the Thames, 
Munsee-Delaware First Nation, Delaware Nation at 
Moraviantown, Conservation Ontario, Lower Thames 
Conservation, Canadian Environmental Law Association, 
and Green Communities Canada. 
Collaborative floodplain  
mapping of Deshkan Zibi
BOX 2
October 24, 2017: The Antler River in southern Ontario. ISTOCK/Daxus
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
12
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
13
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
13
3.2	Impacts of flood risk disclosure  
	
for equity-deserving groups
For flood mapping and risk information to support reasonable action that 
can mitigate risk, the information needs to be disclosed in a timely, complete, 
accurate, and accessible way. Flood risk disclosure practices with the most 
direct impacts for equity-deserving groups and individuals relate to real 
estate, insurance, and rental transactions. The main mechanism for flood 
risk disclosure during real estate transactions is the Property Disclosure 
Statement (or equivalent). In addition, buyers who use a mortgage to 
purchase property are required to acquire property insurance, a transaction 
that includes a verification clause through which the buyer indicates they 
understand the terms of the agreement, including the hazards and risks the 
policy covers and excludes. Though landlords in Canada are not currently 
required to disclose hazard or risk information about their properties 
during rental transactions, other jurisdictions are beginning to require 
disclosure (Dundon and Camp 2021; Frazier et al. 2020). We have identified 
consequences for equity-deserving groups for each of the three aspects of 
flood risk disclosure in Canada. 
i. 	 There are gaps and ambiguities in requirements for 
flood risk disclosure during real estate transactions 
that disproportionately impact equity-deserving 
communities, who are more likely than other 
Canadians to live in flood prone areas.
Because Canada is a patchwork of Indigenous, municipal, provincial, 
and federal government jurisdictions, rules for the disclosure of flood 
risk during real estate transactions vary from region to region. The main 
mechanism for flood risk disclosure during real estate transactions 
is the Property Disclosure Statement (or equivalent), a means for 
communicating to the buyer “knowledge of the seller” about property 
related risks. However, definitions of what constitutes “knowledge of the 
seller” vary across jurisdictions, as does the required timing of disclosure 
and the means for characterizing risk. Furthermore, nowhere in Canada 
is the seller or their agent obliged to assemble and disclose knowledge 
outside their possession. These inconsistencies and ambiguities can result 
in “inadequate information for buyers to make educated decisions about 
flood risk,” impacting members of equity-deserving groups who may 
purchase properties based on deficient disclosure statements (Henstra 
and Thistlethwaite 2018b). 
Flood risk disclosure 
practices with the most 
direct impacts for equity-
deserving groups and 
individuals relate to real 
estate, insurance, and 
rental transactions.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
14
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
14
ii.	 Property and tenant insurance transactions have 
yet to be effectively used to alert prospective buyers 
and renters about the flood risks associated with 
the properties they plan to purchase or rent, with 
impacts for equity-deserving communities who 
disproportionately live in flood-prone areas.
Regardless of the jurisdiction, when agents sell property insurance, they 
are required to verify that the purchaser understands the terms of the 
agreement, including the hazards and risks the policy covers and excludes. 
Judging by the low levels of awareness among homeowners in Canada 
about their flood exposures (Partners for Action 2019), the process of 
verifying the hazards covered and excluded in property insurance policies 
could likely be used more effectively to educate prospective buyers about 
the flood hazards and risks affecting properties. This may relate in part to the 
fact that coastal and riverine flood hazards have not typically been covered 
by property insurance and pluvial flood coverage has been introduced to the 
property market relatively recently, with a high degree of variation in pluvial 
flood and water damage products offered by individual insurers. Thus, 
insurance agents and brokers may themselves have been less well informed 
and able to communicate with clients about related risks. However, insurers 
now offer residential pluvial flood coverage for most homes across Canada 
(Insurance Bureau of Canada 2019; Insurance Bureau of Canada 2023b). As 
the flood insurance market continues to grow, insurance agents should be 
required to  inform their clients about the flood hazard and risk profiles of 
their properties. Local agencies responsible for flood management could 
also be supplied with flood models used by the insurance industry to 
underwrite flood coverage and become more active in informing residents 
of the potential impacts of flood hazards on their property and insurance.
iii. 	There are no requirements in Canada for landlords 
to disclose known risks (including those related 
to flooding) associated with property rentals, with 
significant impacts for equity-deserving communities 
who are disproportionately represented among renters. 
Landlords have no obligation to disclose hazard or risk information 
related to rental properties in Canada (Dundon and Camp 2021; Frazier 
et al. 2020). This means that tenants may be lawfully kept in the dark 
by landlords about known risks to their belongings, health, and well-
being. Meanwhile, renting basement suites or in neighbourhoods with 
inadequate stormwater and wastewater infrastructure may be particularly 
risky given the higher likelihood of impacts from overland flooding in these 
As the flood insurance 
market continues to grow, 
insurance agents should 
be required to  inform their 
clients about the flood 
hazard and risk profiles of 
their properties.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
15
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
15
situations and the generally increasing likelihood of flooding because of 
climate change (Bakos et al. 2022; Paganini 2019). Equity-deserving groups, 
including lower income and racialized Canadians, are overrepresented 
among renters (Dundon and Camp 2021).
3.3 Impacts of flood risk pricing for  
	
equity-deserving groups 
Pricing of flood risks can affect real estate, insurance, and rental costs, 
which can disproportionately impact members of equity-deserving 
groups located in flood-prone areas.2  This section addresses the impacts 
of flood risk pricing on equity-deserving groups in Canada. 
i. 	 Increases in housing prices, rents, financing costs, and 
insurance premiums could compound historic injustices 
and equity-deserving groups’ access to real estate.
While not as prevalent or deeply researched in Canada as in the United 
States, the practice of redlining dates back in Canada to the early settlement 
period  and continues to undermine the accessibility of mortgages for equity-
deserving groups (Claremont and Magill 1999, Mcintosh 2023). Redlining, or 
the practice of denying equity-deserving groups and individuals fairly priced 
mortgages and property insurance based on race and location, rather than 
credit history, has impacted how equity-deserving communities are able 
to access mortgages and where they are able to live (Harris 2003). Similarly, 
land covenants, written into property contracts in Canada prohibited people 
of certain ethnic backgrounds from purchasing in certain areas (Weichel 
2022; Baines 2014). Many members of equity-deserving groups still face 
racism, discrimination, and stereotyping when applying for mortgages 
(Respondent 4; Harris 2003). 
ii. 	Members of equity-deserving groups in flood risk 
areas are more likely to face trade-offs between flood 
insurance and basic necessities because of the high 
cost of insurance premiums. 
Insurers’ understanding of risk and competitive pricing shapes the cost of 
property insurance, which can rise as insurers better understand flood-related 
2  We acknowledge that concepts of home ownership differ across groups, and that the discussion below 
does not address the unique circumstances of on-reserve socially controlled housing. While outside the 
scope of this paper, this is especially important since the creation of the reserve system under the Indian 
Act of 1876 forcibly relocated many Indigenous communities to areas that were less desirable, oftentimes 
in flood-prone areas.
Many members of equity-
deserving groups still face 
racism, discrimination, and 
stereotyping when applying 
for mortgages.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
16
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
16
risks under worsening climate impacts (Smart 2022). Across Canada, home insurance premiums increased 
by 20 to 25 per cent between 2015-2019, with more than half of this increase attributable to flood damage 
(Moudrak and Feltmate 2020). In Ontario, home insurance premiums rose by over 60 per cent over the past 
decade—three times the rate of inflation—in large part because of more frequent flood damage (Berkow 
2021). Absent government intervention, insurance coverage may become unaffordable for members of 
equity-deserving groups living in flood-prone areas (D’Souza et al. 2021; Frazier et al. 2020; Interview 3). 
Because many members of equity-deserving groups are less financially secure than other Canadians, rising 
insurance costs are more likely to prevent them from purchasing flood insurance. Combined with limits on 
coverage and higher deductibles, these rising costs can leave them disproportionately exposed to flood risk. 
The federal government has committed to create a low-cost national public flood insurance program by 2026 
for households at high risk of flooding and without access to adequate insurance (Government of Canada 
2023a). However, experience in other countries such as the United States suggests that even the costs of 
government-backed public insurance are unaffordable for many people who live in areas of high flood risk, 
especially as the costs of climate change are priced into premiums (Allen 2021). Therefore, a national public 
program will not necessarily ensure that equity-deserving groups have fair access to flood insurance.
iii. 	Flood risk pricing can impact the value of properties, potentially affecting 
borrowing and retirement interventions for members of equity-deserving 
groups who are disproportionately represented among homeowners in  
flood-prone areas. 
For those who already own properties, flood risk disclosure can trigger changes in property values.  The 
influence of flood risk disclosure on residential real estate values depends on prior loss and damage from 
flooding, the frequency and severity of past flood events, publicity of past flooding, property location 
relative to mapped floodplains, and the character of flood risk disclosure requirements (Yeo 2003; 
Henstra and Thistlethwaite 2018; Hino et al. 2021). Studies on the impact of flood events on real estate 
values document significant (8 to 60 per cent) dips in property values after catastrophic floods (Bakos 
et al. 2022, Yeo 2003). Issuing flood maps can lower property values; however, in Canada, the effect has 
been “marginal and temporary” to date (Henstra and Thistlethwaite 2018b). 
Reduced home values can undermine borrowing and retirement options, and, coupled with rising 
carrying costs (see insurance premiums above), can reduce savings and home equity. Yet, home 
ownership often represents a large portion of lifetime wealth for equity-deserving groups and individuals, 
contributes to intergenerational wealth and security, and provides an asset against which to borrow in 
times of need (Dundon and Camp 2021). 
iv. 	Flood risk pricing can increase the cost of renting, disproportionately affecting 
equity-deserving groups and individuals who are more likely to rent than 
others in Canadian society. 
Research in the United States raises concerns about increased flood insurance premiums and flood risk-
adjusted mortgage rates being passed onto tenants through rent increases (Frazier et al. 2020). This 
knock-on effect can reduce the number of affordable rental units and lead to more evictions in regions with 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
17
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
17
flood prone areas (Taylor and Aalbers 2022). The overall size of affordable rental markets can also diminish 
if landlords in flood-prone areas begin to accept buyouts or participate in programs for managed retreat 
(Dundon and Camp 2021). Renters could be forced to either relocate away from their current communities 
or pay substantially higher rents (Dundon and Camp 2021; Haider and Moranis 2022).
v. 	 By reducing the relative cost of housing in flood-prone areas and increasing 
the relative cost in less flood-prone areas, flood risk pricing may lead to a 
cycle that disproportionately traps equity-seeking groups in higher-risk, 
degentrifying neighbourhoods. 
Though the influence of flood risk disclosure on housing values can be useful for spurring investments 
in resilience in residential development and housing, this positive effect may be limited to buyers or 
owners who are financially flexible and able to prioritize the long-term appreciation of their investments 
(Henstra and Thistlethwaite 2018b; Canadian Coastal Resilience Forum 2018). Meanwhile, in areas 
with high housing demand, or in overheated markets, prospective buyers may have little choice but 
to consider properties despite their flood exposure, specifically because of their lower purchase cost, 
and may not be able to afford property-level measures for flood risk management (Ratnadiwakara 
and Venugopal 2020). Similarly, lower-income owners and renters may be generally less able to move 
away from highly flood-prone areas (O’Hare and White 2017; Dundon and Camp 2021; Olivotto and 
Herreros-Cantis 2019). This dynamic, coupled with the potential divestiture by outside investors from 
flood-exposed businesses and real estate—a process sometimes referred to as bluelining—can drive 
the degentrification of neighbourhoods at higher risk of flooding (Ratnadiwakara and Venugopal 2020; 
Kaufman 2020; McDonnell 2020; Berman 2019).
Meanwhile, individuals and households who are able to leave or avoid more flood-prone areas will do so, 
potentially contributing to the gentrification of less risky areas in the same region (Ratnadiwakara and 
Venugopal 2020; Keenan et al. 2018). This can elevate the cost of purchasing and renting, making these 
areas less accessible to equity-deserving groups and individuals who on average have fewer financial 
means. Access to these more expensive, less flood-prone areas may be further impeded by the terms 
of most residential home insurance policies in Canada; namely, that any settlement following a loss 
be used to return the affected property to its original state in its original location (Insurance Bureau of 
Canada 2023c; Government of Canada 2022). Insurance settlements may not generally be used to pay 
for adaptation measures when rebuilding or for the policy holder to leave the at-risk area, meaning 
these settlements are, perversely, impeding both the increased resilience and the strategic relocation 
of at-risk homeowners (Government of Canada 2022; Insurance Bureau of Canada 2023c).
Climate-related disasters ultimately reflect societal choices about what climate-related risks are 
acceptable, and how much to invest in mitigating or adapting to those risks (Council of Canadian 
Academies 2022). 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
18
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
18
Since governments are responsible for creating public policies that meet 
the changing needs of society, policy makers can support more just and 
equitable adaptation outcomes by creating space for equity-deserving 
groups in the implementation of flood risk transparency practices. This 
section discusses potential types of interventions governments and 
regulators can use to help ensure flood risk transparency practices result 
in socially equitable outcomes. For a summary of flood risk transparency 
impacts, types of interventions, and example policy responses, see Table 2. 
4.1 	Policy responses for transformative 	
	
	
	
adaptation of flood mapping 
Actions to address procedural and distributive injustices related to 
flood mapping include; i) accelerating federal, provincial, territorial, and 
Indigenous flood mapping initiatives and programs and engaging equity-
deserving groups ; ii) making maps more accessible and providing them in 
plain language with summary products designed for public consumption, 
with a cultural sensitivity and trauma-informed lens; and iii) developing 
professional flood mapping practice guidelines that incorporate equity, 
diversity, inclusion, and reconciliation.
i. 	 Accelerate federal, provincial, and territorial flood 
mapping programs and strategies that engage equity-
deserving groups and reflect social vulnerability.
The federal government, as well as many provincial, territorial, and Indigenous 
governments, are investing in flood mapping programs to help fill gaps in 
characterizing and communicating flood hazards and risks across the country. 
Towards transformational flood 
risk transparency in Canada
August 30, 2019: Wrecked furniture 
sits by the curb of a home on 
Erie Shore Drive near Chatham, 
Ontario. The area flooded during 
a storm causing severe damage 
to several homes. THE CANADIAN 
PRESS/Geoff Robins
4
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
19
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
19
Table 2: 
Summary of flood risk transparency impacts, types of interventions, and policy responses
Impacts 
Types of interventions 
Policy responses 
Availability and accuracy of flood maps 
is poor where equity-deserving groups 
are overrepresented 
Federal, provincial, and territorial flood 
mapping programs and strategies that 
engage equity-deserving groups and 
reflect social vulnerability
Establish knowledge-sharing 
committees that provide diverse 
perspectives related to the flood risk 
mapping process and move towards 
co-development of mapping programs 
Flood maps remain poorly accessible 
for many equity-deserving 
communities 
Accessible, plain language and 
summary maps designed for public 
use, with a cultural sensitivity and 
trauma-informed lens
Expand accessibility standards for 
flood maps to reflect the capabilities 
and needs of the general public and 
specific equity-deserving groups
Current flood risk maps are not 
generally informed by equity 
considerations 
Training and professional flood mapping 
practice guidelines that incorporates 
equity, diversity, inclusion, and 
reconciliation with Indigenous Nations
Fund training programs for 
professionals and requiring cultural 
safety and Gender-based Analysis 
Plus+ training in order to work on 
government flood mapping contracts 
Ambiguities in requirements for flood 
risk disclosure during real estate 
transactions that impact equity-
deserving communities
Property and tenant insurance 
transactions do not alert prospective 
buyers and renters about the flood risks 
associated with the properties
Flood risk pricing can increase the cost 
of renting, disproportionately affecting 
equity-deserving groups
Strengthened real estate and rental 
disclosure requirements and guidance 
Leverage existing legislation and 
regulations to ensure flood disclosure 
information is effectively shared with 
potential buyers and tenants
Price and cost increases could further 
reduce equity-deserving groups’ 
access to real estate, compounding 
historic injustices
Equity-deserving groups may face 
trade-offs between the purchase of 
flood insurance and basic necessities 
Reductions in property values related 
to flood risk may affect borrowing 
and retirement options for equity-
deserving groups
Cost-effective private or public flood 
insurance premiums that make flood 
insurance affordable in flood-prone 
areas  
Mandate maximum private or public 
insurance premiums based on 
socio-economic factors, and include 
an affordability assessment within 
Canada’s first national flood insurance 
program
Reductions in the relative cost of 
housing in flood-prone areas may trap 
equity-seeking groups in higher risk, 
“degentrifying” neighbourhoods
Adjusting flood insurance policies to 
support strategic retreat and post-
disaster relocation
Avoid or mandate removal of same site 
rebuilding conditions from all flood 
insurance policies to allow for relocation 
after a disaster while still receiving the 
insurance payout 
Using land-use and development 
management planning mechanisms 
to create affordable housing options 
outside flood-prone areas
Incent the development of affordable 
housing in flood-safe areas through the 
transfer of development rights from 
areas targeted for managed retreat 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
20
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
20
However, major gaps remain and work through these programs needs to be accelerated as much 
as possible. Many of these programs, including the federal program, emphasize the importance of 
stakeholder engagement; however, very little if any specific guidance is provided for how governments 
and mapping practitioners should engage with equity-deserving groups and incorporate their 
perspectives and experiences into the development of maps. 
A short-term step could be to create knowledge-sharing committees to help incorporate diverse 
perspectives in mapping initiatives, including perspectives on the impacts of flooding on specific 
equity-deserving people and communities. Governments should engage equity-deserving groups 
and individuals in the development and communication of flood maps, using inclusive and diverse 
approaches to knowledge sharing. These processes should be grounded in trauma-informed practice 
and include a cultural sensitivity lens, considering the potential impacts of place-based attachment 
and related experiences of cultural loss associated with flooding. By reflecting community values and 
priorities in the mapping process, and emphasizing the participation of equity-deserving groups and 
individuals, governments can help ensure mapping products are relevant and culturally sensitive, 
trusted and useful. In some rare cases, knowledge-sharing committees already exist or have been used 
in the past for flood mapping initiatives (see Box 2, above). By evaluating the performance of these 
committees, it may be possible to identify transferable lessons for broader use. 
In the longer term, governments should move towards co-development of flood mapping programs. For 
example, processes for the prioritization of areas for updated mapping could include equity-deserving 
groups. Meaningfully including members of equity-deserving groups in the design and implementation 
of flood mapping programs can help ensure that the values, concerns, and priorities advanced in these 
programs reflect the diversity of the communities they seek to map. 
October 28, 2019: Vice President of the Union of 
B.C. Indian Chiefs Chief Don Tom comments on 
modernizing the Emergency Program Act calling 
upon emergency management practitioners, First 
Nations leaders, business and others during a press 
conference at the Legislature in Victoria, British 
Columbia. THE CANADIAN PRESS/Chad Hipolito
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
21
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
21
ii. 	Produce accessible, plain-language, and summary maps designed for public 
use, with a cultural sensitivity and trauma-informed lens.
Flood maps in Canada are not yet consistently designed for and provided through the web and do not 
consider the capabilities and needs of non-specialist audiences. Moving forward, governments should 
expand accessibility standards for flood maps to reflect the capabilities and needs of the general public 
and of specific equity-deserving groups. More accessible flood maps will better serve equity-deserving 
groups by enabling both their basic connection to the products and by helping them interpret and use 
the maps to prepare for and be more resilient to the impacts of flooding. 
iii. 	Provide training for flood mapping professionals to incorporate equity, 
diversity, inclusion, and reconciliation with Indigenous Nations.
As noted, funding for flood mapping programs has often been targeted to areas based on economic 
value at risk, with little consideration for the unique priorities and vulnerabilities of equity-deserving 
communities. 
The flood-mapping professionals responsible for these flood mapping processes have typically adopted 
a similar lens. To support them new training on justice, equity, and gender-based analysis plus could be 
offered to better consider the broader social, cultural, and environmental contexts within which they 
practice. Integrating this training into government flood mapping programs and standards could help 
advance flood mapping processes and products that better consider the needs and perspectives of 
equity-deserving groups and individuals and advance reconciliation with Indigenous Nations. 
4.2	 Policy responses for transformative adaptation of flood  
	
	disclosure practices 
To address equity and social justice in flood disclosure practice, governments should; i) strengthen 
and standardize real estate and rental disclosure requirements and guidance across Canada; and ii) 
develop guidance for local governments and insurers to work together to provide flood hazard and risk 
information to the purchasers of residential property and tenant insurance. 
i. 	 Strengthen and standardize real estate and rental disclosure requirements  
and guidance.   
The lack of common and robust flood risk disclosure requirements across Canada linked to real estate 
and rental transactions results in incomplete and patchy information for purchasers and renters to use 
in their decision making. Strengthening and standardizing flood-related real estate and rental disclosure 
requirements and guidelines could help address some of the disproportionate burden placed on equity-
deserving communities, who are overrepresented in flood-prone areas and often experience difficulty 
accessing flood risk information. 	
 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
22
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
22
Since both real estate and rental markets are regulated at the provincial or 
territorial level, provinces and territories could consider leveraging existing 
legislation to ensure flood disclosure information is being passed along 
to potential buyers and tenants. While this intervention does not address 
the root causes of the overrepresentation of equity-deserving groups in 
flood-prone areas, it will provide necessary information for those who are 
likely to be the most impacted by flooding. This will give them a better 
understanding of the risks associated with a particular property, and help 
to inform purchasing, rental, and flood resilience-related decisions. 
ii. 	Develop guidance for governments and insurers 
to work together to share flood hazard and risk 
information with purchasers of residential property 
and tenant insurance. 
As the flood insurance market continues to grow in Canada, insurers should 
be increasingly well positioned to share information about the flood hazard 
and risk profiles of the residential properties their clients seek to insure as 
owners or tenants. At the same time, governments in Canada are working 
to update and further develop hazard and risk maps for various types 
of flooding. Governments and insurers should seek ways to better work 
together to ensure flood hazard and risk information is more effectively 
shared with prospective purchasers of property and tenant insurers. Specific 
attention could be placed on aligning approaches with the particular needs 
and challenges of equity-deserving groups and individuals. 
4.3	Policy responses for transformative  
	
adaptation of flood risk pricing 
Addressing equity and justice in response to flood risk pricing could 
include; i) providing affordable and cost-effective flood insurance that 
reflects ability-to-pay; ii) adjusting flood insurance policies to help support 
post-disaster relocation and strategic retreat; and iii) using land-use and 
development planning measures to create a more enabling environment 
for the inclusion of equity-deserving groups in post-disaster relocation and 
strategic retreat.
i.	 Provide affordable and cost-effective flood insurance 
that reflects ability-to-pay. 
Equity-deserving communities are less likely to be able to afford flood 
insurance (Government of Canada 2022). Creating affordable flood insurance 
Provinces and territories 
could consider leveraging 
existing legislation to 
ensure flood disclosure 
information is being passed 
along to potential buyers 
and tenants.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
23
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
23
can help eliminate the forced choice between other necessities of life and flood insurance for low-income 
households. The high-risk residential flood insurance program is an opportunity to offset distributive 
injustices related to the accessibility of insurance (Public Safety Canada 2022). The federal government 
could leverage this opportunity by including a flood insurance affordability or ability-to-pay assessment 
within Canada’s forthcoming  national public flood insurance program. Implementing affordability 
measures to make the cost of insurance proportional to household income and expenditures could 
considerably reduce the financial burden of flood insurance premiums for equity-deserving groups.
ii. 	Adjust flood insurance policies to support strategic retreat and post-disaster 
relocation. 
The announcement of Canada’s first national flood insurance plan creates a significant opportunity to 
support relocation as part of a policy of strategic retreat, instead of requiring recipients of insurance 
payouts to rebuild in the same location. Creating space within all flood insurance policies to allow for 
strategic retreat or planned relocation after a disaster while still receiving the insurance payout would 
better allow members of equity-deserving groups options to rebuild or purchase in safer locations, 
rather than having to remain in the same vulnerable location in order to receive financial compensation. 
iii. 	Use land-use and development planning measures to create an enabling 
environment for the participation of equity-deserving groups in post-disaster 
relocation and strategic retreat. 
In regions and communities with residential areas that experience high flood risk or where such risk 
is reasonably foreseeable, governments can consider leveraging land-use plans and related tools to 
help ensure both the immediate and long-term availability of safe, affordable, and climate-resilient 
housing options. Provincial, territorial, municipal, and Indigenous governments in Canada already have 
the foundational legislation and tools to pursue these objectives but may need to use them in new 
ways, such as through planning for managed retreat. Drawing upon examples from other jurisdictions 
(Spidalieri 2020), Canadian governments could: 
	
▶
Establish longer-term (e.g. 100-year) land-use and development plans that classify neighbourhoods 
based on flood risk level, specify requirements for strategic retreat over time, and identify receiving 
areas, where new housing options and services can be established for people permanently 
displaced from other areas by flooding;
	
▶
Zone receiving areas in ways that ensure adequate supplies of affordable housing for lower-income 
people and households;
	
▶
Implement transfer-of-development-rights measures that facilitate the sale of development 
rights by landowners with properties in high-flood-risk areas to parties who may use the rights to 
increase the density (and hence value) of developments planned for elsewhere in the jurisdiction.
These or other analogous measures could help ensure equity-deserving groups and individuals living 
in high-flood-risk areas can find affordable housing elsewhere and, as relevant, recoup the value of the 
property that flood risk has forced them to leave.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
24
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
24
Building resilience to flood risk is an important step in protecting people 
in Canada from the consequences of accelerating climate change. 
Particularly, much greater flood risk transparency is essential to help 
provide information for decision-making and send the market signals 
that can ultimately help reduce flood-related risk. However, flood risk 
transparency practices may have negative effects on equity-deserving 
communities, necessitating policies and programs that integrate social 
justice principles and equity considerations to counteract this tendency. 
This report has identified several policy responses that could address some 
of the equity-related challenges and potential undesired outcomes of flood 
risk transparency, including: 
	
▶
Ensuring federal, provincial, and territorial flood mapping programs 
and strategies further accelerate mapping, engage equity-deserving 
groups, and produce maps that are easily accessible with plain 
language summaries designed for public consumption. 
	
▶
Strengthening or introducing real estate and rental disclosure 
requirements for flood risk, as well as policies that support strategic 
retreat and post-disaster relocation. 
	
▶
Improving how governments and insurers work together to more 
effectively inform the purchasers of property or tenant insurance of 
flood hazards and risks in their area and to their property. 
	
▶
Creating flood insurance regimes that provide cost-effective 
premiums for those already living in certain flood-prone areas, coupled 
with needs-based support for relocation in uninsurable situations. 
	
▶
Using specific land use and development planning measures to 
create an enabling environment for the participation of equity-
deserving groups in post-disaster relocation and strategic retreat. 
Conclusions 
January 3, 2021: Flooding on 
Cowichan Tribes land triggered an 
evacuation order for local residents 
as heavy rain caused the Koksilah 
River to swell near Duncan, British 
Columbia. THE CANADIAN PRESS/
Chad Hipolito
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
25
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
25
Glossary 
Adaptation: The ways in which human and natural systems adjust to reduce the harmful effects of 
climate-related changes while maximizing the benefits. 
Bluelining: A pricing phenomenon arising from flood risk transparency driving divestment from 
communities with higher flood risk.
Climate change risk: Risk that results from the interaction of hazard, exposure, and vulnerability. 
Climate change vulnerability: The degree to which a system is susceptible to negative effects of climate 
change. 
Degentrification: The reverse process of gentrification—where residential property previously only 
affordable to affluent people becomes affordable to those who are poorer. 
Equity-deserving groups: Those that face significant challenges in participating in society because 
of social and environmental barriers based on race, age, ethnicity, disability, economic status, gender, 
sexual orientation, or nationality. 
Fluvial flooding: Often referred to as riverine or river flooding, occurs when the water levels of a river, 
stream, or other watercourse overflow the banks onto the surrounding land. Extreme precipitation 
events, rapid snow melts, and ice jams are common causes of fluvial flooding. 
Flood risk disclosure: Requires flood risk mapping, timely information, and documentation of risks 
associated with the physical impacts of flooding to support informed public and private investment 
decisions and otherwise empower governments, businesses, and individuals to make informed decisions 
about property and land use.
Flood risk mapping: The foundation for communication, disclosure, and pricing of flood risk; helps to 
identify geographic areas of current or potential future flood risk through observation and calculation. 
Flood risk transparency: The practice of communicating flood risk through flood risk mapping, flood 
risk disclosure, and flood risk pricing. 
Flood plain: An area of low-lying ground adjacent to a river, formed mainly of river sediments, which is 
subject to regular flooding 
Flood risk pricing: Uses flood risk disclosure as an input and involves changes in prices reflective of 
understood risk levels, signaling the potential need for protective investments or shifts in activities. 
Gentrification: The process whereby the character of a poor urban area is changed by more affluent people 
moving in, improving housing, and attracting new business, displacing current inhabitants in the process. 
Marine flooding: Results from a large body of water, such as a lake or ocean, overflowing onto the surrounding 
land. Common causes of coastal flooding are high winds and tides, storm surges, and sea level rise.
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
26
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
26
Pluvial flooding: Occurs when an extreme precipitation event causes an accumulation of surface water 
owing to the overwhelmed surface draining capacity, whether natural or a storm drainage system. 
Property insurance: Broad term for a series of policies that provide property protection coverage for 
owners. 
Redlining: A discriminatory and illegal practice that puts services (financial and otherwise) out of reach 
for residents of certain areas, based on race or ethnicity. 
Real estate transactions: The process whereby the rights in a unit of property are transferred between 
two or more parties. 
Receiving areas: Locations where new housing options and services can be established for people 
permanently displaced from other areas by flooding.
Rental transactions: The process of creating a rental agreement between landlord and tenant. 
Resilience: The capacity to withstand or recover from difficulties or challenges. 
Spatial inequity: The unequal distribution of resources and services across different areas or locations. 
Strategic retreat: Aims to proactively move people, structures, and infrastructure out of harm’s way 
before disasters or other threats occur, to avoid damage, maximize benefits, and minimize costs for 
communities and ecosystems. 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
27
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
27
References
Abdillahi, Ifrah, and Ashley Shaw. 2020. Social Determinants and Inequities in Health for Black Canadians: A Snapshot. Public Health 
Agency of Canada. https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/health-promotion/population-health/what-determines-health/
social-determinants-inequities-black-canadians-snapshot.html   
Allen, Greg. 2021. “A Surge in the Cost of Flood Insurance Could Make Housing Unaffordable for Many.” NPR. October 11. https://www.
npr.org/2021/10/11/1045084683/a-surge-in-the-cost-of-flood-insurance-could-make-housing-unaffordable-for-many 
Baines, Meera. 2014. “Vancouver Real Estate Titles Reveal City’s Racist History.” CBC News. August 26. https://www.cbc.ca/news/
canada/british-columbia/vancouver-real-estate-titles-reveal-city-s-racist-history-1.2747924 
Bakos, Kathryn, Blair Feltmate, Chris Chopik, and Cheryl Evans. 2022. Treading Water: Impact of Flooding on Canada’s Residential 
Housing Market. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo.   
Berkow, Jameson. 2021. “Frustrated by Rising Home Insurance Premiums? Blame Climate Change.” RatesDotCA. June. https://rates.
ca/resources/frustrated-rising-home-insurance-premiums-blame-climate-change  
Berry, Peter, Phil Blagden, Céline Campagna, Marika Egyed, Pierre Gosselin, Sherilee Harper, Katie Hayes, National Collaborating 
Centre for Indigenous Health, Nicholas Ogden, Rebekka Schnitter, and Tim Takaro. 2022. Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: 
Advancing our Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Brend, Yvette. 2021. “‘It’s Gone’: Shackan Chief says Floods Have Swept Away First Nations Land, Home.”  CBC News. November 25. 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/shackan-indian-band-first-nation-land-flood-damage-devastation-arnold-
lampreau-1.6262773 
Burlace, Tillem, Elizabeth Veneble, Bright Sibale, Richard Niyongabo, Penias Chabwela, Ivy Kasote, Nyuma Mughogho, Chrispine 
Mtocha, Emma Roberts, Colleen Sullivan, Sarah Knight, Alice Guinan. 2021. Evaluation of the Climate Justice Fund: Final Evaluation 
Report. NIRAS. https://www.gov.scot/publications/evaluation-climate-justice-fund-final-evaluation-report/   
Burton, Hilary, Felicia Rabito, Lisa Danielson, and Tim Takaro. 2016. “Health Effects of Flooding in Canada: A 2015 Review and 
Description of Gaps in Research.” Canadian Water Resources Journal 41:1-2, 238-249, DOI: 10.1080/07011784.2015.1128854
Butler, Cameron, and Jan Adamowski. 2015. “Empowering Marginalized Communities in Water Resources Management: Addressing 
Inequitable Practices in Participatory Model Building.” Journal of Environmental Management, 153, 153-162.  
Canadian Coastal Resilience Forum. 2018, September. Managing Flood Risk in Canada’s Coastal Regions: Policy Opportunities and 
Challenges. https://uwaterloo.ca/canadian-coastal-resilience/sites/default/files/uploads/files/workshopreport-final-september112018.pdf 
Canadian Institute of Planners. 2019. Policy on Planning Practice and Reconciliation. https://www.cip-icu.ca/getattachment/Topics-
in-Planning/Indigenous-Planning/policy-indigenous-eng.pdf.aspx 
Carroll, Bob, Ruth Balogh, Hazel Morbey, and Gonzalo Araoz. 2010. “Health and Social Impacts of a Flood Disaster: Responding To 
Needs and Implications for Practice.” Disasters 34(4), 1045–1063. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7717.2010.01182.x
Chakraborty, Liton, Horatiu Rus, Daniel Henstra, and Jason Thistlethwaite. 2022. “Exploring Spatial Heterogeneity and Environmental 
Injustices in Exposure to Flood Hazards using Geographically Weighted regression.” Environmental Research, 210, 112982.   
Charles, K. 2022. Deshkan Ziibi Floodplain Mapping Workshop 4 [webinar]. March 16.    
Council of Canadian Academies. 2022. Building a Resilient Canada: The Expert Panel on Disaster Resilience in a Changing Climate. 
Council of Canadian Academies. https://www.cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/Building-a-Resilient-Canada-web-EN.pdf  
Cutter, S. L., Emrich, C. T., Morath, D. P., and Dunning, C. M. 2013. “Integrating Social Vulnerability Into Federal Flood Risk Management 
Planning.” Journal of Flood Risk Management, 6(4), 332–344. https://doi.org/10.1111/jfr3.12018
D’Souza, Steven, Jeremy McDonald, and Jenna Cowly. 2021. “Up to 10% of Homes Could Now Be ‹Uninsurable› Because of Flood Risk. 
Yours May Be One of Them.” CBC News. November 26. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/marketplace-home-insurance-1.6262386   
Dundon, Leah, and Janey Camp. 2021. “Climate Justice and Home-Buyout Programs: Renters As A Forgotten Population in Managed 
Retreat Actions.” Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences, 11(3), 420-433. 
Emrich, Christopher, Eric Tate, Sarah Larson, and Yao Zhou. 2020. “Measuring Social Equity in Flood Recovery Funding.” Environmental 
Hazards, 19(3), 228-250.  
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
28
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
28
Engineers Canada. 2020. Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion. https://engineerscanada.ca/sites/default/files/public-policy/nps-diversity-
inclusion-en.pdf 
Environment and Climate Change Canada. 2022. Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy: Building Resilient Communities and 
a Strong Economy. https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/climatechange/climate-plan/national-adaptation-
strategy/full-strategy.html 
Faber, Jacob. 2015. “Superstorm Sandy and the Demographics of Flood Risk in New York City.” Human Ecology, 43(3), 363-378.  
Federal Emergency Management Agency. (n.d.) The National Flood Insurance Program. https://www.floodsmart.gov/about 
Feltmate, Blair, Marina Moudrak, and Kathryn Bakos. 2020. Climate Change and the Preparedness of Canadian Provinces and 
Territories to Limit Flood Risk. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2016. FEMA Flood Map Service Center: Search By Address. https://msc.fema.gov/
portal/search?AddressQuery=princeton%20university#searchresultsanchor
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2022. 2022–2026 FEMA Strategic Plan: Building the FEMA our Nation Needs 
and Deserves. https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_2022-2026-strategic-plan.pdf
Frazier, Tim, Elizabeth Boyden, and Erik Wood. 2020. “Socioeconomic Implications of National Flood Insurance Policy Reform and 
Flood Insurance Rate Map Revisions.” Natural Hazards, 103(1), 329-346.   
Government of Canada. 2022. Adapting to Rising Flood Risk: An Analysis of Insurance Solutions For Canada. https://www.publicsafety.
gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/dptng-rsng-fld-rsk-2022/dptng-rsng-fld-rsk-2022-en.pdf 
Government of Canada. 2023a. Budget 2023: A Made-in-Canada Plan. Department of Finance Canada. https://www.budget.canada.
ca/2023/report-rapport/chap4-en.html 
Government of Canada. 2023b. Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan. https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/
weather/climatechange/climate-plan/national-adaptation-strategy/action-plan.html
Green Communities Canada. 2022. Developing Flood Plain Mapping for the Chippewas of the Credit First Nation [Webinar].  https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=SY1sX-YAEXg&list=PLXj4EHpdrXR1SDUWFg1h-xfLml830t1fE&index=4
Guillard-Gonçalves, Clémence, Susan Cutter, Christopher Emrich, and José Luis Zêzere. 2015. “Application of Social Vulnerability 
Index (SoVI) and Delineation of Natural Risk Zones in Greater Lisbon, Portugal.” Journal of Risk Research, 18(5), 651-674.
Hallegatte, Stephane, and Julie Rozenberg. 2017. Climate Change Through a Poverty Lens. Nature Climate Change 7, 250-256. 
https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate3253 
Haider, Murtaza, and Stephen Moranis. 2022. “Prices are Falling, but Rents are Rising in Canada’s Paradoxical Housing Market.” 
Financial Post. August 2. https://financialpost.com/real-estate/mortgages/prices-are-falling-but-rents-are-rising-in-canadas-
paradoxical-housing-market 
Harris, Richard. 2003. “The Suburban Origins of Redlining: A Canadian Case Study 1935-1954.” Urban Studies 40(13), 2661-2686. https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/248973604_The_Suburban_Origins_of_Redlining_A_Canadian_Case_Study_1935-54   
Heck, Sarah. 2021. “Greening The Color Line: Historicizing Water Infrastructure Redevelopment and Environmental Justice In The 
St. Louis Metropolitan Region.” Journal of Environmental Policy and Planning, 23(5), 565-580.  
Henstra, Daniel, and Jason Thistlethwaite. 2017. Climate Change, Floods, and Municipal Risk Sharing In Canada. Institute on 
Municipal Finance and Governance. https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/bitstream/1807/81204/1/imfgpaper30_henstra_thistlethwaite_
Feb_23_2017.pdf
Henstra, Daniel, Jason Thistlethwaite. 2018. Buyer Beware: Evaluating Property Disclosure as a Tool to Support Flood Risk 
Management. Centre for International Governance Innovation. https://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep24936?seq=1   
Ikeme, Jekwu. 2003. “Equity, Environmental Justice, and Sustainability: Incomplete Approaches in Climate Change Politics.” Global 
Environmental Change 13(3), 195-206. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0959378003000475 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. 2021. Types of Flooding. https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/ICLR_
Flooding_2021.pdf
Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2019. Options for Managing Flood Costs of Canada’s Highest Risk Residential Properties: A Report 
for the National Working Group on Financial Risk of Flooding. http://www.ibc.ca/sk/resources/media-centre/media-releases/
options-for-managing-the-flood-costs-of-canada%E2%80%99s-highest-risk-residential-properties 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
29
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
29
Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2023a. “Insurance Bureau of Canada Statement: IBC Welcomes The Federal Government’s Leadership 
on Canada’s First National Flood Insurance Program.” Press Release. http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/media-centre/media-releases/
ibc-welcomes-the-federal-government%E2%80%99s-leadership-on-canada%E2%80%99s-first-national-flood-insurance-program 
Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2023b. “Water Damage and Flood Protection.” Press Release. https://www.ibc.ca/stay-protected/
severe-weather-safety/flood-and-water 
Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2023c. “Guaranteed Replacement Cost Coverage.” Press Release. http://www.ibc.ca/nt/home/
risk-management/update-your-insurance/replacement-cost 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2014. “Summary for policymakers.” In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 1-32.  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2022. “Summary for Policymakers.” In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Cambridge University Press. 
Jean-Pierre, Johanne. 2021. “How African Nova Scotians Envision Culturally Relevant and Sustaining Pedagogy as Civic Repair,” British 
Journal of Sociology of Education, 42:8, 1153-1171, DOI: 10.1080/01425692.2021.1981247
Keenan, Jesse, Thomas Hill, and Anurag Gumber. 2018. “Climate Gentrification: From Theory To Empiricism In Miami-Dade County, 
Florida.” Environmental Research Letters, 13(5), 054001.  
Khechen, Mona. 2013. Social justice: Concepts, Principles, Tools and Challenges. United Nations. https://www.unescwa.org/sites/
default/files/pubs/pdf/social-justice-concepts-principles-tools-challenges-english.pdf   
Kidd, Ben. 2011. “Flood Resilience for Critical Infrastructure and Services.” In: Flood Hazards: Impacts and Responses for the Built 
Environment, edited by Jessica Lamond, Colin Booth, Felix Hammond and David Proverbs, 245–58. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Klein, Richard. 2009. “Identifying Countries That Are Particularly Vulnerable to The Adverse Effects of Climate Change: An Academic 
or a Political Challenge?” Carbon and Climate Law Review, 3(3), 284–291. 
Lechowska, Ewa. 2018. “What Determines Flood Risk Perception? A Review of Factors of Flood Risk Perception and Relations Between 
its Basic Elements.” Natural Hazards, 94(3), 1341-1366.  
Leon, Calvi. 2022. “Floodplain Project Taps Indigenous Knowledge, Drawing International Eyes.” The London Free Press. February 
28.  https://lfpress.com/news/local-news/floodplain-project-taps-indigenous-knowledge-drawing-international-eyes
Levine, Joyce, Ann-Margaret Esnard, and Alka Sapat. 2007. “Population Displacement and Housing Dilemmas Due to Catastrophic 
Disasters.” Journal of Planning Literature, 22(1), 3–15. https://doi.org/10.1177/0885412207302277
Lianxiao, Takehiro Morimoto. 2019. “Spatial Analysis of Social Vulnerability to Floods Based on the MOVE Framework and 
Information Entropy Method: Case Study of Katsushika Ward, Tokyo.” Sustainability, 11(2), 529. MDPI AG. Retrieved from http://
dx.doi.org/10.3390/su11020529
Mason, Lisa, and Jonathan Rigg. (Eds.). 2019. “People and climate change: Vulnerability, adaptation, and social justice.” Oxford 
University Press.  
Macdonald, Neil. 2019. “Updated floodplain maps will send the housing market underwater.” CBC News. May 14. https://www.cbc.
ca/news/opinion/flood-plains-1.5135336 
Mcclearn, Matthew. “Poor Flood-Risk Maps, or None At All, are Keeping Canadian Communities in Flood-Prone Areas.” The Globe 
and Mail. April 23. https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-poor-flood-risk-maps-or-none-at-all-are-keeping-canadian-
communities/.
Mcclearn, Matthew. 2022. “What Happens To Your Home’s Value When Your Neighborhood Floods?” The Globe and Mail. February 
13. https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-what-happens-to-your-homes-value-when-your-neighbourhood-floods/ 
McDonnell, Tim. 2020. “How New Flood Risk Maps Could Undermine Marginalized Neighborhoods.” Quartz. July 5.  https://
qz.com/1876202/new-flood-risk-maps-could-undermine-marginalized-neighborhoods/  
Mcintosh, Daniel. N.D. “Redlining in Canada.” Koho Financial Inc. https://www.koho.ca/learn/redlining-in-canada/ 
Minano, Andrea, and Shawna Peddle. 2018. “Using Flood Maps for Community Flood Risk Communication. Report prepared for 
Natural Resources Canada, Partners for Action, Waterloo, ON.” https://uwaterloo.ca/partners-for-action/sites/ca.partners-for-action/
files/uploads/files/using_flood_maps_for_community_flood_risk_communication_24jan18_fnl.pdf   
Ministry of Ecological Transition and Territorial Cohesion. 2022. Know The Risks Near Me. https://www.georisques.gouv.fr/
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
30
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
30
Mohtat, Niloofar, and Luna Khirfan. 2022. “Distributive Justice and Urban Form Adaptation to Flooding Risks: Spatial Analysis to 
Identify Toronto›s Priority Neighborhoods.” Frontiers in Sustainable Cities, 4(919724) https://doi.org/10.3389/frsc.2022.919724
Moudrak, Natalia, and Blair Feltmate. 2020. Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada. 
Prepared for Standards Council of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Under-One-Umbrella-1.pdf 
Murphy, B., A. Chretien, K. Smart, and L. Brown. 2022. First Nations engagement on the steering committee on First 
Nations home flood insurance needs initiative. Assembly of First Nations. https://canadacommons.ca/artifacts/3337155/
first-nations-engagement-on-the-steering-committee-on-first-nations-home-flood-insurance-needs-initiative/4136003/ 
Ness, Ryan, Dylan G. Clark, Julien Bourque, Dena Coffman, and Dale Beugin. 2021. Under Water: The Costs of Climate Change for 
Canada’s Infrastructure. Canadian Climate Institute. Ottawa. 
Nightingale, Andrea. 2017. “Power and Politics in Climate Change Adaptation Efforts: Struggles Over Authority and Recognition in 
The Context of Political Instability.” Geoforum, 84, 11–20. 
O’Hare, Paul, Ian White. 2018. “Beyond ‘Just’ Flood Risk Management: The Potential For—and Limits to—Alleviating Flood 
Disadvantage.” Regional Environmental Change, 18(2), 385-396.  
Olivotto, Veronica, and Pablo Herreros-Cantis. 2019. How Flood Risk and Justice Combine in Coastal Cities: A Mix-Method Approach for 
East Harlem (New York City). https://mappinginjustice.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/8/2019/10/Olivotto_HowFloodRisk_MIJ2019.docx  
Oulahen, Greg. 2021. “Flood Hazards, Environmental Rewards, and The Social Reproduction of Risk.” Geoforum, 119, 43-51.  
Paganini, Zachary. 2019. “Underwater: Resilience, Racialized Housing, and the National Flood Insurance Program in Canarsie, 
Brooklyn.” Geoforum, 104, 25-35.  
Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer (PBO). 2016. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial Assistance 
Arrangements due to Weather Events. Ottawa, ON. https://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/
DFAA_EN.pdf
Partners for Action. 2019. Communicating Flood Risk to Canadians: Understanding the Challenges and Developing Best Practices. 
https://uwaterloo.ca/partners-for-action/sites/ca.partners-for-action/files/uploads/files/communicating_flood_risk_to_canadians_
workshop_report__3.pdf  
Partners For Resilience. 2020. Step-by-Step Guide to Inclusive Resilience. https://www.preventionweb.net/files/71675_716542020
marchpfrinclusiontoolkit.pdf  
Pralle, Sarah. 2019. “Drawing Lines: FEMA and The Politics of Mapping Flood Zones.” Climatic Change, 152(2), 227-237.  
Public Safety Canada. 2019. Evaluation of the National Disaster Mitigation Program—Evaluation Report, December 30, 2019. 
Public Safety Canada. 2022. Public Safety Canada Departmental Plan 2022–23. https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/
dprtmntl-pln-2022-23/dprtmntl-pln-2022-23-en.pdf
Ratnadiwakara, Dimuthu, Buvaneshwaran Venugopal. 2020. “Do Areas Affected by Flood Disasters Attract Lower-Income and Less 
Creditworthy Homeowners?” Journal of Housing Research, 29(sup1), S121-S143.  
Spidalieri, Katie, Annie Bennett. 2020. Managed Retreat Toolkit. Georgetown Climate Centre. https://www.georgetownclimate.org/
adaptation/toolkits/managed-retreat-toolkit/authors-and-acknowledgements.html 
Reuters, Thomas. 2020. “Insurers Warn Federal Government Canada Can’t Wait a Decade to Update Flood Maps.” CBC News. March 
4. https://www.cbc.ca/news/science/flood-maps-insurance-1.5485475 
Savard, Jean-Pierre, Danika van Proosdij, and Stéphanie O’Carroll. 2016. Perspectives on Canada’s East Coast Region, Chapter 
4 in Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 99–152. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Coastal_Assessment_Chapter4_EastCoastRegion.pdf
Schlosberg, David,  Lisette Collins, and Simon Niemeyer. 2017. “Adaptation Policy and Community Discourse: Risk, Vulnerability, and 
Just Transformation.” Environmental Politics, 26(3), 413-437.  
Schnitter, Rebekka, Ericha Moores, Peter Berry, Merielle Verret, Chris Buse, Catherine Macdonald, Melissa Perri, and Daniel Jubas-
Malz. 2022. “Climate Change and Health Equity.” In Peter Berry and Rebekka Schnitter (Eds.), Health of Canadians in a Changing 
Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.  
Scoville-Simonds, Morgan, Hameed Jamali, and Marc Hufty. 2020. “The Hazards of Mainstreaming: Climate Change Adaptation 
Politics in Three Dimensions.” World Development, 125, 1–10. 
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
31
TURNING THE TIDE: How flood risk transparency can drive equitable outcomes in Canada	
31
Shi, Linda, Eric Chu, Isabelle Anguelovski, Alexaner Aylett, Jessica Debats, Kian Goh, Todd Schenk, Karen Seto, David Dodman, Debra 
Roberts, J. Timmons Robert, and Stacy VanDeveer K. 2016. “Roadmap Towards Justice in Urban Climate Adaptation Research.” 
Nature Climate Change, 6(2), 131-137.  
Smart, Amy. 2022. “B.C. Flood Survivor Warns Others to Check Insurance Amid Increases in Climate Disasters.” The Canadian Press. 
April 15. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/bc-climate-disasters-floods-insurance-1.6421266 
Song, Jing, Zheng Chang, Weifeng Li, Zhe Feng, Jiansheng Wu, Qiwen Cao, and Jianzheng Liu. 2019. “Resilience-Vulnerability 
Balance to Urban Flooding: A Case Study in a Densely Populated Coastal City in China.” Cities 95. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0264275118310266 
Taylor, Zac, and Manuel Aalbers. 2022. “Climate Gentrification: Risk, Rent, and Restructuring in Greater Miami.” Annals of the 
American Association of Geographers, 1-17.  
The Globe and Mail. 2019. “Canada could avoid flood damage—if we had better flood maps.” The Globe and Mail. April 30. https://
www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/editorials/article-canada-could-avoid-flood-damage-if-we-had-better-flood-maps/ 
Thistlethwaite, Jason, and Daniel Henstra. 2017. “Municipal Flood Risk Sharing in Canada: A Policy Instrument Analysis.” Canadian 
Water Resources Journal 42(4), 349-363.  
Thistlethwaite, Jason, Daniel Henstra, Craig Brown, and Daniel Scott. 2020. “Barriers to Insurance as a Flood Risk Management Tool: 
Evidence from a Survey of Property Owners.” International Journal of Disaster Risk Science, 11(3), 263–273. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13753-020-00272-z
Thomas, Kimberly, and Benjamin Warner. 2019. “Weaponizing Vulnerability to Climate Change.” Global Environmental Change, 
57, 101928. 
Török, Ibolya. 2018. “Qualitative Assessment of Social Vulnerability to Flood Hazards in Romania”. Sustainability, 10(10), 3780. MDPI 
AG. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/su10103780
Waldron, Ingrid. 2020. Environmental Racism in Canada. The Canadian Commission for UNESCO’s IdeaLab. https://en.ccunesco.
ca/-/media/Files/Unesco/Resources/2020/07/EnvironmentalRacismCanada.pdf  
Webber, Sophie. 2015. “Mobile Adaptation and Sticky Experiments: Circulating Best Practices and Lessons Learned in Climate Change 
Adaptation.” Geographical Research, 53(1), 26–38. https://doi.org/10.1111/1745- 5871.12102.
Weichel, Andrew. 2022. “Racist but Unenforceable Clauses in Some B.C. Land Covenants Bar Residents of ‘African or Asiatic descent’.” 
CTV News. May 9. https://bc.ctvnews.ca/racist-but-unenforceable-clauses-in-some-b-c-land-covenants-bar-residents-of-african-
or-asiatic-descent-1.5895390 
Wing, Oliver, William Lehman, Paul Bates, Christopher Sampson, Niall Quinn, Andrew Smith, Jeffrey Neal, Jeremy Porter, and Carolyn 
Kousky. 2022. “Inequitable Patterns of US Flood Risk in the Anthropocene.” Nature Climate Change, 12(2), 156-162.  
Yumagulova, Lilia. 2020. “Disrupting the Riskscapes of Inequities: A Case Study of Planning for Resilience in Canada’s Metro Vancouver 
Region.” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 13(2), 293-318. 
