UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
1
UNDER WATER
THE COSTS OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE FOR CANADA’S 
INFRASTRUCTURE
                       SEPT 2021  
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
II
Timeline.........................................................................................................................................iii
Executive Summary...............................................................................................................iv
1. Introduction..............................................................................................................................1
2. Infrastructure and climate change in Canada..................................................6	
3. Our approach....................................................................................................................... 15
4. Impacts on homes and buildings..........................................................................28
5. Impacts on roads and railways..................................................................................41
6. Impacts on electricity systems.................................................................................. 51
7. Conclusions and recommendations.....................................................................60
Glossary.........................................................................................................................................71
References................................................................................................................................. 75
Acknowledgements..............................................................................................................81
CONTENTS
The Canadian Institute for Climate Choices is an unparalleled collaboration of experts from a diverse range of 
disciplines and organizations across the country. 
As an independent, non-partisan and publicly funded organization, we undertake rigorous research, conduct 
in-depth analysis, and engage a diverse range of stakeholders and rights holders to bring clarity to the climate 
challenges and transformative policy choices ahead for Canada. Learn more at climatechoices.ca.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
III
THE HEALTH 
COSTS OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE 
SPRING 2021
TIP OF THE 
ICEBERG 
FALL 2020
A closer look at health costs and adaptation 
opportunities, built around our analysis of the 
costs of heat-linked health burdens, Lyme 
disease, and air quality changes. The report 
includes a discussion of mental health impacts 
and other difficult-to-quantify health costs.
MACROECONOMIC
SPRING 2022
Using national macroeconomic modelling of 
potential climate change impacts to vulnera­
ble sectors and assets, this report will outline 
the implications of a changing climate on 
economic productivity and well-being.
If we think of the costs of climate change as an 
iceberg ahead, this introductory paper zooms 
in on the tip of the iceberg—the known and 
measurable hazards—as well as the contours 
of what lies below the water.
A focused analysis on infrastructure costs 
and adaptation opportunities, built around 
our modelling of climate-induced impacts 
to flooding, transportation infrastructure, 
and electricity systems. 
UNDER WATER 
FALL 2021
2020
2022
INFRASTRUCTURE
Our ongoing research 
into the costs of climate 
change includes the 
following reports:
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
IV
Infrastructure—our entire built environment—
underpins life in Canada. When this infrastructure 
is damaged or doesn’t function properly, people’s 
health, safety, and livelihoods, and the strength 
of the economy are put at risk. Climate change 
is increasing the risk of damage and service 
disruption to infrastructure across Canada—
infrastructure whose repair and maintenance costs 
are already a major national challenge.
Until now, the scale of risk to Canada’s infrastructure 
has been poorly understood. This report looks at 
how a warming and increasingly volatile climate 
could damage infrastructure across Canada and 
what Canadian governments can do to prepare 
and to reduce damage, disruption, and costs. 
We project impacts for some of the country’s 
most important infrastructure—including homes 
and buildings, roads and railways, and electricity 
systems—and assess how various adaptation 
choices could influence future costs. Our 
findings suggest that to ensure new and existing 
infrastructure is “future proofed,” investment must 
dramatically shift toward making infrastructure 
more resilient. Policy changes drive that shift: 
Canada must rapidly update the policies, codes, 
regulations, and funding decisions that determine 
what gets built and how it is maintained.
This is easier said than done. Even without 
considering the added stress of a warming 
climate, Canada already faces significant threats 
to the integrity of our roads, bridges, buildings, 
communications systems, water and sewer 
systems, electricity grids, and homes. Deteriorating 
roads and electrical grids and slow progress 
in modernizing transportation corridors and 
public transit systems are hampering business 
performance, trade and economic growth. And 
access to clean drinking water and safe housing 
remains a critical need for tens of thousands 
of people—and Indigenous communities in 
particular—eroding health, safety, and prosperity. 
Necessary repairs and upgrades are already 
overdue and underfunded—some estimates peg 
the money required to address this gap at over 
$250 billion. And in some places, like in many 
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
V
FINDINGS 
 	The costs of damage and disruption from climate change to Canada’s infrastructure, 
which is vulnerable from decades of underinvestment, could be massive.
Canada’s warming climate will accelerate climate- and weather-related damage to some of the 
country’s most important infrastructure. As sea levels rise and rainfall increases, flood damage to 
homes and buildings could increase fivefold in the next few decades and by a factor of ten by the 
end of the century, with costs as high as $13.6 billion annually. Temperature- and rainfall- related 
damage to roads and railways could increase by up to $5.4 billion annually by mid century and 
by as much as $12.8 billion annually by end of century. Heat and rainfall damage to electrical 
transmission and distribution infrastructure could more than double by mid-century and triple 
by end of century, costing utilities and ratepayers up to $4.1 billion annually. 
Governments, utilities, businesses, and homeowners across Canada are already struggling 
to keep existing infrastructure in good condition and build the infrastructure needed for the 
future. Growing levels of damage and disruption as a result of climate change could make this 
even more difficult—and costly.
 	Proactive investment in infrastructure adaptation is the most cost-effective way 
to protect the services that people, businesses, and the economy depend on. 
Early investment in adaptation can substantially reduce the impacts and costs to infrastructure 
of a hotter and increasingly volatile climate. Building and moving homes out of high-risk areas 
can reduce the costs of coastal flooding by 2100 up to 90 per cent or up to $1 billion every year. 
When repaving roads, using asphalt mixes and base materials selected to withstand the climate 
two or three decades into the future can reduce costs by over 90 per cent, saving as much as 
majority First Nation, Métis, and Inuit communities, 
essential infrastructure has never been built. The 
added pressure of climate change will make it even 
more difficult to rectify this inequality.
What’s more, Canada’s transition to net zero 
will require major infrastructure investments 
in low-carbon buildings, transportation, and 
electricity infrastructure. If these new investments 
are done right, they can help address infrastructure 
gaps and make infrastructure systems across 
the country more resilient to climate change. If 
they are done poorly, they will add to our stock of 
infrastructure at risk of damage and disruption 
from climate change and deepen gaps.
Canada has a clear opportunity to address existing 
infrastructure needs while also building climate 
resilience into infrastructure from the ground up. 
Failing to consider climate risks and the benefits of 
resilience will only increase costs and exacerbate 
Canada’s existing infrastructure challenges. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
VI
$4.1 billion annually by the 2050s. And during regular maintenance for electricity transmission 
and distribution infrastructure, replacing components with new ones designed to withstand 
increases in heat and rainfall for several decades to come can reduce damage costs by 80 percent 
by the end of the century, or up to $3.1 billion each year.
Despite the clear benefits of early, proactive investment in adapting Canada’s infrastructure 
for climate change, progress has been limited. Public and private infrastructure owners have 
been more concerned with short-term budgets and balance sheets than long-term planning, 
leaving long-term risks like climate change unaddressed. The unprecedented investments 
in infrastructure over the next several decades to support the net zero transition are a key 
opportunity to build the climate resilience of virtually all infrastructure in Canada. However, 
if current short-term thinking around infrastructure continues, those investments will only 
increase the amount of infrastructure vulnerable to climate change impacts. 
 	Not all impacts and costs of climate change for infrastructure can be quantified—
the loss of services and reliability will have far-reaching social and economic 
consequences.
Our analysis shows that the cost of climate change-induced damage to key infrastructure 
could be massive, yet our projections of costs are only a low-end estimate. Climate science 
cannot yet predict how climate change might affect many types of extreme weather events not 
included in our analysis—such as ice storms, tornadoes, hurricanes, and hail—that could cause 
much additional damage. Other types of critical infrastructure that we did not study, including 
telecommunications infrastructure, drinking water systems, healthcare facilities, and marine 
ports and seaways, are also at risk from climate change.
The costs of climate change impacts on infrastructure also go beyond the price of physical 
damage and repair. When infrastructure is put out of commission or made less reliable by 
more frequent damage, the services that it provides—transportation, power, healthcare, 
communications, and shelter, to name a few—are also interrupted. We show that the costs of 
delays from climate-induced damage to roads and railways borne by transportation operators 
alone could  be in the billions annually. In reality, however, these effects will reverberate through 
supply chains and industries, multiplying costs and reducing economic productivity. Further, 
damage from climate change, or the threat thereof, could have far-reaching implications for 
the stability of the financial system and the availability of capital and insurance. 
 	A lack of climate risk information, transparency, and regulation is leading to bad 
infrastructure decisions.
In Canada, very little information is available regarding current or future climate risks to 
infrastructure. For example, we estimate that at least a half million buildings at risk of flooding in 
Canada are not identified by government-produced flood maps. The flood maps that are available 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
VII
BALANCE SHEETS ARE LITTERED WITH UNDISCLOSED 
CLIMATE INFRASTRUCTURE RISKS 
The economic implications of climate change impacts on infrastructure in Canada extend well 
beyond the costs of repairing potholes or flooded homes. The accumulated costs of damage 
and disruption from flooding and extreme weather and from additional wear and tear from 
a warming climate, as well as from the impact of this damage on property and asset values, 
mortgages, and insurance rates, can also ricochet through the economy. Yet very few of these 
costs are being factored into financial systems and economic decisions today. Both public 
and private infrastructure owners risk big write-downs in the value of their assets, as well as 
challenges in obtaining credit and capital once it becomes clear that they face increased risk 
of flooding or other hazards in a changing climate. And stakeholders and investors in both 
government-owned and privately owned infrastructure are unknowingly buying into those risks.
Currently, the risks of climate change for infrastructure owned by individuals or businesses, such as 
homes and commercial buildings—and for the capital that finances them—are not being widely 
assessed or disclosed. For example, flood, wildfire, and permafrost risks are very difficult for asset 
owners in Canada to assess because there are no country-wide maps or data sources, and the 
local data that exists is frequently dated or obsolete. This means that the amount of climate risk 
threatening the value of a home or building is equally unknown to the owner, mortgage lender, 
and mortgage-backed security holder. Indeed, our estimates show that within 30 years, climate 
change will likely increase annual damages of coastal and inland floods to homes and buildings by 
$4.5 billion to $5.5 billion annually, three to four times today’s costs. Yet the lack of information about 
flooding and other climate change risks means that not enough infrastructure owners or lenders 
are taking steps to protect themselves. For example, approximately 45 per cent of homeowners in 
Canada believe they have insurance that will pay for repairs and rebuilding after overland flooding, 
are 20 years out of date on average and only show existing flood risk—virtually none of them 
show how climate change may affect the future risk of flooding. Even bigger information gaps 
exist for other major climate hazards, including wildfire. In the absence of this information, few 
infrastructure owners or investors are able to assess and manage existing climate risks, let alone 
future risks associated with climate change.
The codes and standards that dictate how infrastructure in Canada is built and managed largely 
do not account for climate change, and updates to reflect climate change risk are many years 
from being implemented. As a result, infrastructure is being built and operated based on the 
climate of the past, not the hotter and more extreme climate that is emerging. And regulations for 
financial decision making in Canada do not yet require owners and investors to assess and disclose 
climate change risks to physical assets and infrastructure. Markets are therefore not pricing this 
risk, allowing capital to continue to flow into risky investments. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
VIII
only about 10 to 15 per cent of households actually have this coverage. And mortgage lenders 
typically don’t require purchasers of homes in flood zones to have overland flood insurance. 
Risks to public and large-scale infrastructure like railways and electricity systems are also a 
concern. Governments and other major infrastructure owners continue to design and build for 
yesterday’s environment without factoring in climate change risk. Stakeholders—users, taxpayers, 
ratepayers, lenders, and investors—are largely unaware of how the impacts of climate change 
to these major infrastructure systems will impact them. For example, our projections indicate 
that by around 2050, climate change-induced damage to roads could require governments 
across Canada to spend up to $3.1 billion more annually on road maintenance and repair—or 
almost 20 per cent more than what they currently spend. These costs will hurt the bottom line of 
municipal governments—which are responsible for most roads in Canada—and will ultimately 
impact residents through higher taxes, poor road conditions, and delays. 
In addition to financial risks for individual owners, businesses, and governments, damage and 
disruption to infrastructure from climate change could have major systemic consequences. 
Cumulatively, the costs of infrastructure damage and loss of asset value could affect the stability 
of Canada’s financial system. Lenders and investors will be less willing to provide capital—
or will demand higher rates—to areas and industries where climate-related risks are clearly 
increasing. Similarly, insurance will become more expensive or even unavailable, meaning that 
more losses will be borne directly by owners or creditors. More frequent and severe damage 
means that infrastructure will more frequently be out of service or in poor condition, reducing 
the function that it performs in supporting people, communities, and businesses. For example, 
traffic congestion in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton area alone is already estimated to cost 
up to $11 billion per year in lost productivity—an amount that will only grow with roads in worse 
condition or more frequently closed for repair. Loss of vital infrastructure services will also affect 
productivity, mobility, trade, communications, and food and water security, among other things, 
with implications for economic growth and the health and well-being of people across Canada.
Quite simply, when it comes to forecasting the true scale of damage and disruption of 
infrastructure in a warming climate, we don’t know what we don’t know. The scale and extent 
of climate-related risks to Canada’s infrastructure are only now coming into focus as climate 
models are updated, and the complex consequences of increasing infrastructure damage and 
loss of service for the financial system and the broader economy are beginning to come to light. 
It is therefore impossible to fully gauge the extent of the economic impact of future climate 
risk. However, without starting to act now to minimize future loss and damage based on the 
information today, Canada could find itself swamped by the pace of climate change and its 
impacts on our infrastructure.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
IX
CLIMATE CHANGE MUST FACTOR MORE 
PROMINENTLY INTO INFRASTRUCTURE DECISIONS 
Decisions about where and how public and private infrastructure are driven by a complex web 
of government policies and market forces. In governments, infrastructure departments play 
an important role in deciding what gets built where, but other departments also influence 
infrastructure planning, design, financing, and operations through other levers, including 
building codes and standards, macroprudential decisions, financial system oversight, regulation 
of utilities, and land-use planning. And alongside government decisions, the practices of financial 
system actors, including banks, insurers, stock exchanges, investment companies, institutional 
investors, accounting firms, credit rating agencies, and real estate professionals, have a powerful 
influence over how and when markets finance infrastructure with private capital. 
To date, the combined actions of governments and markets have not been enough to prepare 
Canada’s built environment for the warmer and more volatile climate that lies ahead. The 
climate information developed by governments does not provide individuals and businesses the 
information they need to understand and prepare for climate risks. Building codes and standards 
have not kept up with the increased stresses of a warming world. Governments are also enabling 
risky decisions and bad investments by funding at-risk infrastructure and repeatedly providing 
financial assistance in response to climate-related infrastructure failures and disaster losses. 
And markets are failing to account for the true value of climate change risk because owners, 
lenders, and investors are not able or not willing to disclose how climate change will affect their 
infrastructure assets. 
Governments and the private sector need a new blueprint for how to decide, fund, and insure 
what gets built. To avoid the costs and social and economic disruption of climate change impacts, 
infrastructure planning must be forward-looking, strategic, and coordinated across government 
departments and orders of government, encompassing funding, codes and standards, land-
use planning, infrastructure asset management, and more. Government policies should also 
encourage the transparent disclosure and valuation of risk and stop financially backstopping 
risky public and private investments. And private sector lenders, investors and firms need to play 
their part in making better long-term decisions that incorporate climate change risk.
Canada is at an infrastructure crossroads. Governments, businesses, and communities are 
beginning to rethink what the roads, railways, homes, buildings, and electricity grids of 
tomorrow should look like, and how best to prepare for the changes we anticipate. Ultimately, 
continuing to build infrastructure the way Canada has in the past will cost more than future-
proofing the country’s built environment. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
X
RECOMMENDATIONS
All orders of government have an important role in building the resilience of Canada’s infrastructure 
in preparation for climate change. The following recommendations, if acted on by federal, provincial, 
territorial, Indigenous, and municipal governments, will help ensure that Canada starts building today 
for the climate of tomorrow. 
Governments should develop and publish accurate and practical information about climate-
related infrastructure risks. 
To understand and manage current and future climate change risk and make informed invest­
ments in adaptation, governments, corporations, investors, and individuals need actionable 
and up-to-date risk information. However, current information about future climate change 
impacts and existing climate risks in Canada is inconsistent and incomplete. To ensure that all 
owners and investors of infrastructure understand climate risk and can account for it in their 
decisions, governments must develop useful and consistent climate risk information that is 
universally accessible.
Governments and regulators should require owners of existing and proposed infrastructure 
to disclose climate change risks.
Transparency about climate change risk promotes resilient decisions and discourages risky 
ones. But if infrastructure owners and investors are not made aware of and accountable for 
climate risk, that risk will grow dramatically as the climate becomes hotter and more volatile. 
Governments and regulatory bodies should use their authority to ensure that owners, lenders, 
investors and other financial system actors are analyzing, disclosing, and managing climate risk. 
Governments should explicitly evaluate resilience benefits and climate risks for all 
infrastructure spending and regulatory decisions.
The long lifespan of most infrastructure means governments and others need to start building 
adaptation and resilience into infrastructure decisions immediately to avoid locking in decades 
or centuries of additional climate vulnerability. To make this happen, all orders of government 
should take a long-term, coordinated approach to setting infrastructure standards, funding and 
planning public infrastructure, regulating infrastructure operation, regulating urban develop­
ment, evaluating major industrial and resource development projects, and maintaining and 
operating infrastructure. 
1
2
3
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
XI
Governments should create safety nets for the most vulnerable to make climate risk pricing 
equitable. 
More transparency and disclosure of climate change risk will create price signals that have over­
all, long-term benefits for reducing climate risk. However, uncontrolled climate change risk pric­
ing could create unsustainable costs for the individuals and communities that are already the 
most economically vulnerable to climate-related damage—for example by raising mortgage 
rates or insurance premiums. To avoid negatively impacting those who can already least afford 
to pay, governments should ensure that economically vulnerable individuals, businesses, and 
communities are made a priority for adaptation investments and for programs to ensure access 
to insurance and credit. 
4
Northern infrastructure
Canada’s infrastructure gaps are perhaps most visible when comparing differences between 
Northern and Southern Canada. Inadequate housing, unreliable electricity, and deficient roads 
and airports, among other issues, are major challenges to the health, well-being, and prosperity 
of communities across the North, and of Indigenous peoples in particular. The climate is also 
warming more rapidly in Northern Canada than almost anywhere else in the world. The speed 
of change, as well as the North’s unique geography and history, mean that the patterns and 
consequences of climate change impacts on infrastructure are distinct in Northern communities.
The Canadian Institute for Climate Choices is examining the unique challenges facing northern 
Canada when it comes to climate-related infrastructure impacts and adaptation. These include 
the impacts and costs of permafrost thaw on airports, roads, and homes across the North and 
the impacts of shorter ice road seasons. In collaboration with Firelight, an Indigenous-owned 
consulting and research firm that works with Indigenous and local communities across Canada, 
we are also exploring what these infrastructure impacts mean to Inuit and First Nations commu­
nities. This analysis will be published in 2022.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
1
INTRODUCTION
Climate change is causing unprecedented strain 
and damage to Canada’s infrastructure—the 
buildings, roads, energy systems, and other vital 
physical assets that underpin all aspects of life 
in Canada. When infrastructure is under threat, 
it cannot reliably provide the critical services 
and functions that support social, cultural, and 
economic well-being in Canada. When infrastruc­
ture is at risk, so are trade, business, community 
life, and people’s health and safety.
Canadian governments can make choices now to 
protect Canadian infrastructure. Policy changes can 
create incentives for investing in resilient infrastruc­
ture that can withstand climate impacts—saving 
many private and public dollars over the long life 
of infrastructure projects and protecting the infra­
structure services that people and the economy 
depend on. This is especially true now, as govern­
ments consider major new infrastructure invest­
ments to support a net zero transition. Failing to 
consider the costs of climate impacts, and opportu­
nities to build resilience through these investments, 
will only increase the cost of the transition. 
Damage to homes, businesses, and public infra­
structure from storms, floods, and wildfires is 
increasing—and so is the cost of repairing the 
damage. Over the past several decades, the annual 
cost of weather-related disasters in Canada has 
jumped by a factor of 10, as have the average costs 
of disasters (Sawyer et al., 2020). Recent weather-re­
lated disasters have had unprecedented human 
and economic costs, such as the 2020 Alberta hail­
storm that caused almost $1.2 billion in damages 
(IBC, 2020), the Toronto and Calgary floods of 
2013 that resulted in over $7 billion in combined 
damages, and the Fort McMurray wildfire of 2016 
that had an economic cost of nearly $11 billion 
(Alam et al., 2017). 
1
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
2
But weather-related disasters are only one part 
of the picture—less dramatic and slower-moving 
climatic changes are also a major threat to infra­
structure. Rising sea levels lead to more frequent 
shoreline erosion and flooding in coastal commu­
nities, higher summer temperatures cause 
roads and railways to buckle, permafrost thaw 
damages buildings and roads across the North, 
and ice storms shut down electrical grids and 
telecommunications systems. Although all these 
consequences of climate change are already 
happening in Canada, little is yet known about 
their total effect on infrastructure. Governments 
and other infrastructure owners and operators 
largely do not understand how rates of power 
outages, road closures, rail repairs, or flooding of 
homes and communities—and their economic 
and societal costs—are changing because of 
climate and weather. What is certain is that, as 
the climate continues to change, without adap­
tation these impacts to infrastructure in Canada 
will continue to worsen. 
Escalating infrastructure damages caused by 
climate change could dramatically increase the 
cost of simply maintaining the services that people 
across Canada depend on. Federal government esti­
mates peg the potential costs of climate-induced 
infrastructure damage at over $300 billion in the 
coming decade alone (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
These climate costs could consume funds needed 
to address existing infrastructure deficits, including 
housing shortages, water insecurity, and transporta­
tion gaps. Climate change impacts could also hinder 
Canada’s transition to net zero and delay invest­
ments in new infrastructure that will be critical in 
a low-carbon world, such as updated power grids, 
public transit, and building energy retrofits. If action 
is not taken to adapt new and existing infrastructure 
to the effects of a changing climate, it cannot reli­
ability support a Canadian net zero economy. 
Fortunately, it’s possible to avoid much of the 
potential cost of infrastructure damage and loss 
of infrastructure services from climate change. 
But avoiding tomorrow’s costs hinges on govern­
ments, businesses, and communities investing 
today in adapting to climate change infrastruc­
ture risk. This includes ensuring that new infra­
structure is designed to withstand climate change, 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
3
that existing infrastructure is made more resilient, 
and that all infrastructure is managed and main­
tained to protect its level of service in a changing 
climate. Changes in government policy can create 
the incentives and awareness necessary to drive 
these investments. 
When it comes to building resilient infrastructure 
and adapting existing infrastructure, Canada has 
a lot of work to do. Despite knowing about climate 
change risks to infrastructure for decades, govern­
ments, businesses, and individuals have rarely 
accounted for these risks in their decision making. 
For example, provincial, territorial, Indigenous, and 
municipal governments have not regularly updated 
land use planning policies to reflect increasing 
flood risk in a changing climate. Government envi­
ronmental assessment and regulatory approval 
processes for major industrial and resource devel­
opment projects have limited and inconsistent 
requirements for proponents to plan for a climate 
that will be hotter and more volatile. National and 
regional building codes and infrastructure design 
standards are only very slowly starting to account 
for future climate change. Banks continue to lend 
to individuals and businesses to finance homes, 
buildings, and physical assets that are exposed 
to—and in many cases not insured for— current 
and future climate-related disasters. And insurers 
have not fully priced in the future risks of climate 
change to insured properties and assets, under­
mining incentives for policyholders to manage and 
avoid risk. 
If Canada continues down the current path, 
not only will costs to governments, businesses, 
communities, and individuals continue to grow, 
but a decline in the services that infrastruc­
ture provides will have far-reaching social and 
economic consequences. More frequent damage 
to roads, railways, electricity systems, and telecom­
munications will disrupt businesses and supply 
chains. Healthcare facilities may be unreachable 
or inoperable during climate-related disasters like 
floods and wildfires. Failures of dams and bridges 
will cost lives. And rural and remote communities 
will be cut off from outside sources of food, health­
care, and other critical supplies. 
Other effects will be less apparent but still 
profound. Growing weather-related damage and 
an increased awareness of climate risk will impact 
the value of many public and private infrastruc­
ture assets, with potentially catastrophic effects 
for owners and investors. Private insurance against 
weather-related disasters could become unavail­
able or prohibitively expensive, increasing the 
portion of costs of climate-related disasters that 
will need to be borne directly by individuals, busi­
nesses, utilities, and governments (Dolynny, 2019). 
And banks and mortgage lenders may refuse 
to finance or renew loans for buildings, proper­
ties, and physical assets that are at risk of severe 
damage or destruction. 
This report describes the physical and economic 
risks of climate change for infrastructure in 
Canada. It illustrates both the consequences of 
not being prepared, and the opportunity that 
investing in adaptation presents to avoid costs 
and the loss of vital infrastructure services. We 
examine the costs of three major impacts of 
climate change on some of Canada’s most import­
ant infrastructure:
HOMES AND BUILDINGS experiencing more frequent 
coastal and inland flooding;
ROADS AND RAILWAYS facing increased temperature- 
and rainfall-induced damage; 
ELECTRICITY SYSTEMS seeing escalating climate-driven 
demands and stresses.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
4
Our analysis examines the impacts and costs 
Canada can expect over the remainder of the 
century as climate change intensifies, both with and 
without more proactive planning. For scenarios in 
which Canada invests proactively in adaptation, we 
model the economic outcomes of protecting infra­
structure or increasing its resilience in anticipation 
of a more extreme and volatile climate. In scenarios 
without investments in adaptation, we assume that 
infrastructure continues to be maintained, updated, 
and replaced without accounting for future climate 
change. Comparing the net costs with and without 
adaption measures shows how adaptation could 
substantially reduce the cost of maintaining infra­
structure in the face of a changing climate.
We also examine two climate change scenarios: 
one in which greenhouse gas emissions continue 
unabated through the end of the century, lead­
ing to global temperature increases approach­
ing five degrees Celsius by 2100, and one in which 
global emissions are reduced in line with global 
commitments as of 2020, limiting global warm­
ing to about 2.5 degrees by 2100 (see Section 3 for 
details). The first scenario illustrates the conse­
quences that inadequate international action 
to curb greenhouse gas emissions may pose for 
Canada, including the additional costs and limita­
tions of adaptation to a much warmer and more 
extreme climate. In contrast, the second scenario 
illustrates the benefits of a more committed 
and rapid emissions reduction pathway, includ­
ing reduced impacts and better opportunities to 
control costs through adaptation.
Our findings illustrate the scale of the poten­
tial economic consequences of climate change 
impacts on Canada’s infrastructure. While this 
report describes only a subset of the costs of 
climate change for infrastructure in Canada, the 
results clearly show that climate impacts repre­
sent a major risk that governments, banks, insur­
ers, and financial regulators have so far failed to 
account for. Without proactive and appropriate 
actions to adapt and build resilience, the costs 
of repairing, replacing, and maintaining infra­
structure in a warming climate will become 
overwhelming. The funds that will be needed 
in the future just to maintain current levels of 
infrastructure service will consume financial 
resources that could otherwise be spent address­
ing the national infrastructure deficit and invest­
ing in new infrastructure to support Canada’s net 
zero transition. Immediate investment in manag­
ing the infrastructure risks of climate change is 
therefore critical to achieving a prosperous, resil­
ient, low-carbon future.
We also draw attention to key actions that govern­
ments can take to drive infrastructure choices that 
build resilience and avoid future climate change 
impacts and costs. We consider how governments 
can provide essential information about climate 
risk that is available to everyone who makes infra­
structure planning and investment decisions, not 
just to those who can afford to buy it. We consider 
how governments can drive private capital toward 
more resilient infrastructure by requiring disclo­
sure of climate risks. We consider how govern­
ments can improve resilience of publicly funded 
infrastructure by explicitly considering resilience 
benefits and climate risks in ways they currently 
do not. And we consider how governments can 
protect economically vulnerable individuals, busi­
nesses, and communities to avoid exacerbating 
inequality. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
5
Notably, this report does not address every import­
ant gap in research and policy advice related to 
climate change risks to infrastructure. The report 
is not a review of existing infrastructure-related 
adaptation policies and actions across Canada, 
nor of the efforts that communities, businesses, 
and individuals are already making to adapt. Nor 
does it examine in depth the ways that continued 
climate change impacts could disproportionately 
impact people and communities currently denied 
important infrastructure services or already bear­
ing a greater burden from climate change, includ­
ing people living on low incomes, Northern and 
remote communities, and Indigenous Peoples. Our 
own future work will help to fill some of these gaps, 
including our forthcoming report exploring climate 
impacts on infrastructure in the North.
The role of this report is to complement and 
support work in those other areas by highlight­
ing the larger context: climate change threatens 
the infrastructure services upon which the pros­
perity and well-being of people across Canada 
depend, and governments need to do more to 
create conditions for better, smarter decision 
making about infrastructure and climate risk.
The remainder of this report is structured as 
follows: 
	
▶SECTION 2 sets the context for Canada’s infra­
structure challenges, including the impor­
tance of infrastructure to prosperity and 
well-being in Canada, as well as the exist­
ing national infrastructure gap that climate 
change will only exacerbate.
	
▶SECTION 3 describes our methodology for 
estimating infrastructure impacts and costs 
from a changing climate and the benefits of 
adaptation.
	
▶SECTION 4 applies this approach to estimate 
the impacts of climate-related flooding on 
homes and buildings.
	
▶SECTION 5 considers impacts of a changing 
climate on roads and railways.
	
▶SECTION 6 assesses climate impacts on elec­
tricity systems. 
	
▶SECTION 7 provides our overall conclusions 
and recommendations.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
6
INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE IN CANADA
Functioning infrastructure is essential to the 
Canadian economy and the well-being of people 
from coast to coast to coast. Climate change 
will increase the cost of maintaining that infra­
structure and make it more difficult to sustain 
the level of service people across Canada expect. 
Immediate and sustained investment is needed 
to prepare Canada’s infrastructure for a climate 
that is warming at twice the global rate (Bush 
& Lemmen, 2019); without it, communities can 
expect rapidly escalating costs and significant 
service disruptions. 
The challenge of preparing Canada’s infrastruc­
ture for a warmer and more volatile climate is 
compounded by the fact that Canada already has 
a significant infrastructure deficit, and is already 
struggling to fund, build, and operate infrastruc­
ture that provides the services people and the 
economy require. Failure to address this deficit 
will limit Canada’s ability to successfully address 
the additional risks to infrastructure caused by a 
warming and increasingly volatile climate. 
To set the context for our analysis of the threats 
and challenges ahead, this section describes the 
state of infrastructure in Canada and its degree of 
readiness for climate change.
A foundation for well-being and 
prosperity 
Across Canada, people depend on the reliable 
services provided by infrastructure. Efficient and 
dependable roads and transportation, electricity, 
water, telecommunications, and healthcare lower 
business costs by decreasing production times and 
costs and increasing labour productivity and the 
reliability of operations. This increases private-sec­
tor returns and competitiveness while making the 
economy more productive, which in turn leads to 
increasing returns on investments, a higher stan­
dard of living, and long-term economic growth. In 
2009, Statistics Canada estimated that up to half 
of all productivity growth in the previous 45 years 
could be attributed to investment in public infra­
structure (Gu & Macdonald, 2009). 
2
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
7
Dependable infrastructure and infrastructure 
services are also essential to the health and 
well-being of people across Canada. People’s 
health and comfort depend on safe and afford­
able places to live, clean drinking water systems, 
and electricity and gas for heating. Wastewater 
treatment plants, recycling facilities, and landfills 
protect people from the environmental impacts of 
pollution and waste. Hospitals and clinics that are 
open and available are essential to quality health­
care. Roads, railways, and airports help families 
connect, and community centres and sports facili­
ties help people maintain and improve their phys­
ical and mental well-being. 
Infrastructure and infrastructure services are partic­
ularly important for Northern and remote commu­
nities, where safe housing and long-distance 
shipments of food and medicine can be a matter 
of life and death. For example, over 100 communi­
ties across Canada are not accessible by year-round 
roads and rely heavily on small ports, winter roads, 
and airports for supplies and access to the rest of 
Canada (NRCan, 2018). 
Canada’s infrastructure already 
wasn’t keeping up 
Despite its importance to every aspect of life in 
Canada, infrastructure across the country is dete­
riorating—and so is the level of service it provides 
to businesses, communities, and individuals. This 
is particularly true for public infrastructure. Over 
the past 50 years, investments in roads, bridges, 
airports, electricity grids, and water systems have 
not kept up with wear and tear and the demands 
of a growing population and economy. 
Although public infrastructure spending in 
Canada has increased somewhat in the past 
two decades, recent estimates peg the funding 
needed to maintain existing infrastructure and 
fill gaps so the national economy can run at maxi­
mum efficiency at between $110 and $270 billion 
(Berz et al., 2020).
Although Canada’s infrastructure deficit constrains 
productivity, prosperity, and well-being across the 
country, not all people are affected equally. The 
national infrastructure gap is not just the story 
of an inadequate stock of infrastructure overall 
but of slapdash investment in infrastructure and 
unequal access to infrastructure services. There 
are important disparities in Canada regarding 
who has access to quality roads, reliable electric­
ity, clean water, and safe and affordable housing. 
For example, 32 Indigenous communities across 
the country are currently under long-term drink­
ing water advisories, and 185 off-grid communities 
rely on diesel generators for electricity (Indigenous 
Services Canada, 2021; NRCan, 2018). An estimated 
one-third of households in Canada live in a dwell­
ing that is inadequate, unaffordable, or unsuit­
able (Claveau, 2020). And homes and dwellings 
in Indigenous communities are three times more 
likely to need repairs than other communities 
nationwide (Thistlethwaite et al., 2020).
The story of Canada’s infrastructure deficit is 
complex and started decades ago. Government 
investment in infrastructure peaked in the late 
1950s and then declined continuously until the 
mid-2000s (Figure 2.1). In the late 1990s, infrastruc­
ture spending decreased to the point where the 
total value of Canadian public infrastructure was 
actually declining, taking into account deprecia­
tion (Mackenzie, 2013). In the late 2000s there was 
an uptick in public infrastructure spending associ­
ated with economic stimulus programs after the 
financial crisis, but this has subsequently tailed off. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
8
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
$50
$60
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Infrastructure spending in Canada is not keeping pace with the economy
Infrastructure investment as a percentage of GDP and in billions of dollars
Figure 2.1
Investment, % of GDP
Investment, billions of 
dollars  (2019 CAD)
Source: Data was obtained from Statistics Canada, 2020d; 2021a.
From the mid-20th century until today, responsi­
bility for public infrastructure has also steadily 
shifted. In the early 1960s, the federal government 
owned about 25 per cent of public infrastructure, 
provincial governments owned 45 per cent, and 
municipal governments owned only about 30 per 
cent (Harchaoui et al., 2003). Presently, municipal 
governments own and are responsible for almost 
60 per cent of infrastructure—including roads, 
bridges, water and wastewater treatment systems, 
recreational facilities, and public buildings—as 
compared to the federal government’s two per 
cent (Infrastructure Canada, 2018). Since munici­
palities have few revenue-generating tools at their 
disposal and collect less than 10 per cent of all 
taxes paid in Canada, they have been unable to 
invest adequately in the construction of new infra­
structure and the maintenance of existing assets, 
leading to an overall decline in the condition of 
infrastructure nationwide (Johal, 2019). Small 
municipalities and Indigenous governments with 
limited budgets have been particularly hard hit. 
While recent federal government announce­
ments regarding new infrastructure investment 
are good news, addressing the national infrastruc­
ture deficit will still be an uphill battle. Decades 
of underinvestment have left much of Canada’s 
infrastructure in poor condition, so rehabilitating 
or rebuilding it will be expensive. Major invest­
ments will continue to be required to improve the 
condition of infrastructure until it can be main­
tained by moderate, regular spending on main­
tenance and repair (Figure 2.2). 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
9
Climate change action can help 
close the infrastructure gap
Climate change poses a major challenge to 
addressing Canada’s infrastructure gap, for three 
main reasons.
First, climate change could accelerate the dete­
rioration of existing infrastructure, substantially 
reducing its lifespan. Warmer temperatures will 
strain electrical distribution systems and cause 
roads and highways to crack and rut (EPA, 2015). 
Floods will wash out culverts and bridge footings, 
and permafrost thaw will damage runways and 
building foundations in the North. This will push 
more infrastructure into poor condition, further 
decreasing levels of service and increasing costs 
for repair or replacement.
Second, climate change is increasing the need for 
new investment specifically focused on protect­
ing existing infrastructure and the people it 
serves from harsher conditions (IBC & FCM, 2020). 
Examples include building seawalls, restoring 
wetlands to protect urban areas from flooding, 
and retrofitting public transit vehicles with more 
powerful air conditioning. These demands will 
further increase the investment needed beyond 
what is already required to address the national 
infrastructure deficit. 
It pays to keep infrastructure in good condition
Costs of timely infrastructure maintenance vs. deterioration and replacement
Figure 2.2
Infrastructure condition
Time
$10 
million 
repair
$60 million 
replacement
•
Proactive asset 
management: $40 million
in repair and minimal 
service disruption
•
Poor asset management:
$60 million in replacement
and significant service 
disruption
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
10
Third, meeting Canada’s emissions reduction 
commitments to reach net zero will require 
investment in new, low-carbon infrastructure 
like modernized electricity grids, electric vehicle 
charging networks, zero-emissions public tran­
sit, and building renovations. These will create 
even more demand and competition for infra­
structure funding. And if this new infrastructure is 
not constructed to be climate-resilient and is not 
maintained to reflect the stresses of a changing 
climate, it risks becoming part of Canada’s pool of 
poor-condition infrastructure—further deepening 
the infrastructure gap and increasing the costs of 
Canada’s efforts to achieve net zero. 
However, forthcoming investments in infrastruc­
ture to support the net zero transition and to 
protect Canada from climate change are also an 
opportunity to leapfrog the infrastructure gap. 
The scale of these investments will be unprece­
dented, and if coordinated and integrated intelli­
gently they can make the best use of committed 
resources to simultaneously reduce emissions and 
build resilience with maximum speed and at mini­
mum cost (ACT, 2021). These investments can also 
help to restore the overall condition of Canada’s 
infrastructure to a level that can be sustain­
ably funded and maintained—even in the face 
of increased stresses from climate change. And 
focussed planning can ensure that new infrastruc­
ture provides services for people and communities 
that have been historically underserved. 
Real estate is a precarious pillar 
of national wealth 
Most of Canada’s infrastructure equity is privately 
owned. In 2019, Canada’s private infrastructure 
was worth $6.1 trillion, amounting to about 13 
per cent of national wealth (Figure 2.3) (Statistics 
Canada, 2021a, 2021b). Privately owned homes 
and buildings represent almost 85 per cent of this 
total infrastructure asset value (Statistics Canada, 
2021b). In 2016, 63 per cent of people in Canada 
owned their home. And for most, their home is 
their largest asset—representing 41 per cent of 
the wealth of the average household (Statistics 
Canada, 2020b). 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
11
Homes and buildings, like public infrastructure, 
play a crucial role in supporting the health, safety, 
well-being, and economic productivity of people 
in Canada. And like public infrastructure, private 
real estate is highly exposed to damage from 
climate change. The costs of damage to real estate 
from weather-related disasters such as floods, ice 
storms, and wildfires have been growing rapidly 
over the last few decades (Sawyer et al., 2020). 
While private insurance and government disas­
ter assistance have historically covered much of 
this cost, there are growing signs that these back­
stops are reaching their limit. Insurance premi­
ums are rising and are in danger of becoming 
unaffordable or unavailable to many home and 
business owners facing risks of flooding (Shaw 
& Baumann, 2020). The federal government has 
reduced its support for financial disaster assis­
tance through major increases in the thresholds 
of financial damage before provinces and terri­
tories can access funding (Davies, 2020). And the 
2021 federal budget allocated less than half the 
amount for disaster assistance the Parliamentary 
Budget Officer had said was required (PBO, 2016).
The economic implications of escalating 
climate-related damage to buildings extend 
well beyond the costs of repair or replacement, 
whether borne by insurers, governments, or 
owners. Historically, property values have declined 
in the short term in areas impacted by weath­
er-related disasters but have typically bounced 
back after a few years (Bin & Landry, 2013; Kousky 
et al., 2020; Pfeffer, 2017). However, there is grow­
ing evidence from the United States that prop­
erty values in very high-risk areas are becoming 
Homes and buildings are Canada's most valuable infrastructure
Canada's infrastructure asset stock
Figure 2.3
Homes and buildings
$4.5 trillion
Transportation
Energy
Utilities
Source: Data was obtained from Statistics Canada 2021a; 2020b; 2021b.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
12
permanently depressed as the frequency of 
disasters increases and the awareness of climate 
change risk grows (Beck & Lin, 2020; McAlpine & 
Porter, 2018). Further, climate change may devalue 
real estate completely in some areas as sea level 
rise permanently inundates some coastal homes 
or as more intense wildfires make it impossible to 
rebuild communities (Atkin, 2017). 
In addition to a loss in real estate asset value, 
climate change risks and impacts could restrict 
property use, cause loss of rental income, and 
increase costs for insurance and mortgages 
(Chopik, 2019). Insurers facing increasing and 
unsustainable payouts are already increasing 
premiums to reflect risk (RATESDOTCA, 2021). 
Declining property values due to more frequent 
weather-related damage or perceived climate 
change risk could also make it more challeng­
ing for owners to renew or refinance their mort­
gages. And although 45 per cent of Canadian 
homeowners believe they have insurance that 
will pay for repairs and rebuilding after overland 
flooding, only about 10 to 15 per cent of house­
holds actually have this coverage (Joseph & Alini, 
2017; Posadzki, 2017). Many of the homes that are 
most at risk of flooding cannot be insured, leav­
ing owners financially vulnerable in the event of 
disaster. Mortgage lenders and banks, as well as 
investors and guarantors of mortgage-backed 
securities, could also be financially exposed. In 
the U.S., the implications of climate risks to real 
estate have been equated to the subprime mort­
gages that precipitated the 2008 financial crisis, 
but with even greater potential for economic loss 
and social disruption (Becketti & Lacy, 2016). In 
addition to direct economic losses and impacts 
on the stability of the financial system, increas­
ing damage to homes and buildings will disrupt 
families and businesses, interrupt commerce and 
supply chains, decrease investment in local econ­
omies, and decrease regional or even national 
economic productivity (Boustan et al., 2017).
Damage to Canada’s housing stock will also 
affect individuals who do not own their homes. 
Thirty-seven per cent of people in Canada live in 
rental units or band housing (Uppal, 2019). When 
the homes or buildings these people live in are 
damaged by flooding or other weather-related 
disasters, they often have little choice in how or 
when landlords make repairs, forcing them to live 
in inadequate and sometimes dangerous condi­
tions (Wesseler, 2021). And evidence from the 
U.S. suggests that wealthier homeowners move 
away from neighbourhoods affected by climate 
impacts like floods, wildfires, and permafrost thaw, 
and that homes in these areas are often converted 
to rental units (Ajibade & McBean, 2014). This can 
worsen existing racial and economic inequities, 
as renters—who tend to have lower incomes and 
fewer financial resources and are more likely to 
belong to racialized communities than home­
owners—will disproportionately bear the brunt of 
climate impacts where they live.
Canada is not accounting for 
climate risks to infrastructure
Despite evidence that climate risks are growing and 
will continue to grow, decisions about new infra­
structure are failing to take physical climate risks into 
account. Governments and developers are continu­
ing to build roads, buildings, and critical infrastruc­
ture in high-risk areas with materials that are not 
suited to a warmer and more volatile climate. And 
banks, investors, and pension funds are continuing 
to operate portfolios without adequately consid­
ering future risk, amplifying exposure to climate 
hazards and threats. For example, despite develop­
ment restrictions in some flood zones, analysis we 
conducted previously found that in the last three 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
13
years, 10 per cent of building permits in Vancouver 
were for projects situated on land that, not account­
ing for climate change, is deemed likely to flood 
once a century (Clark & Coffman, 2020).
Governments and regulators have made some 
efforts to protect and strengthen existing infrastruc­
ture and to ensure that new infrastructure is built 
to withstand a changing climate. These measures 
include providing funding for resilient infrastruc­
ture, requiring that climate risks be incorporated 
into some new infrastructure projects, and encour­
aging the finance sector to start accounting for and 
disclosing climate-related financial risks. However, 
thus far, these efforts  have failed to move the needle 
on climate risk to infrastructure.
The federal government’s Disaster Mitigation 
and Adaptation Fund (DMAF) is currently the 
largest dedicated pool of infrastructure adapta­
tion and resilience funding in the country. DMAF 
provides approximately $500 million annually to 
provinces, territories, Indigenous governments, 
and municipalities to reinforce and improve exist­
ing infrastructure or to build new infrastructure 
that protects people, critical infrastructure, and 
essential services (Infrastructure Canada, 2021). 
However, a recent estimate by the Federation 
of Canadian Municipalities indicated that $5.3 
billion of infrastructure adaptation investment is 
required annually at the municipal level alone—
more than 10 times more than what is available 
through DMAF (IBC & FCM, 2020). 
Through Infrastructure Canada’s Climate Lens, the 
federal government has also attempted to incor­
porate resilience into new infrastructure projects 
that receive federal funding. This lens requires 
applicants to assess climate risks and build adap­
tation into project design (Infrastructure Canada, 
2020). However, Infrastructure Canada provides 
little guidance on how those Climate Lens assess­
ments should be conducted, leading to sometimes 
cursory efforts and inconsistent levels of rigour (Li et 
al., 2019). Furthermore, only a fraction of infrastruc­
ture projects are subject to the Climate Lens, which 
is not applicable to projects that do not receive 
federal funding, nor is it applicable to private-sec­
tor projects or real estate development. Smaller 
communities and businesses, as well as individuals, 
often lack the expertise and capacity to assess the 
climate vulnerability of existing or proposed infra­
structure, limiting their ability to conduct Climate 
Lens-type assessments or to incorporate climate 
risk in infrastructure planning and maintenance 
(Engineers Canada, 2016). 
Many of the codes and standards that dictate how 
infrastructure is built in Canada do not provide 
guidance on designing for climate hazards, and 
those that do are only starting to be updated to 
reflect changing future risks like stronger winds, 
more intense rainfall, and changing snow loads. 
Canada’s national building code will not be fully 
updated to reflect climate change until 2025, after 
which provincial and territorial building codes will 
need a separate process to be brought up to date 
to mirror the national code, should provincial and 
territorial governments decide to do so (Arsenault, 
2019). Owners, builders, and designers of infrastruc­
ture also lack access to information about exist­
ing and future climate risks—which keeps them 
from understanding and addressing risk even if 
they wanted to. For instance, Canada does not have 
comprehensive public floodplain maps that show 
homeowners or infrastructure owners whether 
their assets are at risk of flooding (Henstra et al., 
2019). The limited maps that do exist are frequently 
outdated, contain insufficient detail, or are incon­
sistent from one area to the next. And only six per 
cent of people in Canada who live in flood risk areas 
are aware that this is the case (Ziolecki et al., 2020).
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
14
The physical risks of climate change to infrastruc­
ture and assets are also not being evaluated or 
disclosed in private and public sector finance. Both 
the Task Force on Financial Disclosures (TCFD) and 
Canada’s Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance 
have recommended that physical climate risks 
should be disclosed so that they can be priced by 
markets and factored into financial transactions, 
yet this has not become mainstream practice in 
Canada (Government of Canada, 2019; TCFD, 2017). 
Physical climate risks to residential real estate are 
not disclosed by home insurers, banks, or other 
mortgage lenders, nor are they disclosed for mort­
gage-backed securities. Real estate investment 
trusts also do not typically look at climate risks to 
their portfolios or are not disclosing those risks to 
shareholders. This means that investors have no 
idea how likely it is that infrastructure, companies, 
and sectors in which they are invested could lose 
value because of growing damages from climate 
change. In some cases, the federal government 
is even helping owners access capital to buy or 
build in hazardous locations through mortgage 
insurance and economic development programs. 
Governments of all orders are also sending coun­
terproductive price signals that encourage urban 
development in high-risk areas, for example by 
continuing to build hospitals and other public 
services in flood zones (Clark et al., 2021).
Proactive investments can 
dramatically reduce future costs
Climate change presents a real and present 
danger to Canada’s public and private infrastruc­
ture and the vital social and economic services it 
provides. However, the response to this challenge 
has thus far failed to match the threat. More must 
be done to ensure that governments, owners, 
operators, and investors have the funds, informa­
tion, and incentives they need to build resilient 
infrastructure and adapt existing infrastructure 
to a changing climate. 
By examining both the potential costs of climate 
change to some of Canada’s most important infra­
structure and the economic benefits of proactive 
adaptation, we highlight the need and oppor­
tunity to do more immediately. And our recom­
mendations point out what policy makers can do 
right away to create the conditions for smarter 
decisions that can address the gaps in Canada’s 
infrastructure resilience.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
15
OUR APPROACH
Our analysis of the likely impacts and costs of 
climate change on Canadian infrastructure 
focuses specifically on the magnitude of key 
climate change impacts and the resulting costs 
for roads, railways, homes and buildings, and 
electricity systems. The modelling included four 
main steps:
1.	
We identified climate-sensitive infrastructure
categories that will be substantially impacted
by a warming climate.
2.	
We projected future climate conditions and
hazards across Canada.
3.	
We estimated the rate of future infrastructure 
damage, disruption, and loss of service.
4.	
We calculated both the economic costs of
climate-related damage and the economic
benefits of adaptation.
Our analysis was supported by Industrial 
Economics, which has extensive expertise 
analyzing the impacts and costs of climate 
change, including for the World Bank and the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
The Industrial Economics team also included 
Resilient Analytics, which has developed sophis­
ticated models to estimate the impacts and costs 
of climate change on infrastructure and the bene­
fits of adaptation for the EPA and numerous 
other governments around the world. Additional 
information about the analytical approach and 
detailed results can be found in the technical anal­
ysis report here.
Navius Research also provided analytical support 
for the estimation of changes to electricity 
demand due to shifts in building heating and 
cooling needs because of projected changes in 
climate, as discussed in Section 6. Details on their 
methodology and results can be found in their 
technical report here.
3
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
16
Key infrastructure risks: buildings, 
roads, railways, and electricity 
systems 
Climate change will alter climate-related hazards, 
threatening infrastructure and compromising 
infrastructure services. Table 3.1 lists some of the 
ways that climate change is projected to phys­
ically affect infrastructure in Canada, as well as 
key outcomes of those impacts. However, not all 
impacts can be quantified and assigned a cost. 
In some cases, it is not yet possible to project 
how climate change will affect a particular type 
of climate hazard that could damage important 
infrastructure, such as the impacts of ice storms 
and tornadoes on electricity grids. In other cases, 
the science and data do not yet exist to model 
exactly how a climate hazard could affect certain 
types of infrastructure and services, such as the 
effects of rising sea levels on ports and water­
ways. Even when it is possible to model impacts 
on infrastructure, it is not always possible to calcu­
late the costs of repairing damage or of the loss of 
infrastructure service, such as the business inter­
ruption costs of weather-related power outages.
Table 3.1
Climate change threatens built infrastructure with implications for critical services
Infrastructure
Climate hazard
Physical impacts
Service losses
Electricity systems
	
▶Shifts in precipitation
	
▶Increase in temperatures
	
▶More severe weather (e.g., 
hail, ice storms, extreme 
wind, tornadoes)
	
▶Larger and more frequent 
wildfires
	
▶Impacts to hydroelectricity 
generation
	
▶Shifts in energy demand
	
▶Reduced efficiency of 
power lines
	
▶Downed and damaged 
power lines
	
▶More frequent power 
outages
	
▶Disruption of critical 
services like healthcare, 
water delivery, and public 
transit
	
▶Heating or cooling 
outages
	
▶Communication outages
Telecommunications
	
▶More severe weather
	
▶Increasing permafrost thaw
	
▶Damaged equipment and 
conduits
	
▶Power loss and disruption
	
▶Temporary loss of internet 
and cell services
	
▶Disruptions to emergency 
response
Roads and railways
	
▶Shifts in avalanche risk
	
▶More erosion and landslides
	
▶More floods and higher 
storm surges
	
▶Increase in temperatures
	
▶Increasing permafrost thaw
	
▶More severe weather
	
▶Road or rail blockages 
from snow
	
▶Destruction of roads and 
railways
	
▶Road and rail washouts
	
▶Damage to road surface 
and rails
	
▶Dangerous driving and 
travel conditions
	
▶Travel disruptions
	
▶Delays in movement of 
essential goods like food 
and fuel
	
▶Increased risk of travel-
related accidents
	
▶Higher taxes and shipping 
costs
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
17
Infrastructure
Climate hazard
Physical impacts
Service losses
Airports and 
air travel
	
▶More severe weather
	
▶Increase in temperatures
	
▶Increasing permafrost 
thaw
	
▶More floods and higher 
storm surges
	
▶Dangerous flying 
conditions
	
▶Damage to equipment 
and facilities
	
▶Need for longer runways
	
▶Increase in turbulence
	
▶Runway damage and 
impacts to facilities
	
▶Travel disruptions
	
▶Delays in movement of 
essential goods (including 
food) and mail
	
▶Reduced air service for 
some communities
	
▶Higher fees and ticket 
costs
Water and 
wastewater 
infrastructure
	
▶More floods and higher 
storm surges
	
▶Increasing permafrost 
thaw
	
▶More severe weather
	
▶Overwhelmed storm and 
sewer systems
	
▶Potable water 
contamination
	
▶Damage to water 
treatment facilities
	
▶Icing and overflow of 
storm drains
	
▶Interrupted access to 
drinking water
	
▶Local flooding and sewer 
backups into homes
	
▶Higher taxes to cover 
repairs
Homes and buildings
	
▶More floods and higher 
storm surges
	
▶More severe weather
	
▶Increasing permafrost 
thaw
	
▶Larger and more frequent 
wildfires
	
▶Flood damage to homes 
and buildings
	
▶Hail, tornado, and wind 
damage to structures
	
▶Damage to foundations 
and building stability
	
▶Fire or smoke damage
	
▶Loss or damage to homes 
and valuable possessions
	
▶Increasing insurance 
premiums
	
▶Displacement of 
neighbourhoods or 
communities
	
▶Dangerous living 
conditions
Dams and 
mines
	
▶More erosion and 
landslides
	
▶Increasing permafrost 
thaw
	
▶More floods and higher 
storm surges
	
▶Tailing pond and dam 
failure
	
▶Damage to mining 
equipment
	
▶Damage to downstream 
infrastructure
	
▶Higher taxes to cover costs 
of repairs and cleanup
	
▶Damage to local 
ecosystems
	
▶Displacement of 
neighbourhoods or 
communities
Marine infrastructure
	
▶More floods and higher 
storm surges
	
▶Sea level rise
	
▶More severe weather
	
▶Fluctuating inland water 
levels
	
▶Disruption to port 
activities
	
▶Damage to pilings and 
docks 
	
▶Debris in waterways
	
▶Hazardous travel 
conditions
	
▶Increased cost of goods
	
▶Delay in delivery of food 
and other essential goods
	
▶Impacts to ferry services
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
18
Infrastructure seldom fails in isolation. In many 
cases, when one infrastructure system is damaged, 
the impacts domino, knocking out other affected 
systems (U.K. Committee on Climate Change, 
2016). Cities and towns across Canada consist of 
highly interconnected infrastructure. Stoplights 
require electricity, emergency services depend 
on cell towers, airports need a regular supply of 
fuel brought by truck and rail. Because of these 
and many other interdependencies, the costs and 
impacts from an initial event have the potential 
to cascade. Since we do not model these cascad­
ing impacts directly in this report, our results 
could significantly underestimate the costs and 
damages of actual climate change impacts.
Because it is not possible or realistic to quantify 
every climate change impact to infrastructure 
in Canada, we focussed on key infrastructure 
impacts for which we could analyze the poten­
tial for major costs at a national scale. We under­
took a stepwise prioritization process to select 
the infrastructure and the climate impacts that 
would be the focus of the analysis. Table 3.2 illus­
trates the priority infrastructure types, climate 
hazards, and potential impacts that emerged 
from the following process: 
1.	
We reviewed how climate hazards in Canada 
such as floods, heatwaves, overall climate 
warming, droughts, and blizzards are expected 
to shift over the century based on existing 
studies and science. 
2.	 We examined the different ways these chang­
ing hazards could impact infrastructure in 
Canada and the services they provide by draw­
ing on current research about climate-related 
infrastructure impacts worldwide. 
3.	 We assessed which of the climate hazard-re­
lated impacts on infrastructure and infrastruc­
ture services would be likely to have the most 
substantial economic effects for Canada. 
4.	 Finally, we assessed which of these most 
substantial impacts we could model and 
value at a national scale for Canada, given the 
current state of science, data availability, and 
modelling tools. 
Table 3.2
Priority infrastructure impacts for analysis
Infrastructure type
Climate change hazard
Potential impact
Homes and buildings
	
▶Increased flooding
	
▶More frequent and severe damage
Roads and railways
	
▶Rising temperatures and extreme heat
	
▶Increased rainfall
	
▶Freeze-thaw cycle changes
	
▶More frequent and severe damage
	
▶Reduced service life,
	
▶Transportation system delays
Electricity systems
	
▶Rising temperatures and extreme heat
	
▶Increased rainfall
	
▶Seasonal temperature changes
	
▶More frequent and severe damage 
to transmission 
	
▶Distribution infrastructure, reduced 
service life
	
▶Changes to electricity demand and demand 
timing for space heating and cooling
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
19
We validated our selection of infrastructure 
systems by looking at other national climate risk 
studies, such as the U.S. EPA Climate Impact and 
Risk Analysis project and the European Union’s 
PESETA economics impact project (Ciscar et al., 
2019; EPA, 2020). We found that these studies had 
largely prioritized the same infrastructure impacts 
and costs that we independently identified.
The full scope of climate-related infrastructure 
impacts and costs for Canada will of course be 
much larger than what we were able to analyze. 
There will be impacts to other types of infrastruc­
ture beyond those we focus on in this report, and 
there will be other types of impacts for the infra­
structure we focus on that we could not quan­
tify—particularly how the loss of infrastructure 
services affects economic output and the lives and 
lifestyles of people in Canada (Figure 3.1). However, 
just the costs and associated impacts we have 
focussed on are substantial—in the tens of billions 
of dollars annually—and illustrate both the overall 
scale of Canada’s infrastructure climate risk and 
the benefits of early and thoughtful investments 
in adaptation.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
20
More ice storms and extreme winds that will 
cause major electricity power outages
More frequent loss of critical services, such as 
water supply and telecommunications, that 
depend on electrical power
Unpredictable changes in hydropower 
generation capacity due to shifting precipitation 
patterns
Increased wildfire damage to homes, buildings, 
and critical infrastructure
Accelerated decay of building materials from a 
combination of warmer temperatures, increased 
rainfall, and higher CO2 concentrations
Major losses in real estate and physical asset 
values, leading to financial system instability
Public health impacts from disruption to 
healthcare and food systems
Cascading failures across interdependent 
infrastructure systems, causing widespread 
social and economic disruption
Climate change is increasing the risks of damage and service disruption to infrastructure across 
Canada.  Some of these risks are relatively well understood, and their impacts and costs can be 
projected. However, many other risks are looming below the waterline—the science and data 
do not yet exist to fully understand how they will occur, and how severe they might be.  And new 
risks will undoubtedly emerge that have not yet been anticipated.  While Canada should strive for 
better knowledge, the impacts and costs of climate change will never be completely understood. 
In light of this uncertainty, infrastructure adaptation choices need to build resilience to a wide 
range of potential futures, and be flexible and adaptive to changing conditions.
RISKS IN CANADA’S PATH 
for which we can start 
to calculate the scale 
of impact and cost
RISKS THAT MAY HAVE MAJOR IMPACTS 
through complex interactions and 
processes and that are 
very challenging 
to predict
Permafrost thaw undermining Northern roads, 
buildings and airports
More frequent damage to homes and buildings 
from floods 
Strain on roads, railways, and electricity grids 
from more intense heat
Damage to coastal communities and ports from 
rising sea levels
Figure 3.1
Known and unknown infrastructure impacts in Canada: the climate costs iceberg
CLIMATE IMPACTS WE 
SUSPECT WILL AFFECT CANADA 
but whose scope and scale 
we don’t yet have the tools 
to understand
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
21
Projecting Canada’s future climate
To model the impacts of climate change on 
infrastructure, we first need to understand what 
Canada’s future climate might look like. Studies of 
climate change impacts typically draw on global 
climate models that project future shifts in the 
climate caused by global greenhouse gas emis­
sions. Climate change models do not give a single 
picture of the future climate under changing emis­
sions levels but rather a range of possible futures. 
This is because there are many ways to represent 
the complexity of the global climate system, as well 
as the uncertainty about societal choices that deter­
mine greenhouse gas emissions yet to come. We 
used the data from seven different climate models, 
under two different emissions scenarios, to capture 
a range of potential future climates in Canada. 
We obtained outputs for the seven different climate 
models from the Canadian Centre for Climate 
1.   The seven General Circulation Models (GCM) used were: CCSM4, GFDL-CM3, GFDL-ESM2M, HadGEM2-AO, HadGEM2-ES, MIROC-ESM-CHEM, 
and MRI-CGCM3.
Services.1 Climate Services provided datasets devel­
oped by the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, 
which provides daily projections of temperature 
and precipitation from 2041 to 2100 on a ten-kilo­
metre-by-ten-kilometre grid for all of Canada (PCIC, 
2019). These seven climate models were used for all 
the impact analyses except the coastal flooding 
analysis. Because climate models do not directly 
produce projections of sea level rise, we obtained 
the most recent low, medium, and high projec­
tions of sea level change for Canadian coastlines 
from Natural Resources Canada to capture coastal 
flooding uncertainty (James et al., 2021). 
For each climate model, we considered two 
possible emissions scenarios. Our low-emissions 
scenario corresponds with the Representative 
Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 scenario of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 
(IPCC) fifth assessment report (IPCC, 2014), 
reflecting global warming that corresponds with 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
22
greenhouse gas emissions reductions policies 
announced globally in 2020 (see text box, p. 23). 
For the climate models we used in our analysis, 
this emissions scenario is projected to result in an 
average temperature increase in Canada of 3.3 
degrees Celsius by mid-century and 4.0 degrees 
by end of century compared to the 1981 to 2010 
average (Figure 3.2). Our high-emissions scenario 
corresponds with the IPCC RCP 8.5 scenario and 
reflects a trajectory where current emissions 
trends continue, and countries take little addi­
tional action on emissions reductions and other 
forms of mitigation. This scenario results in an 
average temperature change across Canada of 
about 4.4 degrees Celsius by mid-century and 7.4 
degrees by end of century. 
0
5
10
Recent past (1981 - 2010)
Beginning of century (2010 - 2039)
Mid-century (2040 - 2070)
End of century (2070 - 2099)
Temperatures in Canada will rise at twice the global rate
Projected average annual mean daily temperature increase for Canada
Figure 3.2
High-emissions
scenario
Low-emissions 
scenario
oC
Source: Data was obtained from Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, University of Victoria.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
23
Anticipating climate change 
impacts in an uncertain future
In 2016, the Paris Agreement committed countries around the world to limiting the glob­
al average temperature rise in this century to “well below 2 degrees Celsius, while pursu­
ing efforts to limit the temperature rise to 1.5 degrees.” However, at the time our analysis 
was run in late 2020, the policies and pledges that had been set by governments were 
only likely to limit warming to around 2.5 degrees (Climate Action Tracker, 2020). 
In our analysis, the “low-emissions scenario” is based on the IPCC RCP 4.5 scenario, 
which also leads to about 2.5 degrees of global warming. (As shown in Figure 3.2, Cana­
dian temperatures are projected to rise at about twice the global average. Therefore, a  
2.5 degree average global increase is equivalent to a 4.5 degree average Canadian in­
crease.) In 2020, this scenario represented a realistic lower estimate of future emissions 
and global warming for us to use. 
This does not mean that we are pessimistic about the potential to limit warming to 
1.5 or 2 degrees. Since the end of 2020, the world has seen a raft of new commitments 
from countries pledging to reduce emissions dramatically by 2030 and to achieve net 
zero by the middle of the century. While these commitments, at the time of writing, 
are not yet sufficient to meet a 1.5- or 2-degree target, they are an important step in the 
right direction (UN, 2021).  
We continue to believe that our low-emissions scenario is the right one for our analy­
sis, despite these recent developments. At the time our analysis was run there was no 
climate modelling available simulating a world in which these kinds of net zero com­
mitments are implemented. The modelling done for the IPCC fifth assessment report 
about 10 years ago had scenarios with more aggressive emissions reductions than RCP 
4.5, but actual emissions between then and now have far exceeded what those sce­
narios forecasted (Carbon Brief, 2019). Our low-emissions scenario based on RCP 4.5 
therefore likely provides a more accurate picture of what Canada’s climate will look like 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
24
by the middle of the century. It does a better job of accounting for the impacts of the 
world’s past emissions­—that are now baked into Canada’s future climate—than more 
optimistic fifth assessment report scenarios. Our low-emissions scenario results there­
fore highlight how the benefits to Canada from the world moving aggressively to limit 
warming to 1.5 or 2 degrees will, at this point, likely not show until after 2050. 
Our low-emissions modelling results are still helpful for visualizing the benefits of rapid 
global transition to net zero. It is likely that our mid-century results for the low emis­
sions scenario approximate an upper limit under which impacts could be contained 
should a 1.5- to 2-degree world be achieved. And as our results also show, Canada’s pros­
pects for minimizing infrastructure impacts through adaptation improve significantly 
if global warming is kept in check.
For each climate model and concentration path­
way combination, we analyzed the impacts of 
changing climate hazards on infrastructure and 
the associated costs for two future time horizons: 
2041 to 2070, which we refer to as mid-century, and 
2071 to 2100, which we refer to as end of the century. 
The mid-century analyses provide a sense of medi­
um-term impacts, while the end-of-century analy­
ses show how impacts may accelerate, plateau, or 
decline towards 2100. For road, rail and electricity 
transmission and distribution infrastructure we 
also analyzed a 2010–2029 beginning-of-century 
period to show how costs are already growing. 
The analysis of 30-year time periods is common 
in climate change impact assessments, as they 
average out short-term variability in the climate so 
that overall changes can be more clearly analyzed 
(Gillingham et al., 2018). 
As a result, for all impacts except coastal flood­
ing, we modelled 28 scenarios of infrastructure 
impacts—permutations of seven climate models, 
two emissions scenarios, and two time periods. 
(For coastal flooding we used the three Natural 
Resources Canada projections of sea level rise 
instead of the seven climate models, for a total of 
12 permutations.) 
As we highlight in previous sections, infrastruc­
ture and related services in Canada are already 
experiencing disruptions and damages due to 
climate variability beyond the range of scenarios 
they were built for, and Canada is already experi­
encing climate changes that will accelerate those 
impacts. Furthermore, infrastructure decisions 
made today have major implications for the longer 
term, because the life-span of most infrastructure is 
measured in decades. For example, the infrastruc­
ture we focussed on in our analysis can last for 20 to 
100 years, and gaps between major maintenance—
where there may be opportunities to undertake 
substantial retrofits—can be as long as 20 years 
(Table 3.3). Therefore, the decisions that are made 
now about where and how infrastructure is built 
and maintained will determine how well it—and 
the services it provides to Canadian society and the 
national economy—will withstand the impacts of 
climate change, for decades if not longer.  
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
25
Table 3.3
Infrastructure lifespan and maintenance cycles
Infrastructure
Major maintenance cycles (years)
Total useful life (years)
Homes and buildings
15–20 
50–100
Roads
5–10 
20–50
Railways
10–20
50–100
Electricity transmission and distribution
5–10
30–50
Source: (Gibson, 2017)
Costing climate-related 
infrastructure damages
To estimate the potential damage to infrastruc­
ture from key climate hazards, we adapted exist­
ing models or developed new ones to estimate 
rates of infrastructure damage, wear, and required 
replacement under different climate hazards. 
Each damage model is explained in more detail 
in the following sections.
These models require two types of inputs: infra­
structure information and climate hazards data. 
We characterized the amount and location of the 
infrastructure that was the focus of our analysis 
using highly detailed digital maps and databases 
to plot the location of buildings, transportation 
infrastructure, and electricity transmission and 
distribution infrastructure across Canada. And we 
generated projections of future hazards that could 
present a risk to infrastructure using our detailed 
national-scale climate models, as discussed above. 
We estimated the value of infrastructure damage 
using data on the costs of repair and replacement 
from national infrastructure databases, economic 
studies of infrastructure capital and operating 
costs, and engineering standards. Wherever 
possible, we used Canadian data, but where data 
specific to Canada was not available, we adapted 
information from other countries—most often 
from the United States. We isolated for the costs 
of damage attributable to climate change by esti­
mating costs of infrastructure repair and replace­
ment under a future climate and subtracting the 
costs of routine repair and replacement corre­
sponding to past climate conditions, represented 
by the 1971–2000 period. 
As described above, the economic impacts of infra­
structure damage and failure extend well beyond 
the costs of repair and replacement. The loss and 
disruption of services provided by infrastructure 
result in numerous secondary and indirect impacts. 
Most of these secondary impacts and costs, such as 
the costs of supply chain disruption and business 
interruption, are difficult to model because they 
are extraordinarily complex. However, we were able 
to adapt research from the United States to esti­
mate some of the business interruption costs of 
transportation delays associated with future road 
and railway system damage and service outages. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
26
The results provide a partial but useful illustra­
tion that the indirect costs of loss and disruption 
of infrastructure services are of at least the same 
scale as the direct costs of infrastructure damage 
and repair. As such, the opportunity to avoid costs 
through adaptation clearly extends well beyond 
reducing costs of repair and replacement.
In most cases, we present costs or savings in terms 
of average annual values for the period in ques­
tion—the mid-century and end-of-century time 
periods described above. Where analyses required 
weighing present expenditures against future 
costs or benefits, we applied a discount rate of 
three per cent. 
For most of our analyses, we assumed that the 
amount of infrastructure—homes, buildings, 
roads, railways, and powerlines—would not 
change over the rest of the century. While we 
know that more infrastructure will be built to serve 
communities over the next 80 years, it is difficult to 
predict what kind and where such infrastructure 
will be built. For example, the number of roads 
and rail lines in the future will depend not only 
on population but on energy, land-use policies, 
and technological shifts. Assuming current levels 
of infrastructure in our analysis allows an apples-
to-apples comparison of current and potential 
future costs. However, actual future costs for the 
infrastructure we focus on in our analysis could be 
substantially larger than our estimates if the new 
infrastructure that is built in Canada is similarly 
vulnerable to climate impacts. 
For our analysis of electricity demand, the model 
we used already accounted for changes in elec­
tricity demand due to projected population and 
economic growth, as well as all currently imple­
mented and announced federal and provincial 
climate policies that would affect demand into 
the future. Because these projections were already 
built into the model, we used them to calculate a 
new baseline for each time period in our analysis, 
allowing us to compare the relative contributions of 
increased demand from population and economic 
growth and of changing demand from shifting 
heating and cooling needs due to climate change. 
Projecting the benefits of 
adaptation
For our baseline analyses, we assumed that the 
owners and operators of assets and infrastruc­
ture would not proactively adapt. This means we 
assumed that, when infrastructure is repaired 
or replaced as a part of regular asset lifecycles, it 
is replaced with infrastructure of similar design. 
For example, if a home is damaged by flooding in 
our model, we assumed that it would be rebuilt 
to the same condition as before it was damaged 
and that it would not be protected against future 
flooding. We called these scenarios no adaptation. 
For roads and for electrical transmission and distri­
bution infrastructure, we also considered scenar­
ios in which infrastructure would be repaired or 
replaced with materials that reflect changes to the 
climate which occurred since the original infra­
structure was built, since design standards for 
infrastructure are sometimes updated to reflect 
ongoing shifts in climate (although typically not 
to anticipate future changes). We called these 
scenarios reactive adaptation.
Finally, we incorporated what we called proactive 
adaptation actions or policies into our impact 
models to demonstrate the benefits of selected 
adaptations that could reduce the negative 
impacts of climate change by anticipating the 
future climate. In most cases, this involved model­
ling the benefits of replacing infrastructure with 
designs and materials that are based on future 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
27
climate projections, rather than measurements 
of climate in the recent past. Some cases also 
involved protecting at-risk infrastructure against 
future climate hazards or moving or abandon­
ing infrastructure where future climate hazards 
would create unacceptable levels of risk (Table 
3.4). The policies and practices we considered do 
not cover all adaptation options for the infrastruc­
ture impacts we analyze in the report, but they 
serve to illustrate the benefits of early and proac­
tive investment.
We estimated the net economic benefits of 
adaptation by assessing the reduction in costs 
of damage or loss, and then subtracting the cost 
of implementing the adaptation action. More 
detail on our adaptation analyses is provided in 
the following sections. 

Table 3.4
Adaptation actions that we analyzed
Infrastructure category
Modelled adaptation measures
Homes and buildings
	
▶Coastal flood protection works 
	
▶Strategic retreat from areas of high inland flood risk
Road and rail 
infrastructure
	
▶Use of more climate-resilient materials when maintaining and replacing roads and railways 
	
▶Advanced rail temperature sensors to monitor for dangerous, high-heat conditions
Electricity systems 
	
▶Installation of more resilient transmission and distribution infrastructure (transformers, 
transmission lines, and poles)
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
28
IMPACTS ON HOMES 
AND BUILDINGS
Homes and buildings are central to the well-
being of families and the functioning of businesses, 
governments, and communities. Access to safe, 
affordable, and culturally appropriate housing is a 
foundation for health and has been an important 
tool for the middle class to save and build wealth. 
Institutional, commercial, and industrial buildings 
are vital locations for work, trade, public services, 
and recreation. And real estate is critical to Canada’s 
economy and financial system, as described in the 
previous section. 
In Canada, flooding is the single largest cause of 
damage and loss to homes and buildings (PBO, 
2016). While governments and researchers have 
not yet conducted comprehensive national anal­
yses of the impact of climate change on flood risk, 
various regional and local analyses indicate that 
risks are increasing and will continue to increase. 
For example, a recent study of flood risk in Halifax 
estimated that annual flood losses could triple by 
the end of the century under a scenario of high 
global greenhouse gas emissions (Thistlethwaite 
et al., 2018). Without adaptation, studies estimate 
that annual losses from flooding of coastal prop­
erties in Canada could consume half of annual 
GDP growth by mid-century (Withey et al., 2016). 
These projections align with recent observations 
of growing flood risk and cost: between 2005 and 
2014, government, insurance, and private costs for 
flooding exceeded $12 billion (PBO, 2016). 
While our analysis focussed on the impacts and 
costs of flooding, climate change poses other 
major risks for homes and buildings across Canada. 
The risks of wildfire, for instance, are increasing 
across the country—climate change is creating 
longer wildfire seasons and the potential for larger, 
more destructive fires, while a growing number 
of people live and work near fire-prone wildland 
areas. Prior to 2003, no single wildfire in Canada 
had cost more than $10 million in losses, but this 
is changing quickly. The 2016 Fort McMurray 
wildfire is the costliest weather-related disas­
ter in Canada’s history, destroying 2,600 homes 
and causing insured losses of $3.8 billion. Total 
insured losses from wildfire between 2003 and 
2017 were almost $5 billion (Tamm & Klose, 2019). 
4
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
29
And climate change is likely to increase the 
frequency and intensity of other kinds of extreme 
weather that already cause major damage to 
homes and buildings, including thunderstorms, 
high winds, hail, and hurricanes and tropical 
storms (Brown et al., 2021).
Our analysis focuses primarily on direct physi­
cal damages. However, floods and other weath­
er-related disasters entail many other costs for 
affected communities and people. These include 
the costs of disaster response and cleanup, 
mental health impacts, lost work time, busi­
ness losses, and economic disruption (Clark et 
al., 2021). While the tools and data don’t yet exist 
to quantify those costs in our analysis, growing 
evidence suggests that the indirect economic 
and social costs of weather-related disasters and 
climate change impacts could be as high as, and 
longer lasting than, the direct costs of physical 
damage (Deloitte, 2016; Hetherington et al., 2018; 
Rao, 2020). For this reason, our results should be 
seen as a conservative, lower-bound estimate of 
potential flood costs.
Modelling approach for homes 
and buildings
To model potential impacts of climate change on 
the risk of flooding for homes and buildings, we 
developed two unique models—one for inland 
flooding and one for coastal flooding. 
Our coastal flooding model uses U.S. flood damage 
data from the National Coastal Property Model 
to provide a relationship between sea level rise 
and damage, as there is no equivalent data avail­
able for Canada (Lorie et al., 2020). To estimate the 
magnitude of damage and the property values of 
damaged buildings, we used home and building 
maps from Microsoft’s open building footprint 
data for Canada and property values from the 2016 
Census (Boehlert et al., 2021; Microsoft, 2019).
We identified representative U.S. areas that have 
similarities in location and development patterns 
to the coastal study areas of Canada. Using Natural 
Resources Canada estimates of sea level rise, we 
then estimated future sea levels and storm surge 
heights for our study areas. Using relationships 
between flooding depth and damage from the 
U.S. and Canadian data on building locations and 
property values, we estimated the total costs of 
damage along Canada’s most populated coasts—
the southern coasts of British Columbia and 
Quebec, and all coasts in New Brunswick, Nova 
Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. While popu­
lated areas of Newfoundland and Labrador, the 
Northwest Territories, Nunavut, and the northern 
coasts of Quebec and B.C. are also at risk of current 
or future coastal flooding, we did not include them 
because they represent only a small fraction of 
total homes and buildings at risk, and their sparse 
distribution would have required a large model­
ling effort. We also did not analyze the potential for 
coastal flooding in the Great Lakes because there 
is still significant uncertainty about how climate 
change may impact water levels in these lakes 
(Delaney & Milner, 2019).
Our inland flooding analysis uses flood risk model­
ling from JBA Risk Management, a private risk 
analytics firm (JBA Risk Management, 2020). We 
chose to use the JBA data because many regions 
across Canada are not covered by government 
flood risk maps, and therefore we could not rely 
on those maps to conduct national-scale analysis. 
This follows practices of the insurance industry and 
flood risk researchers who also use data such as the 
JBA mapping—which is available for purchase—to 
evaluate flood risk in the absence of more detailed 
and accurate government flood maps. JBA models 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
30
fluvial flooding (flooding from rivers and streams) 
and pluvial flooding (local flooding of streets and 
buildings from overwhelmed urban drainage 
systems) across all of Canada and estimates both 
how often different areas will flood as well as the 
expected average annual damage costs for affected 
buildings. While private risk mapping such as the 
JBA data is somewhat less accurate than detailed 
government flood risk maps, in the absence of that 
mapping for many areas it provides invaluable 
insights into Canada’s large-scale flood risk. 
To establish a baseline against which to compare 
future projected damages, our modelling first 
estimated current flood damages using the JBA 
mapping. We then used our detailed climate 
projections to estimate how frequently the 
extreme rainfall events that cause flooding would 
occur in future. Based on those findings, we esti­
mated increases in flood damage costs by scaling 
up the JBA estimates of current annual damages 
according to these increases in flood frequency.
We also examined the benefits of adaptation in 
the face of both coastal and inland flooding. For 
coastal flooding, our model simulated the bene­
fits of implementing coastal protection measures. 
These included sea wall installation, the raising 
of vulnerable structures, or beach nourishment 
(supplementing sand and stone on beaches 
to absorb the energy of storm surges), depend­
ing on which approach was most cost-effective 
for each portion of coast. We then estimated the 
reduction in damage costs over a 30-year time­
frame in contrast to the cost of the adaptation 
measures in order to establish an estimate of the 
net direct benefits. We focussed on these adapta­
tion measures because they are some of the most 
common approaches used in coastal areas and 
because we could model their benefits with data 
and tools. However, there are other types of adap­
tation measures that we did not examine, such as 
buying out and removing the homes and buildings 
at greatest risk of flooding in coastal areas, known 
as strategic retreat. (We did, however, model stra­
tegic retreat for inland flooding.)
For inland flooding, we examined adaptation oppor­
tunities for each modelled scenario by costing 
strategic retreat for a varying number of high-risk 
homes and buildings. We then estimated the differ­
ence between the costs of buying out those proper­
ties at market value and the elimination of projected 
annual damage costs to those homes and build­
ings to establish an estimate of net direct benefits. 
While there are several other adaptation actions that 
can be taken to protect homes and buildings from 
pluvial and fluvial flooding, including building flood 
control works like diversion channels and dams, or 
installing devices in homes to prevent basement 
sewer backups, the choice of adaptation approach 
is specific to each location and to the type of flood­
ing. As a result, it was not possible in our analysis to 
reasonably estimate the type, scale, and cost of the 
adaptation measures that would be required for the 
hundreds of thousands of at-risk homes and build­
ings across the country.
Climate change will increase 
the costs of flooding 
Our analysis finds that the costs of coastal and 
inland flooding could increase by a factor of almost 
10 by the end of the century and that all parts of 
Canada are at risk.
The coastal flooding analysis shows that annual 
damages may increase from present levels ofre 
4.1). This is a substantial increase, but estimates for 
the end of the century are even more concerning. 
While there is still a large amount of uncertainty 
about how much sea levels will rise, after mid-cen­
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
31
tury the upper range of sea-level-rise projections 
result in many coastal neighborhoods being 
permanently flooded—with their value completely 
destroyed. Other neighbourhoods that have not 
historically been affected by storm surges could 
become regularly flooded during major storms. 
At the high end of the range of projections, 
annual damages could reach $750 million under 
a low-emissions scenario and exceed $1.2 billion 
under a high-emissions scenario for the end of 
the century—between 12 and 20 times more than 
current damage costs.
$60 
$160 
$490 
Present
Mid-century
End of century
$60 
$140 
$260 
Present
Mid-century
End of century
Coastal flooding costs will rise sharply through the end of the century
Projected annual costs of coastal flooding in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Figure 4.1
In our figures, each line reflects the median projected values of seven global climate models (GCMs). Shaded areas behind each line capture the range 
between the maximum GCM value and the minimum GCM value for each scenario. Teal lines and areas represent results under a low-emissions scenario. 
The orange lines and areas represents a high-emissions scenario.
Our analysis of inland flood risk using the JBA 
data finds that over 1.6 million of the 11.8 million 
mapped buildings in Canada—or 14 per cent of 
the total—are currently located in a 500-year flood 
risk zone for pluvial or fluvial flooding, meaning 
that, statistically, they have a 0.2 per cent chance 
of flooding in any given year. Over 950,000 build­
ings, or eight per cent, are in a 100-year flood risk 
zone (a one per cent risk of being flooded each 
year) and 550,000, or five per cent, are in a 20-year 
flood risk zone (a five per cent annual risk). At a 
national scale, our modelling estimates that this 
existing risk translates into an estimated $1.3 
billion in inland flood damages each year, which 
aligns with other estimates of current annual flood 
damage in Canada (PBO, 2016).
In analyzing future flood risk, all seven of the climate 
models that we used projected increases in extreme 
rainfall. Figure 4.2 shows the changes in frequency 
that we project for a historic 100-year rainfall event 
for Canada’s largest cities. A 100-year rainfall event 
typically results in significant flood damage—for 
context, the 2013 Calgary flood that caused billions 
of dollars in damage was caused by a 10- to 20-year 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
32
rainfall event (Teufel et al., 2017). We estimate that 
what is historically a 100-year rainfall event in the 
Toronto, Edmonton, or Calgary areas could occur 
as frequently as every six years by the end of the 
century under a high-emissions scenario, a 17-fold 
increase in the annual risk of such an event.
When we applied increases in extreme rainfall 
driven by climate change to the JBA inland flood 
modelling, our median estimates showed an 
increase in damages to $5.7 billion and $6.8 billion 
by mid-centurey under the low- and high-emis­
sions scenarios respectively, with some climate 
models producing estimates of up to $8.1 billion 
in damage annually under high emissions (Figure 
4.3). Under the low-emissions scenario, average 
annual damages do not change much between 
the middle and end of the century, but under the 
high-emissions scenario damages could multiply 
once again, increasing to as much as $12.4 billion 
annually for the climate models that project the 
greatest increase in rainfall, a 10-fold increase from 
current conditions. 
It is important to note that our approach only 
assesses the increase in damage under climate 
change for buildings the JBA data currently iden­
tifies as being at risk of flooding. Our analysis is 
only able to evaluate the potential increase in flood 
depth and resulting damage for homes in the 
zone of existing flood risk. Realistically, the size of 
the total land area at risk of flooding will increase 
substantially as extreme rainfall increases, putting 
even more homes at risk and increasing damages 
and costs beyond our estimates.
3%
7%
5%
5%
0%
10%
20%
Toronto
Edmonton
Calgary
Vancouver
A warming climate means more frequent and severe floods in Canadian cities
Increasing likelihood of today's 1-in-100-year rainfall by end of century
Figure 4.2
Low-emissions scenario
Range of 
uncertainty
9%
14%
14%
6%
Toronto
Edmonton
Calgary
Vancouver
High-emissions scenario
Current annual probability of today's 1-in-100-year rainfall
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
33
Overlooking flood risk 
threatens real estate investments 
in major cities
While hundreds of thousands of homes and 
buildings across Canada are at risk of flooding, 
the greatest physical and economic risks are 
concentrated in some of the country’s biggest 
urban centres. The Vancouver region of B.C. is a 
hotspot of concentrated risk for coastal flooding. 
In the Vancouver Metropolitan Area, $30 billion in 
home and building value sits within one metre 
of current sea level, and $77 billion within two 
metres. Our analysis estimates that coastal flood 
damage costs in the Vancouver area are currently 
about $30 million annually on average. By the end 
of the century, damages are projected to be up 
to $510 million annually under the low-emissions 
scenario and up to $820 million annually under 
the high-emissions scenario. Further, our analysis 
shows that, under the high-emissions scenario, 
the number of buildings in the area affected by 
coastal flooding could rise from 44,000 to 75,000 
by the end of the century—while average annual 
damages for each affected property could rise 
substantially, from about $600 per year to almost 
$4,400 annually (Table 4.1).
Many of Canada’s other major cities are already 
hotspots of inland flood risk, with large numbers 
of homes and buildings at risk of both fluvial and 
pluvial flooding. Our analysis shows that Toronto, 
Winnipeg, Calgary, Mississauga, Edmonton, and 
Ottawa are the major urban centres with the 
greatest current and future flood risk. Our median 
estimate indicates that the annual cost of flood 
damage in those cities could increase by a factor 
$1,290 
$6,780 
$9,410 
Present
Mid-century
End of century
$1,290 
$5,710 
$5,310 
Present
Mid-century
End of century
Figure 4.3
Inland flood damage could increase fivefold by mid-century
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Projected annual costs of inland flooding in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
34
of three to 10 by the end of the century, with 
most of the increase taking place by mid-century 
(Table 4.2). In Toronto, for example, average flood 
damage to the more than 145,000 homes at risk 
could increase from about $700 per year to almost 
$4,000 in any given year. 
Because these cities are home to Canada’s most 
expensive real estate markets, they may be driving 
asset overvaluation that risks leaving homeown­
ers not just financially underwater but physically 
flooded out. Studies in the U.S. have shown that 
flood risk generally is not yet reflected in housing 
prices, meaning that homes at risk of damage from 
flooding are priced the same as homes that are 
not at risk—even when detailed government-pro­
duced flood maps clearly show which properties 
are in flood zones. This leads to overvaluation of 
homes and real estate that’s at risk of flooding, 
incentives for sellers to avoid disclosing risks in real 
estate transactions, and an absence of price signals 
to stop investment in flood-prone areas (Hino & 
Burke, 2021). Since government-produced flood 
maps in Canada are substantially more incomplete 
and outdated than those in the U.S. (see Murky 
understanding of flood risk is limiting adaptation, 
p. 36), it is likely that flood-prone properties here 
are at least as overvalued. In hot real estate markets 
such as Vancouver and Toronto, this means that 
property buyers—from individual homeowners to 
commercial real estate investors—are likely paying 
too much for homes and buildings whose value 
will drop when their flood risk becomes apparent.
Flood risk in urban areas is not limited to existing 
homes and buildings—cities are continuing to 
approve new development in areas already known 
to be at risk of flooding. As noted earlier, 10 per cent 
of permits approved for new building in Vancouver 
between 2017 and 2020—representing $1 billion in 
value—were in a known 100-year floodplain (Clark 
& Coffman, 2020). Given that government-pro­
duced flood maps do not capture many areas of 
flood risk, particularly for pluvial flooding, it is likely 
that even more flood-prone development is being 
approved in urban areas across Canada than what 
is officially understood. 
At some point, the extent of the flood risk of high-
value urban real estate will become known, whether 
through the efforts of governments to update public 
flood mapping; of insurers, banks, and institutional 
investors to understand their exposure to flood 
risk; or through repeated flood events that cause 
Table 4.1
Climate change will leave more homes at risk of coastal flooding 
Number of homes at risk of storm surge
 Low-emissions 
 High-emissions 
Province
Baseline
 Mid-century 
 End of century 
 Mid-century 
 End of century 
British Columbia
45891
57780
65628
59151
69738
New Brunswick
25332
27698
29016
28048
30186
Nova Scotia
12406
14609
15583
14894
16387
Prince Edward Island
5068
6235
6903
6420
7482
Quebec
6489
46004
47510
46836
50255
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
35
certain areas and neighbourhoods to be known as 
flood-prone. The exact outcome of this awareness 
cannot be predicted, but economists and regula­
tors in the United States are already warning that 
regional climate-induced market corrections are 
a strong possibility in some states (Keys & Mulder, 
2020). Insurance providers will likely continue to 
raise rates or stop providing coverage (Moorcraft, 
2020), governments may stop providing disas­
ter assistance funding after multiple occurrences 
(CBC, 2019), and homeowners left liable may not be 
able to afford the costs—now completely out-of-
pocket—to rebuild. Property values in affected 
areas could decrease, causing individual home and 
business owners to lose a major proportion of their 
wealth, with banks and other lenders left holding 
the bag on defaulted loans and mortgages. At a 
large enough scale, this could have national impacts 
on consumer spending, lending and credit, and 
productivity and economic growth.
Murky understanding of flood risk 
is limiting adaptation
Canada has a flood risk information deficit. Unlike 
other countries, including the United States, 
Canada does not have a federally led program 
for mapping flood hazards and risks at a national 
scale. Provinces and territories set their own stan­
dards for flood mapping, which varies consider­
ably in coverage, age, and quality both within and 
among jurisdictions. A 2014 federal government 
review of flood mapping in Canada estimated 
that there was no flood risk information for up to 
one-third of households in Canada (MMM Group 
Limited, 2014). The median age of floodplain maps 
for the areas that are covered was 18 years, mean­
ing that most floodplain mapping does not reflect 
the current state of climate and land development 
in the areas that are mapped.
Further, almost all existing flood maps in Canada 
Table 4.2
Homes at risk of inland flooding will face more damage more often 
Flood damages, millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
CMA Name
Province
Households 
in flood zone
Baseline
Mid-century, 
low-emissions
Mid-century, 
high-emissions
End of century, 
low-emissions
End of century, 
high-emissions
Toronto
Ontario
146,798
$99 
$557 
$592 
$548 
$566 
Winnipeg
Manitoba
250,918
$54 
$285 
$239 
$259 
$325 
Calgary
Alberta
105,441
$37 
$193 
$195 
$193 
$234 
Mississauga
Ontario
38,341
$24 
$162 
$166 
$157 
$165 
Edmonton
Alberta
108,171
$35 
$131 
$108 
$129 
$144 
Ottawa
Ontario
75,514
$44 
$114 
$92 
$109 
$114 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
36
present only partial information about flood risk. 
The maps present flood exposure rather than 
flood vulnerability—meaning that, while they 
show which areas may be affected by flooding 
in general, they do not show how deep or how 
fast-flowing flood waters may be, nor how much 
damage they would cause or the danger they 
pose to life and safety. 
Government-produced flood maps, where they 
exist, are almost always limited to flooding along 
coasts (coastal flooding) and beside rivers (fluvial 
flooding). They rarely, if ever, capture pluvial flooding, 
the local flash flooding of streets and sewers in urban 
areas that can also cause major damage. Our anal­
ysis suggests pluvial flooding is currently respon­
sible for about 20 per cent of total flood damages 
across the country. For context, almost all the nearly 
$1 billion in insured losses from the July 2013 floods in 
Toronto was the result of pluvial flooding (Mills, 2013).
Our analysis, using the JBA risk analytics data, shows 
that about 650,000 buildings in Canada are currently 
at risk of fluvial flooding and about 325,000 buildings 
are at risk of pluvial flooding for a one-in-100-year or 
smaller event. If about a third of buildings at fluvial 
flood risk are not mapped and pluvial flood risk is not 
mapped at all, as the 2014 federal review suggests, 
then owners of about 540,000 buildings in Canada 
have no way of knowing that their properties are 
at risk of flooding. Figure 4.4 illustrates this gap in 
Ottawa, Hull, and Gatineau, showing the buildings 
that are currently identified as being within the 
100-year floodplain in government-produced flood 
mapping and highlighting the additional buildings 
JBA risk data shows have a 100-year or greater risk 
of fluvial and pluvial flooding. 
O
t
t
a
w
a
Publicly available flood mapping
Private flood mapping for purchase
G
a
t
i
n
e
a
u
Risk is seriously underestimated in publicly available flood mapping 
1-in-100-year flood risk zones in the National Capital Region
Figure 4.4
Source: The private flood hazard information was provided by JBA Risk Management Limited. The public flood data was provided by the Mississippi 
Valley Conservation Authority and the Rideau Valley Conservation Authority. Copyright JBA Risk Management.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
37
Even where flood maps do exist, property owners 
face significant barriers to identifying their own 
flood risk. A 2016 survey of 2,300 homeowners 
across Canada who lived in areas defined as high-
risk in flood maps showed that only six per cent 
were aware that their home was in a flood risk area 
(Henstra & Thistlethwaite, 2018). Flood mapping 
prepared by governments is often difficult to obtain 
and is frequently not included in  open data portals. 
In certain cases, the responsible agencies—such as 
some Conservation Authorities in Ontario—require 
payment to release detailed floodplain maps, 
despite the fact they were developed with public 
funds. Privately developed flood risk data such as 
the JBA mapping used for our study is too costly 
for most individuals, or even small municipalities, to 
obtain. And these private datasets generally do not 
provide sufficient detail for homeowners or other 
building owners to understand the extent or sever­
ity of the flood risk on their properties. 
Perhaps the most important gap of all is that, apart 
from a handful of experimental efforts (NRCan, 
2018a), flood maps do not incorporate climate 
change. They reflect flood risk that is based on 
the historic climate, not the future climate that will 
be determined by global warming. Therefore, even 
if Canada’s flood maps were complete and up to 
date, they would not capture ongoing changes to 
flood risk associated with a shifting climate.
Canada’s flood risk information gaps are limit­
ing understanding of the need for action and the 
measures that could help minimize current and 
future flood risk. The absence or limited availability 
of flood maps constrains individuals and communi­
ties from reducing the risk to their properties. It also 
prevents current and future flood risk from being 
adequately considered in real estate transactions. 
Insurers and mortgage lenders may similarly be 
unaware of the risk to many of the properties they 
are underwriting—and passing on to reinsurers, 
governments, and taxpayers. Municipal govern­
ments may unknowingly permit new development 
in areas of risk. And governments themselves are 
in the dark about much of the growing flood risk 
to existing homes and buildings that could be 
prevented or reduced through adaptation.
Coastal flood adaptation 
substantially reduces risk
We used methods developed for the U.S. national 
coastal property model to assess the potential bene­
fits of proactive coastal flooding adaptation (Lorie 
et al., 2020). Our analysis estimated which of three 
adaptation options—sea walls, elevation of buildings 
at risk, or beach nourishment—was most cost-effec­
tive for each segment of Canadian coastline in our 
analysis, given property values and potential flood 
exposure. We then re-ran our coastal flood impact 
and damage model to estimate the net benefit 
of proactive adaptation, accounting for both the 
initial costs of adaptation measures and discounted 
avoided flood damages over the next 30 years. 
The results (Figure 4.5) show that coastal flood costs 
can be reduced by 45 to 60 per cent by mid-cen­
tury, depending on the emissions scenario. By the 
end of the century, cost savings could amount to 
45 to 75 per cent, even after accounting for the 
costs of constructing sea walls, raising up build­
ings, or adding rock and sand to protect coasts. 
More importantly, our analysis shows that proac­
tive coastal flooding adaptation using combina­
tions of these three measures drastically reduces 
the worst-case outcomes for damages under the 
highest sea-level scenarios. 
For example, without adaptation, the end-of-cen­
tury projection for the high-emissions scenario 
results in estimated costs in British Columbia of 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
38
up to $820 million annually, with nationwide costs 
of $1.2 billion. Adaptation can reduce the costs of 
the worst-case scenario to $60 million annually 
in British Columbia and $120 million nationally—
decreases of approximately 90 per cent. While 
the construction and ongoing maintenance of 
protective coastal infrastructure will be a massive 
undertaking, our high-level analysis suggests that 
the net benefits are well worth the cost. 
It is important to note that we considered only 
three of the most common coastal flood protection 
measures. There are a variety of other adaptation 
measures that could be used in some circum­
stances, such as restoration of coastal wetlands, 
which could have similar or greater benefits. And 
our analysis only considered the direct economic 
benefits of avoided damage and loss—some coastal 
adaptation actions may also generate additional 
benefits that are difficult to quantify economically, 
such as creating public amenities or restoring wild­
life habitat (Chausson et al., 2020; ACT, 2020). 
Strategic retreat for inland flooding 
has benefits and challenges
To examine inland flooding adaptation, we modelled 
the potential outcomes of strategic retreat—the 
intentional relocation of people and property out 
of flood-risk areas. Typically, strategic retreat requires 
publicly funded buyouts of at-risk buildings and 
properties, after which those buildings may be 
demolished, and the floodplain returned to a natural 
state or converted to lower-risk uses such as parks. 
Present
Mid-century
End of century
$0
$500
$1,000
Present
Mid-century
End of century
Adaptation could cut coastal flooding costs substantially
Projected annual costs of coastal flooding in millions of dollars (CAD 2019)
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Figure 4.5
No 
adaptation
Proactive 
adaptation
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
39
To be clear, strategic retreat is not the only adap­
tation option for reducing inland flood risk. At-risk 
buildings could also be protected through build­
ing large-scale structural defences such as dams, 
dikes, or natural infrastructure solutions. In some 
cases, there are measures that home and build­
ing owners can take to protect their properties 
directly, particularly for pluvial flood risk, which 
can be supported by governments. However, 
the appropriateness, effectiveness, and costs 
of these actions are highly dependent on the
characteristics of the homes, neighbourhoods, 
and areas that are at risk. Therefore, it was not 
possible for us to develop estimates of the 
costs and benefits of these kinds of actions at a 
national scale.
Analyzing strategic retreat as a measure to 
address inland flood risk helps to illustrate how 
proactive adaptation decisions can reduce costs. 
It also provides insights on the effectiveness of the 
measure, given that it is being considered by the 
federal government as a key element of its long-
term strategy for dealing with high-risk properties 
(PSC, 2020).
We looked at a series of hypothetical scenarios in 
which governments implement strategic retreat by 
buying out high-risk properties at market value and 
found that the projected benefits are substantial 
in some cases. For example, with strategic retreat 
involving buyouts of 10 per cent of properties in the 
neighbourhoods that our analysis determined are 
in the highest one per cent for flood risk across the 
country, annual inland flood damages decrease by 
an average of about 2.2 per cent nationally by end of 
century for both low- and high-emissions scenarios. 
This represents a savings of $120 million and $200 
million annually under the low- and high-emissions 
scenarios, respectively (Table 4.3). At market value, 
the buyouts of these approximately 7,500 proper­
ties would cost almost $1.9 billion. The discounted 
net present value of the investment would be about 
$1.9 billion for the high-emissions scenario and $540 
million for the low-emissions scenario—a significant 
net economic benefit in both cases. 
However, these returns diminish quickly if buyouts 
are extended to lower-risk neighbourhoods. 
Strategic retreat for neighbourhoods in the high­
est two per cent risk category—instead of the high­
est one per cent as described above—delivers a 
net economic benefit under the high-emissions 
scenario, but a negative benefit under low emis­
sions. And net benefits quickly disappear for both 
high- and low- emissions scenarios thereafter. 
Table 4.3
Strategic retreat offers benefit but with diminishing returns 
Values in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
Neighbourhood 
risk percentile
Buyout cost
Annual avoided damages (end of century)
Net present value
Low-emissions 
scenario
High-emissions 
scenario
Low-emissions 
scenario
High-emissions 
scenario
Top 1%
1,900
120
200
500
1,900
Top 2%
4,200
180
290
-600
1,500
Top 5%
10,500
270
440
-5,400
-1,900
Top 10%
22,600
350
580
-15,800
-11,300
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
40
Our results suggest that strategic retreat is a solution 
best applied to the highest-risk properties. However, 
strategic retreat need not necessarily have a posi­
tive net present value in cost-benefit analysis to be 
a viable option. It may still deliver greater economic 
value compared to other forms of flood adapta­
tion that have extremely high upfront costs, such 
as the construction of dams, dikes, and flood diver­
sions. Strategic retreat has a significant advantage 
compared to structural defences in that it is a perma­
nent solution and requires no ongoing operations or 
maintenance. Further, flood damage carries other 
costs such as those for emergency response and the 
long-term impacts to the physical and mental health 
of those affected, and strategic retreat has other 
benefits associated with converting flood-prone land 
to natural or public uses (French et al., 2019). 
However, relocating families and neighbour­
hoods can have long-term impacts on individual 
and community well-being that are not captured 
in conventional cost-benefit analysis. In partic­
ular, strategic retreat proposals require signifi­
cant consideration of equity implications as well 
as meaningful consultation, considering that 
Indigenous Peoples, other racialized communities, 
and people living in lower-income neighbourhoods 
at risk of flooding are often disproportionately 
disrupted by strategic retreat programs and expe­
rience long-term social impacts (Siders, 2018). 
Co-developing potential strategic retreat options 
alongside Indigenous rights holders is particularly 
important in the context of Canada’s long history 
of colonization, forced removal, and relocation—
which, in many cases, saw Indigenous Peoples 
forcibly removed from higher-value or less-risk-
prone areas and relocated to areas that are more 
exposed to flooding and other climate-related 
risk—and to ensure recognition of Indigenous 
land, resource, and treaty rights. Strategic retreat 
plans will therefore need to evaluate less tangible 
societal considerations alongside more quantifi­
able considerations like economic costs and bene­
fits and returns over time to determine the most 
appropriate adaptation solution. 
Our analysis of strategic retreat also illustrates the 
much larger scale of the challenge of inland flood 
adaptation. While coastal flood adaptation can be 
managed effectively in a relatively small propor­
tion of Canada’s coastlines where risks are concen­
trated, inland flooding risk affects a much larger 
number of properties that are dispersed through­
out the country. Solutions for inland flooding adap­
tation will require combinations of strategic retreat, 
major structural measures, measures imple­
mented by owners, and financial supports such as 
new insurance tools, all designed specifically for 
and by affected neighbourhoods and communities 
across the country. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
41
IMPACTS ON ROADS 
AND RAILWAYS
Roads and railways are essential to Canada’s soci­
ety and economy. People across Canada depend 
on road and railway networks to access health­
care, groceries, jobs, and schools; for essential 
travel as well as leisure and vacation time; and to 
meet family, friends, and colleagues. Businesses 
and the economy also rely on roads and rail to 
move goods and services across the country 
efficiently. Approximately 750 million tonnes of 
freight were transported on Canada’s roads and 
330 million tonnes of freight were transported on 
railways in 2018, with trains alone helping move 
about $175 billion in goods to export (Statistics 
Canada, 2021c). In 2017, the total value of goods 
moved on roads in Canada was over $2.2 trillion 
(Statistics Canada, 2017).
A warming and increasingly volatile climate over 
the coming decades will increase the stress on 
Canada’s roads and railways and reduce their reli­
ability and level of service. Our analysis of roads 
focusses on the impacts of rising heat, increasing 
rainfall, and changing freeze-thaw patterns on 
pavement, which can cause damage and prema­
ture deterioration. Our analysis of railways focusses 
on the impacts of increasing summer tempera­
tures that can cause rails to kink and deform, forc­
ing operators to slow or stop trains because of the 
potential for derailments.
There are other important climate-related risks 
to roads and railways, however, that we could 
not include in our analysis, such as the impacts 
of flooding, which can wash out roads, railways, 
bridges, and culverts. The 2013 flood in Alberta 
destroyed 1,000 kilometres of roads and washed 
out hundreds of culverts and bridges (CCA, 2019; 
Palko & Lemmen, 2017). Intense rainfall can also 
lead to landslides on roads or tracks, such as the 
2019 event that caused delays and cancelled 
shipments on the Edmonton-Jasper segment of 
the Canadian National Railway, one of CN’s busi­
est network areas (CN, 2021). High winds, heavy 
precipitation, and freezing rain can damage traf­
5
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
42
fic signals and make travel more hazardous (Palko 
& Lemmen, 2017). Even higher relative humid­
ity and increased carbon concentrations in the 
atmosphere can increase the risk of deteriora­
tion of bridges (Nasr et al., 2019). However, it is not 
currently possible to model and estimate the costs 
of any of these impacts with confidence. As with 
our analysis of impacts to homes and buildings 
and electrical infrastructure, the results of our 
analysis here reflect a lower bound of the range 
of potential impacts and costs.
Growing rates of damage to roads and railways 
could substantially increase the cost of mainte­
nance. For example, Canada’s 2.8 million kilo­
metres of roads already cost federal, provincial, 
territorial, Indigenous, and municipal govern­
ments approximately $20 billion per year to main­
tain (Statistics Canada, 2021a), so even moderate 
increases in damage and degradation could result 
in major costs. 
More frequent closures and delays from damage 
or repair will further reduce the reliability of road 
and rail networks, with consequences to the lives 
and livelihoods of those who depend on them, as 
well as knock-on effects for the economy. Poor 
road conditions already cost drivers in Canada $3 
billion every year in higher vehicle operating costs 
(CAA, 2021), and traffic congestion in the Greater 
Toronto and Hamilton Area alone costs up to $11 
billion per year in lost time and economic oppor­
tunities (Dachis, 2013). Studies from the U.S. show 
that climate-related road and rail transportation 
delays could cost between $25 billion and $60 
billion over the 21st century (Chinowsky et al., 2019; 
Neumann, under review).
Modelling approach for roads 
and railways 
To estimate climate impacts and costs on roads 
and railways, we used the Infrastructure Planning 
Support System, a tool used widely around the world 
for analysis of climate change impacts to infrastruc­
ture, including for the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency’s National Climate Assessments (Resilient 
Analytics, 2021). Using detailed mapping of Canada’s 
road and rail networks data from DMTI Spatial and 
Natural Resources Canada (DMTI-Lightbox, 2020; 
Boehlert, et al. 2021) and applying future climate 
projections from the seven climate models, we 
used the Infrastructure Planning Support System 
to analyze the physical impacts and associated costs 
of key change climate hazards on Canada’s roads 
and railways (Table 5.1). As discussed in Section 3, for 
the purposes of our analysis we assumed that the 
total length and type of roads remained constant 
over the remainder of the century. 
For paved roads, rising temperatures and warmer 
summers mean the maximum temperatures 
that binders in the asphalt are designed for will 
be exceeded more frequently, leading to rutting 
and premature aging that makes pavement more 
brittle and prone to cracking. This deterioration 
creates poor road conditions and increases the 
frequency with which resurfacing is required. 
Increased precipitation may also cause rutting, 
while changing freeze-thaw cycles can alter the 
amount of subsurface shifting and heaving, lead­
ing to bumps and potholes. On unpaved roads, 
increasing precipitation is a significant concern 
because it can lead to increased erosion and make 
road travel more difficult or impossible. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
43
Table 5.1
Climate-related damages, costs, and adaptation scenarios for road 
and rail infrastructure
Infrastructure 
type
Stressor
Damage sources
Outcomes without 
adaptation
Adaptation scenario
Paved roads
Temperature
Surface degradation and 
increased roughness due to 
thermal cracking and rutting
Increased mainte­
nance and repair 
costs to maintain 
level of service; 
delays
Alter asphalt mix to 
include binder with 
appropriate tem­
perature perfor­
mance
Precipitation
Erosion of base and sub-base 
due to infiltration; increased 
cracking
Modify binder/seal­
ant and increase 
base layer depth
Freeze-thaw
Base layer degradation due to 
soil heaving; increased surface 
damage from settling and 
movement
Modify design to 
increase surface 
density and reduce 
infiltration
Unpaved roads
Precipitation
Surface erosion and rutting
Increased mainte­
nance and repair 
costs to maintain 
level of service; delays
Increase base 
material depth to 
increase strength 
and drainage 
Rail lines
Temperature
Track expansion and buckling 
during heat events
Increased repair 
costs; blanket speed 
orders and wide­
spread delays
Install track tem­
perature sensors to 
target speed orders 
The total cost of damage to roads and railways 
is not limited to the costs of repair and replace­
ment. It also includes the costs of reductions in 
service levels. Repair and reconstruction of roads 
create traffic jams and bottlenecks, slowing travel 
times and affecting the flow of people, resources, 
and goods. When temperatures increase substan­
tially, the risks of track buckling and train derail­
ment are so severe that railway operators typically 
reduce the speed of trains or even stop traffic 
completely when temperature-related buckling 
is a risk, dramatically reducing overall rail traffic 
and freight volumes. These delays already cost 
businesses and the economy hundreds of millions 
of dollars annually (Johnson, 2018), and could grow 
significantly under climate change. 
Using methods developed in the United States, we 
examined delay costs associated with poorer road 
conditions, increasing travel times, and freight 
transport delays caused by reduced travel speeds 
(Boehlert et al., 2021). We calculated delay costs 
to passengers based on the value of travel time 
savings, and we also calculated the costs of freight 
delay borne by shippers and truckers (Boehlert 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
44
et al., 2021; National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine, 2016). Delays will also 
impact businesses and economic productivity 
through supply chain interruptions, with costs 
that are likely to be much larger than the direct 
costs borne by shippers. However, the tools and 
data were not available to develop estimates of 
these additional costs. 
To calculate delay costs associated with speed 
orders on railways, we used the Infrastructure 
Planning Support System to model the reduction 
in travel speed that more frequent heat-related 
speed orders would cause throughout Canada’s rail 
networks. We then estimated the costs of delay to 
both freight and passenger travel based on current 
levels of railway network traffic. Costs to passengers 
include impacts to leisure and work-related travel, 
while freight costs include costs to rail owners and 
operators incurred from delays due to speed reduc­
tion orders (Boehlert et al., 2021; Chinowsky et al., 
2019). Again, we were not able to model costs to 
other business and sectors whose supply chains 
rely on rail shipments. These costs would likely be 
substantially higher than the costs borne by rail 
passengers and operators alone. 
Roads built to current standards 
are a future liability
Road systems are the single most valuable publicly 
owned infrastructure assets in Canada—the nearly 
2.8 million kilometres of roads and highways have 
a value of $142 billion (Statistics Canada, 2021a). 
With relatively short lifespans, roads require signif­
icant annual investments by all levels of govern­
ments for maintenance and replacement, as do 
bridges, culverts, and other related infrastructure. 
Between 2016 and 2020, federal, provincial, terri­
torial, Indigenous, and municipal governments 
invested an average of $20.2 billion annually in 
capital and operating costs in the national road 
network (Statistics Canada, 2021a).
Our analysis indicates that increasing tempera­
tures and precipitation in Canada will accelerate 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
45
the wear and tear on roads. Our median estimates 
of the annual costs of repair and replacement 
for the low-emissions scenario are $2.3 billion by 
mid-century and $3.1 billion by end of century. Our 
high-emissions median cost estimates are substan­
tially higher, at $3.4 billion and $7.7 billion annually 
for mid-century and end of century (Figure 5.2). 
Notably, the range of potential costs rises under 
the high-emissions scenario by end of century as 
the estimates for the climate models showing the 
most dramatic warming for Canada indicate that 
costs could approach $12.6 billion annually. 
Road damage due to rising temperatures and 
extreme heat is by far the costliest of climate 
impacts modelled in our analysis. Across the 
scenarios we modelled, temperature-related 
damage represents 87 per cent of total climate-in­
duced damage to roads across Canada, with the 
impacts of increasing precipitation making up 
most of the remainder. We found that warming 
conditions may result in less freeze-thaw damage 
in many areas as the climate changes, but any 
economic benefits are far outweighed by the 
costs of damage from higher temperatures and 
increased precipitation. 
Alberta, Quebec, and Ontario will bear the larg­
est overall costs as the regions with the most 
extensive road networks (Figure 5.3). As early as 
mid-century, damage induced by climate change 
will cost those provinces hundreds of millions 
more to maintain their road networks, under the 
lower-emissions scenario. Costs relative to the size 
of provincial and territorial road networks depend 
on the proportion of paved and unpaved roads, as 
paved roads are much more expensive to build 
and maintain. For example, the fact that P.E.I. has 
the highest proportion of paved roads to unpaved 
roads of any province or territory drives high costs 
0
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
AB
BC
MB
NB
NL
NS
NU
NWT
ON
PEI
QC
SK
YT
Canada has millions of kilometres of paved and unpaved roads
Road lane kilometres across Canada
Figure 5.1
Paved
Unpaved
Source: Data was obtained from Statistics Canada, 2018.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
46
relative to the size of that province’s road network 
(Statistics Canada, 2018). 
On average, climate-related impacts could 
increase typical capital and operating costs of 
road networks—for which provincial, territorial, 
and municipal governments are almost exclu­
sively responsible—in many regions by more than 
30 per cent by the end of the century in the 
high-emissions scenario (Figure 5.3). The rela­
tive increase will vary regionally, based on both 
the scale of historic investment in road infra­
structure in each province and territory, as well as 
differential impacts from rising temperatures. In 
P.E.I., costs could almost double, illustrating how 
climate change impacts could quickly consume 
infrastructure funding that is needed for modern­
ization and addressing infrastructure deficits.
Damage to road and rail 
infrastructure leads to costly delays
Our analysis shows that the costs of delays and 
travel disruptions on road and rail systems could 
be nearly as high as the costs of direct physical 
damage to the infrastructure itself. For railways, our 
analysis suggests that damage costs are relatively 
low, between $1 and $180 million per year depend­
ing on the timeframe and emissions scenario 
(Figure 5.4). Even in the worst case, under high 
emissions by end of century, these costs are rela­
tively minor, representing less than one per cent 
of the combined 2019 operating costs of Canadian 
Pacific and Canadian National (CN, 2021; CP, 2021). 
However, it is important to note that these are only 
the costs of repairing buckled rail segments—as 
$1,390 
$2,350 
$3,110 
Beginning of century
Mid-century
End of century
$1,390 
$3,440 
$7,740 
Beginning of century
Mid-century
End of century
Climate change is increasing road repair and replacement costs
Projected annual costs of road damage in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Figure 5.2
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
47
 $-
 $500
 $1,000
 $1,500
 $2,000
 $2,500
0%
400%
800%
1200%
 AB
 BC
 MB
 NB
 NL
 NWT
 NS
 NU
 ON
 PEI
 QC
 SK
 YT
Projected annual costs for road damage by millions of dollars (2019 CAD) per land KM and per cent change from present to end of century under a 
high-emissions scenario
Figure 5.3
The cost of road damage will increase the most where there are more paved roads
we discuss above, climate change may cause other 
types of substantial damage to rail networks.
Our delay cost estimates show that even the first-or­
der costs of delays from track buckling and slow 
or stop orders could outweigh the costs of physi­
cal damage by a factor of 10 or more. These costs 
increase dramatically over the century, reaching a 
median value of $1 billion annually in a high-emis­
sions scenario by the end of the century (Figure 5.5).
We estimate that the costs of delays for road travel 
will be of similar magnitude to those for railways, 
from the hundreds of millions of dollars to over $2 
billion annually. As with railways, we project that 
these costs will increase over the course of the 
century, particularly under high emissions, although 
even under low emissions, road delay costs remain 
substantial. Our estimates of rail delay costs are 
generally lower than road delay costs, except for 
the high-emissions, end-of-century scenario—illus­
trating the potential sensitivity of the rail sector to 
temperature change above key thresholds.
Combined, delay costs across road and rail 
networks will be roughly distributed region­
ally across Canada according to population and 
economic activity. Large delay costs in Ontario 
reflect the size of the population, extent of the 
road network, and high volume of rail traffic. 
Quebec, B.C., and Alberta experience similar costs 
in proportion to their population. We estimate that 
Saskatchewan, despite its smaller population, will 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
48
experience delay costs approaching those in B.C. 
and Alberta because of the volume of rail freight 
traffic in the province. 
Proactive road and railway 
adaptation can save billions
Of the three types of infrastructure analyzed in 
this report, road and rail systems have perhaps the 
most straightforward and cost-effective adaptation 
opportunities. For roads, we considered proactive 
measures to increase resilience to future changes 
in climate that can be incorporated into ongoing 
maintained or replacement cycles, including:
1.	
Altering asphalt mixes with materials 
suitable for future summer temperature 
increases;
2.	 Modifying asphalt materials and surface 
sealants to better withstand future 
increases in precipitation and increasing 
base layer depth in paved roads for better 
drainage;
3.	 Modifying road surface design to increase 
surface density and reduce infiltration 
when increases in freeze-thaw frequency 
are expected;
4.	 Increasing the base layer depth of unpaved 
roads to allow for better strength and 
drainage. 
Our analysis shows that, even after accounting for 
the up-front costs, these proactive measures could 
reduce net climate-related costs for road repair 
and replacement by 77 to 84 per cent by mid-cen­
tury and by 90 to 98 per cent by end of century, 
depending on the emissions scenario (Figure 5.6). 
These reductions are median estimates—under 
some climate scenarios the benefits may be even 
greater and could result in net cost savings. This 
$5
$20
$40
Beginning of century
Mid-century
End of century
$5
$10
$5
Beginning of century
Mid-century
End of century
Heat increases rail damage costs
Projected annual costs of rail damage in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Figure 5.4
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
49
means that not only would proactive adaptation 
eliminate increased costs associated with climate 
change, but that the future cost of road main­
tenance and repair could be lower than current 
expenditures. This reflects the fact that freeze-thaw 
cycles will become less damaging with a changing 
climate across most of the country by the end of 
the century. Therefore, if the impacts of increased 
temperature and precipitation can be managed 
through proactive measures, reduced freeze-thaw 
damage could result in less overall climate-related 
damage to Canada’s road networks and lower costs 
for operations and maintenance.
We also estimate that reduced road damage, 
repairs, and replacement will result in a signif­
icant reduction in road delay costs. Our analysis 
shows that the increase in serviceability of roads 
with proactive adaptation will reduce delay costs 
substantially, with the greatest benefit (a 92 per 
cent reduction in net annual costs) under high 
emissions and at the end of the century, but with 
substantial benefits (a 62 per cent reduction) even 
under low emissions in the mid-century (Figure 5.5).
For railway adaptation, our analysis used the 
Infrastructure Planning Support System tool to 
model the benefits of installing track temperature 
sensors that allow rail operators to implement a 
more targeted and risk-based approach to speed 
orders. This technology—an adaptation measure 
being considered in many parts of the world to 
address heat impacts (Chinowsky et al., 2019)—
allows operators to target speed orders to specific 
locations based on track temperature instead of 
blanket speed orders that apply to all rail lines in a 
region and result in longer delays. We recalculate 
rail delay costs considering these more targeted 
orders. Our results show that this form of adap­
tation can dramatically reduce delay costs by a 
median of 80 per cent by end of century under 
the high-emissions scenario. 
$0
$500
$1,000
$1,500
$2,000
Beginning of
century
Mid-century
End of century
Beginning of century
Mid-century
End of century
No 
adaptation
Proactive 
adaptation
Delays add to the already high costs of damage but can be minimized with adaptation
Projected annual road and rail delay costs in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Figure 5.5
Road
Rail
Rail
Road
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
50
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
51
IMPACTS ON 
ELECTRICITY SYSTEMS 
Electricity systems are essential to daily life and 
economic activity across Canada. In addition to 
powering homes and buildings, virtually every 
critical service that individuals, communities, 
and businesses depend on—including hospitals, 
water treatment systems, grocery stores, airports, 
telecommunications systems, and many more—
require functioning, reliable electricity systems. In 
Canada, the electricity sector also contributes $34 
billion annually to the economy through exports 
to the United States (IEA, 2020; Statistics Canada, 
2020d). When electricity systems go down, even 
for a short time, industrial production is halted, 
employees sit idle, data is lost, and power exports 
may be compromised. And damage to Canada’s 
electrical infrastructure—worth over $235 billion—
can mean big expenses for repair and replace­
ment (Statistics Canada, 2021a).
Climate change will damage both the quan­
tity and reliability of electricity distributed to 
households and businesses across the country. 
Our analysis focusses on two impacts. The first 
is accelerated deterioration and loss of function 
of electricity distribution systems from rising 
temperatures and increasing precipitation from 
and the costs of more frequent repair and replace­
ment. The second is the change in patterns of 
demand for electricity as the climate in Canada 
gets warmer, reducing the demand for electricity 
to heat homes and buildings during the winter 
but increasing loads during summer months as 
more homes and businesses are driven by unprec­
edented heat to install air conditioning and use it 
more often (Navius Research, 2020).
Besides the impacts we focus on in this report, 
there are many other ways that climate change 
will impact electricity systems and electrical infra­
structure, disrupting life and business in Canada 
and creating significant costs that we could 
not model. Electricity systems are vulnerable to 
extreme wind and ice storms—hazards that are 
likely to become more frequent in Canada under 
climate change (Dowling, 2013; Government of B.C., 
2019). Canada’s most catastrophic experience with 
6
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
52
such impacts was the Northeast Ice Storm of 1998, 
which brought down high-voltage transmission 
lines and damaged transformers, leaving close to 
half of Quebec’s population and parts of Ontario 
and New Brunswick in the dark for weeks. Costs 
of damage and economic disruption exceeded $5 
billion and reduced national GDP by 0.2 per cent 
(Lecomte et al., 1998). More recently, in 2018, torna­
does in Ottawa left more than 300,000 residents 
without power (Crawford, 2018). However, although 
scientists theorize that ice storms and extreme 
wind will become more frequent and severe under 
climate change, global climate models are not 
currently able to precisely project these shifts (Fant 
et al., 2020; Klima & Morgan, 2015). 
Climate-induced shifts in precipitation patterns 
will alter the flows of rivers, creating uncertainty 
in the supply of hydroelectricity, which makes up 
over 60 per cent of Canada’s electrical generation 
(NRCan, 2021). However, simulating the effects of 
these changes on hydroelectricity generation in 
Canada requires complex models of river basins 
and generating stations that do not yet exist in 
the public domain. And more frequent and severe 
floods resulting from changes in rainfall and snow­
melt under climate change can also impact electric­
ity systems. Canada has already seen these impacts; 
in Toronto’s 2013 flash floods, for example, flooding of 
one of the two main electrical substations that feed 
the city resulted in long-term power outages for over 
70,000 residents (Küfeoğlu et al., 2014). 
Our analysis focusses on the costs of repairing 
and replacing damaged infrastructure, which 
will be substantial given the sheer scale and 
extent of electrical infrastructure in Canada. 
Such damage and resulting outages will also 
have major economic impacts on businesses 
and economic productivity that we were unable 
to cost. Estimates put the current cost of electri­
cal outages in Canada—most of which is weath­
er-related—at approximately $12 billion annually, 
with over $8 billion of this cost incurred during 
short outages (McMullen, 2018). If climate change 
increases the number and length of power 
outages, additional costs could be substantial. 
Unfortunately, the science and data are not yet in 
place to model how power outages may shift with 
climate change.
Modelling approach for electricity 
infrastructure
To examine the impacts of rising temperatures 
and increasing precipitation on transmission 
and distribution infrastructure, we developed 
an inventory of power lines, transformers, trans­
former stations, and transmission poles across 
Canada (Table 6.1). Data on transmission infra­
structure (electrical substations and transmission 
lines) is available from DMTI Spatial, but compre­
hensive information on distribution infrastructure 
(distribution transformers, poles, and lines) is not 
available for Canada. To overcome this gap, we 
used data from the United States to relate quan­
tity of distribution infrastructure to population 
density and estimated the location and amount 
of this distribution infrastructure across regions.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
53
Table 6.1
Canada’s electrical transmission and distribution infrastructure network is massive
*estimated
Province / Territory
Substation 
transformers
Transmission lines
Distribution 
transformers* 
Distribution lines*
Power poles*
Alberta
 542 
11,300
676,000
253,000
6,418,000
British Columbia
 210 
13,100
586,000
135,000
5,486,000
Manitoba
 356 
9,900
309,000
68,000
2,604,000
New Brunswick
 138 
5,500
224,000
48,000
1,721,000
Newfoundlnd 
and Labrador
 80 
5,900
187,000
39,000
1,338,000
Nova Scotia
 246 
5,100
209,000
44,000
1,562,000
Ontario
 3,238 
23,000
1,102,000
260,000
10,850,000
PEI
 10 
300
146,000
29,000
909,000
Quebec
 404 
27,600
1,377,000
327,000
13,708,000
Saskatchewan
 280 
9,200
276,000
60,000
2,260,000
Territories
 18 
1,400
141,000
28,000
858,000
TOTAL
 5,522 
112,000
5,230,000
1,289,000
47,713,000
To estimate the impacts and costs of future 
damage from climate change, we adapted a 
model used by the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency’s Climate Change Impacts and Risk 
Analysis program to predict climate change-in­
duced damages and costs to electrical system 
infrastructure (Fant et al., 2020; EPA, 2020). This 
model allowed us to analyze and cost the impacts 
of climate change on key infrastructure compo­
nents, and to examine the effects of reactive and 
proactive adaptation choices on damages and 
costs (Table 6.2). 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
54
Table 6.2
Climate damages and adaptations for transmission and distribution infrastructure
Component damage
Description 
No adaptation: 
No consideration of 
climate change
Reactive adaptation: 
Replace based on 
current climate 
Proactive adaptation: 
Design using 
climate projections
Reduced transform­
er lifespan (both 
substation and 
distribution) 
Increases in air 
temperature shorten 
the lifespan of large 
power transformers
Build replacement 
transformers with 
the existing design 
(historical climate)
Build replacement
transformers specified 
to recent climate
Build replacement 
transformers 
specified to 
projected climate 
(30-year horizon)
Reduced transmis­
sion and distribution 
line capacity
High temperatures 
on lines cause a re­
duction in transmis­
sion capacity
Build additional 
transmission lines 
using existing design 
Upgrade ampacity
 of existing lines 
based on recent 
climate
Upgrade ampacity
 of existing lines using 
climate 
projections
Wood pole decay
Increases in precipi­
tation and tempera­
ture accelerate the 
rate of decay at the 
base of wood poles
Replace decayed 
poles with new 
wood poles as needed
Use steel 
reinforcement as 
needed based on 
recent climate
Use steel 
reinforcement as 
needed based on 
climate projections
Change in vegeta­
tion management
Changes in climate 
result in altered 
vegetation growth, 
which requires 
changes in vegeta­
tion management
Increase operations 
and maintenance (no 
adaptation options)
Increase operations 
and maintenance (no 
adaptation options)
Increase operations 
and maintenance (no 
adaptation options)
We also examined how rising temperatures 
will affect future electricity demand in Canada. 
Summers will get substantially warmer across 
the country, and since air conditioning already 
accounts for about a third of electricity use on hot 
days in warm provinces like Ontario (IESO, 2015), 
additional demand could increase competition for 
electricity supply across the country. We modelled 
shifts in electricity consumption with the Navius 
Research Inc. Integrated Electricity System Dispatc 
model, using our climate model projections. Our 
results include estimates of changes to overall and 
peak electricity demand across Canada, and esti­
mates of costs of installing the generating capacity 
to meet this increased demand.
Climate-related damage to 
electrical infrastructure could cost 
billions each year
Our results show that if electrical transmission 
and distribution infrastructure is not adapted to 
future climate conditions, the median estimate of 
increased damage for providers is $2.4 billion annu­
ally by mid-century and about $3.6 billion annually 
by the end of the century under a high-emissions 
scenario (Figure 6.1). Under a low-emissions scenario, 
costs could still be substantial, with a median esti­
mate of $1.8 billion annually for both mid-century 
and end of century. Of the five types of electrical 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
55
transmission and distribution infrastructure that we 
modeled, we project that the the costliest impacts—
about 75 per cent of the total—will be from prema­
ture failure of electrical substation transformers and 
from the accelerated decay of the tens of millions of 
wooden utility poles across Canada.
Climate-related impacts also vary geographically, 
with costs in Ontario and Quebec comprising over 
half of the national total costs (Table 6.3), reflecting 
both the size of the population in both provinces 
and the infrastructure associated with Quebec’s 
vast hydroelectric generation and transmission 
system. No region will be unaffected, however; per 
capita costs could be highest in some of Canada’s 
less populous provinces, territories, and regions 
where more electrical infrastructure is needed 
to service a widely dispersed population. Rural, 
remote, and Northern areas require more lines, 
poles, and transformers to serve each customer 
and c ould experience higher increases in electric­
ity rates to cover the cost of damage..
Again, some major climate change risks to elec­
trical infrastructure are not reflected in our anal­
ysis, including the impacts of potential increases 
in ice storms and high winds. When data and 
tools become available to model these impacts, 
the total costs of climate change impacts could 
increase substantially. The distribution of costs 
across different types of infrastructure and differ­
ent regions could shift as well. 
$1,320 
$1,770 
$1,770 
Beginning of century
Mid-century
End of century
$960 
$2,420 
$3,580 
Beginning of century
Mid-century
End of century
More heat and rain will raise costs for maintaining electricity infrastructure
Projected annual costs for transmission and distribution infrastructure in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Figure 6.1
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
56
Table 6.3
Costs are highest where the most electrical infrastructure is found—in Ontario, 
Quebec, and Alberta 
Median values in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
Low-emissions scenario
High-emissions scenario
Mid-century
End of  century
Mid-century
End of century
 Alberta 
$149
$189
$211
$361
 British Columbia 
$107
$131
$152
$244
 Manitoba 
$86
$90
$125
$179
 New Brunswick 
$77
$73
$102
$130
 Newfoundland and Labrador 
$42
$37
$53
$68
 Northwest Territories 
$12
$8
$20
$27
 Nova Scotia 
$56
$51
$72
$90
 Nunavut 
$12
$8
$20
$27
 Ontario 
$468
$488
$595
$872
 Prince Edward Island 
$32
$27
$39
$50
 Quebec 
$473
$482
$656
$942
 Saskatchewan 
$61
$71
$94
$142
 Yukon 
$12
$8
$20
$27
Impacts on reliability, availability, 
and cost of electricity could 
threaten net zero transition
The damages to electrical transmission and 
distribution infrastructure described above will 
decrease the reliability of the electricity system as 
more of those components will fail more often, lead­
ing to more frequent outages. We could not esti­
mate the number of these outages in our analysis,
or the costs of the business interruption and 
delay they would create. However, it is certain that 
those costs will increase dramatically as electricity 
becomes increasingly essential for power, heat­
ing, and mobility needs in Canada’s transition to 
net zero. 
A warming climate will itself increase demand for 
electricity as time goes on. Rising temperatures 
and increased need for space cooling will lead 
to a rise in overall and peak electrical demand in 
the coming decades. We estimate that electricity 
demand from home heating will decrease due to 
lower space heating requirements, but that the 
increase in demand for air conditioning in summer 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
57
0
40
Mid-century
End of century
0
10
Mid-century
End of century
A hotter climate will drive up electricity demand for heating and cooling
Projected annual electricity demand (TWh) relative to a scenario with no climate change
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Figure 6.2
will outweigh winter reductions by mid-century 
and beyond (Figure 6.2). The difference between 
a low- and high-emissions scenario is especially 
apparent at the end of the century: under a 
high-emissions scenario, total national electric­
ity demand for heating and cooling is projected 
to increase by a median of 43 per cent by the end 
of century compared to present levels due to 
increased air conditioning needs alone.
Our estimates of peak electricity demand show 
even more dramatic increases. We estimate that 
peak demand will rise in every province relative 
to what would have been driven by economic 
and population growth alone in the absence 
of climate change (Figure 6.3). In all provinces 
except Ontario and Saskatchewan, peak electric­
ity demand currently occurs in the winter, primar­
ily because of electricity use for baseboard heaters 
and other forms of space heating. Our analysis 
finds that in a high-emissions scenario, the warm­
ing climate will shift peak demand from winter to 
summer for most provinces by mid-century and 
for most regions by end of century in a high-emis­
sions scenario. This will have the aggregate effect 
of increasing peak electricity demand nation­
ally by nine per cent by mid-century and 13 to 17 
per cent by the end of the century. Regionally, 
the largest increases are projected to occur in 
Ontario—where demand already peaks on the 
hottest summer days—with an increase of up to 
30 per cent anticipated by mid-century, even in 
our low-emissions scenario.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
58
To avoid triggering rolling outages or blackouts 
on dangerously hot days, substantial new elec­
trical generation capacity across Canada will be 
needed to meet these dramatic increases in peak 
demand—requiring additional investment well 
beyond what would be otherwise necessary to 
supply a growing population and economy. Not 
only is this a challenge in itself, it will also compli­
cate the task and increase the expense of elec­
trifying the economy as Canada transitions to 
net zero and new, competing demands for elec­
tricity at peak times come online. Heat-related 
infrastructure damage, along with performance 
declines in transmission and distribution infra­
structure in hotter temperatures, will further 
exacerbate the challenge of providing reliable 
electricity during the summer when it will be 
most needed (CEA, 2016). 
Building resilience into Canada’s 
electricity systems will reduce costs 
Because so much other infrastructure and so 
many critical services depend on electricity—a 
dependency that will only grow as electricity 
becomes Canada’s most critical energy system 
in a net zero world—a resilient grid is a critical 
element of a resilient and prosperous country.
Our analysis shows that improving the resilience 
of electrical transmission and distribution infra­
structure in anticipation of future temperature 
and precipitation changes could significantly 
reduce the frequency and cost of damage to 
transmission while increasing the reliability of the 
grid. And these investments are relatively simple 
and low-cost. Replacing transmission and distri­
9.1%
13.0%
Mid-century
End of century
8.9%
16.7%
Mid-century
End of century
A hotter climate will drive up peak electricity demand
Projected change in peak electricity demand compared to a no-climate-change scenario
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Figure 6.3
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
59
bution infrastructure components at the end of 
their life with more resilient materials and compo­
nents—in many cases a marginal expense—can 
eliminate 83 to 77 per cent of damage costs that 
would have occurred without adaptation by the 
end of the century for the low- and high-emis­
sions scenarios, respectively (Figure 6.4). Even a 
“reactive” adaptation scenario, where replace­
ment components and materials are updated to 
the climate of the day, can save between 52 and 66 
per cent compared to an approach where climate 
change is not factored in at all. 
Remember that our analysis only captures 
the damages associated with certain climate 
hazards to electrical transmission and distribu­
tion infrastructure and that our cost/benefit anal­
ysis is limited to costs of direct physical damage 
and the benefits of adaptation in reducing this 
damage. In practice, the adaptation measures 
we consider would also increase the reliability of 
the grid, which will reduce interruptions in criti­
cal services like water supply, medical care, and 
telecommunications caused by power outages—
and the associated costs of cascading economic 
and social disruption. There will also be opportu­
nities beyond what we have modelled to adapt 
and improve the resilience of electricity systems 
to other climate change hazards, thereby increas­
ing grid reliability and reducing both direct and 
indirect costs.
$0
$2,000
$4,000
Beginning of century
Mid-century
End of century
Beginning of century
Mid-century
End of century
Adaptation can dramatically reduce costs of climate-related electricity infrastructure impacts
Projected annual costs of electricity damage in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
Figure 6.4
No 
adaptation
Proactive 
adaptation
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
60
CONCLUSIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS
Our analysis confirms that climate change poses major risks to Canada’s public and private infrastruc­
ture—risks that could prove extremely costly and threaten infrastructure services that are critical to social 
and economic health. Proactive and judicious adaptation measures have the potential to dramatically 
reduce or even reverse these costs and service losses, but the incentives and policy supports to drive 
adaptation at the scale that is required do not yet exist. Meeting the challenge that climate change 
represents to Canada’s infrastructure will require major improvements in the current understanding 
of risk, technical guidance, funding and investment, price signals, and regulatory drivers. 
CONCLUSIONS
The following specific conclusions expand on our findings:
Climate-related infrastructure damage and losses in Canada will cost tens of billions of dollars 
each year at a minimum—total costs will likely be much higher.
Without adaptation, the costs of climate change damage to homes and buildings, roads, railways, and 
electricity systems are on track to increase to tens of billions of dollars annually. Climate change threats 
to infrastructure are already costing Canada billions of dollars annually, and without action, impacts and 
costs will continue to grow—even if global greenhouse gas emissions are reduced. Many regions will face 
the largest costs towards the end of the century, particularly if global action in the next few decades to 
reduce emissions falls short of the ambition science indicates is necessary. 
7
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
61
Moreover, our estimates are only a lower bound for the potential costs Canada could face. Our estimate 
is conservative because we were not able the quantify some of the direct consequences to the three 
types of infrastructure that were the focus of our analysis. For example, we were not able to examine 
the impacts of more frequent wildfires on homes and buildings, of ice and storms that could knock 
out electrical transmission and distribution systems more often, or of larger and more frequent floods 
on roads and railways. And we were not able to examine direct and indirect costs of climate change to 
other types of important infrastructure, such as telecommunications infrastructure, drinking water 
systems, healthcare facilities, or marine ports and seaways. Recent experience with weather-related 
disasters that we were not able to include in our analysis—such as the 2016 Fort McMurray wildfire, the 
1998 ice storm, and the 2020 Calgary hailstorm—clearly indicate that the future costs of these types of 
climate-driven events could be of equivalent or greater magnitude to those we quantify in this report.
We were also not able to quantify most of the indirect costs of the loss of infrastructure services for indi­
viduals, businesses, or the economy. Our analysis of just the first-order delay costs associated with inter­
rupted road and rail service suggests that the sum of indirect costs of delay and economic disruption 
could match or exceed the direct costs of infrastructure damage, repair, and replacement. Therefore, 
while our estimates provide an important insight into the scale of potential impacts and costs to Canada’s 
infrastructure that could result from climate change, the total costs will undoubtedly be much higher. 
Flooding and other climate-related hazards will reduce the value of buildings and infrastructure 
and threaten investments, markets, and the economy. 
We found that up to 15 per cent of homes and non-residential buildings in Canada are exposed to some 
level of coastal or inland flood hazard, while about eight per cent are located within a 100-year flood­
plain. And because risk is concentrated in expensive property markets such as Toronto and Vancouver, 
we estimate that almost one quarter of Canada’s home and building value is exposed to flooding. As 
climate change further drives sea level rise and causes what are currently considered 100-year rains to 
occur on average every 25 years, 10 years, or less, the risk to these properties will increase dramatically. 
We estimate current annual damages from coastal and inland flooding at about $1.3 billion. By the middle 
of the century, we estimate that these costs will increase by a factor of five—even in our lower-emissions 
scenario. If emissions are not reduced, by the end of the century, these costs could increase by a factor 
of 10 or more. As damages accumulate, property values will decrease in flood-prone areas across the 
country. Owners will have less collateral to negotiate or renew mortgages, loans, and other debt obliga­
tions. Banks and other lenders could see an increase in defaults as owners walk away from homes and 
buildings that are no longer insurable, or for which repairs become unaffordable—and lenders could 
incur larger losses because the collateral value they can collect from those buildings will be reduced. 
And investors in real estate, such as through real estate investment trusts or mortgage-backed securi­
ties, could see substantial losses. 
Impacts to asset values and the associated financial risks are not limited to real estate. Utilities, munici­
palities, and private industry with infrastructure exposed to flooding and other growing climate hazards 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
62
will experience unexpected devaluation of physical assets. Their credit ratings could decline, they may 
experience greater challenges in borrowing or raising capital, and insurance for climate-related hazards 
will become more expensive or may be withdrawn completely. These costs will be passed on to taxpay­
ers, ratepayers, and investors. And lenders and bond holders who provide long-term capital could expe­
rience credit losses and lower returns. 
Cumulatively, these impacts could pose a risk to the stability of markets and to the financial system. 
Increasing damages and losses from more frequent extreme weather and other climate change effects 
in Canada and around the world could cause banks and other lenders to reappraise the creditworthi­
ness of a wide range of individuals, businesses, and even entire industries, making credit more difficult 
to access. Investors could begin to divest from businesses and sectors that have infrastructure and 
assets at risk, further reducing the value of buildings and physical assets and making credit even more 
expensive. Insurers could withdraw coverage from at-risk households and businesses if climate-related 
payouts continue to increase, putting not only owners but lenders at risk. At a sufficient scale, these 
effects could lead to reinforcing cycles of credit contraction and reduced activity and growth that would 
affect Canada’s entire economy (FSB, 2020). Moreover, as the world shifts to a low-carbon economy, 
physical climate risks will interact with transition risks—losses and costs to owners, lenders, and inves­
tors in high-carbon industries—that could further reinforce financial and economic instability. 
Poor understanding and disclosure of climate risk are leading to risky decisions and 
mounting liabilities.
In Canada, remarkably little information is available on the risks to physical infrastructure from climate 
change. Current publicly available climate change information—such as that provided by the federal 
government’s Canadian Centre for Climate Services and other regional data portals—is largely limited 
to climate and weather variables (CCCS, 2021). These data show the climate conditions Canada may 
experience in the future but do not describe the risks that accompany those conditions—the poten­
tial physical damage, the direct and indirect economic costs, or the social and cultural consequences. 
Other government products that aim to characterize climate-related risks are also inadequate for 
supporting adaptation. For example, even though flooding has consistently been the costliest type 
of weather-related disaster in Canada, government-produced flood maps that describe existing flood 
hazards are incomplete, largely out of date, and difficult to obtain. And despite decades of research 
showing climate change will likely exacerbate flooding in much of Canada, virtually no progress has been 
made on estimating future flood risk in any part of the country. As a result, homes and other buildings 
continue to be built in high-risk locations, while current property owners and prospective buyers have 
little understanding of their existing or potential future risk of flooding. Similar information gaps exist 
across Canada regarding current and future wildfire risks (Lewis, 2019). 
The lack of risk information and guidance in codes and standards means that new infrastructure contin­
ues to be designed, and existing infrastructure continues to be managed, for the climate of the past, 
creating billions of dollars in potential liabilities—as we demonstrate in our analysis. Although decision 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
63
makers have known for decades that many of Canada’s building and infrastructure codes and stan­
dards were no longer relevant in a changing climate, updates to reflect the risks of the potential future 
climate have only just begun (Arsenault, 2019). 
In the absence of publicly available climate risk information, the private sector has developed some 
risk information products that serve the needs of certain business sectors such as the insurance indus­
try. However, these products are costly, and intellectual property restrictions prevent them from being 
made widely available. 
In addition to a lack of information on the physical risks of climate change, there is an even larger gap in 
knowledge about how to calculate the costs associated with those risks. While bodies such as the Task 
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures and Canada’s Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance have 
highlighted the importance of making physical climate risks transparent in financial systems, most 
homeowners, small businesses, and even large corporations and governments lack the expertise to 
determine the effect that climate change impacts will have on their bottom line—even if the data on 
impacts were available (Government of Canada, 2019; TCFD, 2017). As a result, most individuals, organiza­
tions, and sectors are not able to build climate risk into their financial planning and decision making. And 
specialized insurers, providers of adaptation solutions, and holders of private capital are largely unable 
to develop business cases for products, services, and investments that could help individuals and firms 
address some of their climate risk. 
Governments and taxpayers are financially exposed on many fronts.
Governments—and by extension, taxpayers—will directly pay for climate-related infrastructure damage. 
Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will pay a large part of the growing costs of damage 
through disaster response programs. However, financial resources are not meeting the demand. Even 
with commitments in recent budgets, funding for disaster response and recovery is far short of what 
the Parliamentary Budget Officer has said is needed (Government of Canada, 2021; PBO, 2016), poten­
tially leaving more costs to be passed on to provincial, territorial and Indigenous governments, local 
governments, and individuals. 
Provincial, territorial, and municipal governments—the nation’s largest owners of public infrastruc­
ture —will also be liable for the increased costs of maintaining and replacing infrastructure damaged 
by changing climate conditions. Indigenous governments could also be exposed as they continue to 
gain greater ownership over infrastructure in their territories and communities. Paying for this damage 
could require cuts to other programs, more borrowing, or increases in taxes. As our analysis shows, 
exposed assets include public buildings, roads, and electrical infrastructure. Many other types of public 
infrastructure are also at risk, including drinking water and sewer systems, bridges, airports, ports, and 
public transit systems. 
Private-sector insurers have always played an important role in helping people and business rebuild 
after weather-related disasters, but their business model is threatened by rapidly growing payouts. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
64
If insurers choose—or are mandated by governments—to continue to provide insurance to owners 
of buildings and assets at growing risk from climate change, they will need to pass the costs on to all 
property insurance customers in the form of substantially higher premiums. Alternatively, they may no 
longer offer coverage for certain customers—for example, flood insurance is already either unafford­
able or unavailable for the homes and buildings at greatest risk of flooding in Canada (Dolynny, 2019) 
and will no doubt be even more difficult to obtain for more and more property owners as flood risk 
increases with climate change.
Beyond direct liabilities, governments and individuals are also exposed indirectly through the impacts 
of infrastructure damage and loss on the broader economy. Business interruption and supply chain 
impacts caused by increasingly unreliable infrastructure will ultimately impact government coffers 
through declines in productivity, economic growth, and tax revenues—shortfalls that would lead to tax 
hikes or cuts to programs and services that people in Canada rely on. 
The net zero transition requires—and can help create—climate-resilient infrastructure. 
Canada is faced with two infrastructure transition challenges over the coming decades. The first is the 
need to make massive infrastructure investments while supporting a fundamental transition in our 
economy to meet Canada’s 2050 net zero target—investments of a scale that may not occur again for 
generations. The second is the need to invest in making existing and future infrastructure in Canada 
resilient to a warming and increasingly volatile climate. Currently, investments to meet these two infra­
structure challenges occur separately. But Canada has limited resources, little time, and no margin 
of error to achieve both—so efforts to support the net zero transition and make infrastructure more 
resilient must be aligned to make greater progress while avoiding investments in either priority that 
compromise the other.
For example, the electrification of Canada’s economy is a critical pathway for reaching net zero emis­
sions, with electricity demand projected to increase by at least 45 to 65 per cent by mid-century from 
2015 levels (Dion et al., 2021). However, our analysis shows that, in the absence of adaptation, electrical 
transmission and distribution infrastructure will be at greater risk of deterioration and failure in a warm­
ing climate, while hotter summer temperatures will cause demand spikes and breakdowns at the most 
critical times. Therefore, if investments in renewable energy and grid modernization are to successfully 
advance Canada’s net zero goals, they must include actions to improve the resilience of the grid itself. 
All new infrastructure can be designed to provide reliable service in a future climate while at the same 
time reducing emissions. Examples include building energy retrofit programs that also incorporate 
resilience upgrades for wildfires, floods, and heat waves, or urban redevelopment plans that reduce 
storm runoff while increasing density and walkability. 
The federal government has taken initial steps to build resilience into infrastructure investment through 
Infrastructure Canada’s Climate Lens, a requirement that applications for some federal government 
infrastructure funding programs assess climate risks to proposed infrastructure and describe how these 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
65
risks will be addressed. However, the Climate Lens does not apply to many federally funded projects, to 
infrastructure wholly funded by provinces and municipalities, or to infrastructure investments by utili­
ties and the private sector. It also does not direct proponents to consider how projects might enhance 
the resilience of the communities or areas where they are located, either alone or in concert with other 
infrastructure projects. A broader suite of tools is required to leverage the resources and authority of all 
orders of government to ensure that every infrastructure investment contributes to building resilience. 
Climate-related infrastructure costs will be unevenly distributed in Canada.
Our analysis shows that some individuals, communities, and regions will be disproportionately affected 
by climate change infrastructure impacts and costs. For example, the physical and financial risks of 
flooding are mostly concentrated in less than ten per cent of homes and buildings. Not only are the 
owners of these properties far more likely to experience direct damages from flooding, but they will 
also be most affected by declining property values and loss of access to insurance as flood risk grows 
under climate change. Communities with a large proportion of flood-prone homes and buildings—
especially small towns and settlements with limited resources—could be devastated, not only by the 
costs of rebuilding after flood disasters, but also from loss of property tax revenues if assessed values 
decline and residents abandon hazardous properties to move elsewhere. 
Communities facing existing infrastructure gaps are particularly exposed. For many Indigenous Peoples, 
especially those living in chronically risk-prone areas because of colonization and forced relocation, 
climate impacts could exacerbate deficits in critical infrastructure—for example, clean water and roads 
—while undermining rights, cultural practices, and health and well-being (Waldron, 2021). Moreover, 
Northern, rural, and remote communities that rely on single road and rail connections or small airports 
will be at risk of disruption from infrastructure failures. These communities may also be most affected 
by costs of repairing infrastructure passed on by electrical utilities, because they require more extensive 
transmission and distribution systems on a per-customer basis than in the south and in urban areas. 
Infrastructure impacts and costs induced by climate change will also have greater impacts on people 
and communities that are already at an economic disadvantage. People living on low incomes and less 
wealthy communities already have fewer resources to respond to extreme weather and weather-related 
disasters and will continue to be hardest hit as these events become more frequent and severe. But as 
banks and insurers seek to cover their growing portion of this risk, increased costs of insurance, loans, 
and capital will create new expenses for people and communities with fewer financial resources and 
will further reduce their ability to invest in adaptation that could reduce these risks. 
Proactive adaptation can eliminate much of the risk but faces hurdles.
Our results show that proactive adaptation can substantially reduce the damages and losses induced 
by climate change. The analyses of adaptation benefits for roads, railways, and electrical transmission 
and distribution show that relatively straightforward actions—such as making sure repairs and replace­
ment infrastructure are designed for long-term climate change—can reduce net costs by 50 to 90 per 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
66
cent. Furthermore, we project that adapting these systems and adaptation to address coastal flooding, 
are highly effective in reducing the risks associated with the most drastic projections of climate change 
and sea level rise for Canada—a critical hedge against worst-case outcomes.
Despite the clear benefits of acting on adaptation, many barriers remain. As noted above, the lack of 
relevant, usable, and credible information about current and future climate-related risk means that 
homeowners, businesses, and communities are not aware of, or motivated to reduce, risks. Canadian 
building and infrastructure codes and standards, which are updated very slowly, are only just starting 
to incorporate climate change risks. Governments, businesses, and investors are more concerned with 
short-term benefits and profits from operating and developing infrastructure than in managing long-
term risk. Both public and private entities have limited knowledge of the opportunities to adapt infra­
structure and make it resilient, and they struggle to fund adaptation actions because it is difficult to 
develop business cases based on uncertain future impacts or avoided costs. And some potential adap­
tation solutions, such as coordinating strategic retreat from flood risk areas by expending public funds 
to buy homes and properties at risk, can be deeply emotional and contentious. While such options may 
have net economic benefits, they may not be a viable or culturally appropriate option—particularly if 
those negatively affected are from low-income, racialized, or otherwise-marginalized communities. 
Projected climate-related costs and risks to infrastructure in Canada are just the tip 
of the iceberg. 
While we have been able to identify some of the most important impacts of climate change on infra­
structure and infrastructure services in Canada and their potential costs, we have quantified only a frac­
tion of the overall risks. Our analysis was able to estimate major direct costs of climate-related damage 
to key infrastructure; however, a lack of information about some types of future climate hazards and 
how infrastructure will respond to those hazards mean that many direct damages cannot be practi­
cally quantified. Indirect costs are even more challenging to evaluate. While analyses such as ours can 
analyze some first-order costs of delays and disruption, it is extremely difficult to predict how losses of 
infrastructure service—in the interactions of multiple types of infrastructure interruptions—propagate 
through supply chains and the economy. How those losses and interruptions will affect the health and 
well-being of individuals and communities also remains unclear. 
Despite these information gaps, our analysis is sufficient to highlight both the scale of the climate change 
infrastructure challenge and the opportunity to dramatically reduce impacts and costs through adaptation. 
Important decisions about the future of Canada’s infrastructure are now being made, with the forth­
coming National Infrastructure Assessment mapping out future investments, including the transition 
to net zero (Government of Canada, 2021). There is no time to lose, and these initiatives must incorpo­
rate what is already known about climate change risks to build modernized, low-carbon infrastructure 
that better serves communities and businesses in a rapidly changing world. 
In the longer term, the absence of publicly available climate risk information will continue to limit adap­
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
67
The following recommendations aim to help all orders of governments across Canada address 
impending infrastructure impacts and costs, close gaps in policies and incentives, and drive 
better climate change risk management and adaptation: 
Governments should develop and publish accurate and practical information about 
climate-related infrastructure risks. 
To understand and manage current and future climate change risk and make informed 
investments in adaptation, governments, corporations, investors, and individuals need 
actionable and up-to-date risk information. 
Currently, information about future climate change impacts and existing climate risks 
in Canada is inconsistent and incomplete. Governments are mostly publishing historic 
climate data and the basic output of future climate models, which provide little, if any, 
direct insight into climate change risks to infrastructure and infrastructure services. 
Other government products that are intended to communicate climate-related risks, 
such as flood mapping, are out of date and incomplete and do not reflect the future risk 
of climate change. Commercially developed climate risk information is useful to those 
who can afford to pay but creates an unfair playing field when it comes to factoring risk 
into decisions and transactions. 
Governments have an important role to play in ensuring that consistent and useful 
climate risk information is universally accessible. The federal government should lead 
the basic research and modelling required to understand the threats to infrastruc­
ture presented by a warming and increasingly volatile climate, including monitoring of 
ongoing weather and climate in Canada,  as well as ongoing development of nationally 
relevant future climate modelling. It should also develop standards for the use of this 
information in climate change risk products such as flood mapping and in climate risk 
assessments. Provincial and territorial governments should apply these data and stan­
dards to develop and publish information on climate risks that are priorities for their 
residents and their economies. And all orders of government should work together to 
develop arrangements—including the private sector where appropriate—to ensure that 
these applications are adequately and equitably funded. 
tation action by infrastructure owners and operators—from governments to private corporations to indi­
vidual homeowners. As Canada’s Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance has highlighted, tools to translate 
climate data into tangible impacts are virtually non-existent in Canada (Government of Canada, 2019). 
This is a gap that must be addressed to develop robust practices of assessing, measuring, pricing, and 
managing climate risk and opportunity in the development and operation of infrastructure in Canada. 
RECOMMENDATIONS
1
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
68
The current lack of climate risk information, however, does not justify continued inaction 
on adaptation. Climate change is already damaging infrastructure and costing billions 
annually across the country and requires an immediate acceleration of adaptation invest­
ment in response. Existing risk information and a growing catalogue of recent climate-re­
lated impacts and disasters have shed enough light on the magnitude of climate change 
risks to infrastructure in Canada to initiate more adaptation actions for the biggest risks 
and for the most vulnerable areas. Governments should continue to press forward with 
adaptation strategies and actions that can be updated and evolved when the next gener­
ation of climate risk information is available.
Governments and regulators should require owners of existing and proposed 
infrastructure to disclose climate change risks. 
As we highlighted in our introductory adaptation report, Tip of the Iceberg: Navigating 
the Known and Unknown Costs of Climate Change for Canada, transparency about 
climate change risk promotes resilient decisions and discourages risky ones. The 
Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures and Canada’s Expert Panel on 
Sustainable Finance have also highlighted that disclosure of physical climate risks—and 
of strategies to manage those risks—are critical for directing investment away from risky 
infrastructure and physical assets and towards more resilient options (Government of 
Canada, 2019; TCFD, 2017). 
Our analysis sheds light on the current and projected consequences of insufficient assess­
ment, disclosure, and management of climate change risks. It shows that if public and 
private infrastructure owners are not made aware of and accountable for climate risk, they 
will continue to accumulate risk that will grow dramatically with climate change. Similarly, 
if lenders, insurers, and investors do not analyze the climate risk in their portfolios, they will 
continue to enable poor infrastructure decisions through credit, insurance, and capital.
Governments, along with regulatory bodies overseen and legislated by governments, should 
ensure that infrastructure owners, lenders, and insurers are analyzing and managing climate 
risk. They should also ensure that these actors are disclosing their risks and their risk manage­
ment strategies so that stakeholders and markets can incorporate this information into their 
decisions. For example, federal bodies such as the Office of the Superintendent of Financial 
Institutions, the Bank of Canada, and the Department of Finance should integrate climate 
risk disclosure into the supervision of federally regulated financial institutions, as suggested 
by the Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance. And provincial bodies that regulate securities, 
real estate, utilities, and municipal infrastructure should require disclosure of physical climate 
risk and risk management strategies in planning, decision making, and transactions.
2
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
69
As discussed in Recommendation #1, not all the data, tools, and expertise required to 
assess climate infrastructure risks are in place. Many aspects of disclosure can begin 
now with the information that exists, but governments and regulators must support the 
development of resources for implicated sectors and organizations and help guide them 
through a swift but staged transition to full and consistent disclosure.
Governments should explicitly evaluate resilience benefits and climate risks for all 
infrastructure spending and regulatory decisions.
The long-lived nature of infrastructure means that decisions made today—and yesterday—
will dictate the resilience of Canada’s infrastructure to climate change over the remainder 
of the century. This means that governments and others cannot act too soon to start build­
ing adaptation and resilience into all infrastructure decisions. This is especially true for the 
coming surge of public and private infrastructure investment required for Canada’s net 
zero transition. If not carefully planned with resilience in mind, these investments could lock 
decades or centuries of additional vulnerability into new infrastructure across the country 
while neglecting opportunities to increase the resilience of communities and the economy. 
In combination, federal, provincial, territorial, Indigenous, and municipal governments 
can influence nearly all infrastructure decisions made in Canada. Their roles in setting 
infrastructure standards, funding and planning public infrastructure, regulating infra­
structure operation, regulating urban development, evaluating major industrial and 
resource development projects, and maintaining and operating infrastructure can all 
be leveraged to reduce current and future risks in infrastructure decisions. 
For example, the federal government should make climate resilience a key goal of long-
term national infrastructure strategies and infrastructure funding programs. It should 
dramatically accelerate the incorporation of climate change risks and adaptation princi­
ples into national building and infrastructure codes and standards. And it should extend 
the Climate Lens concept so that it applies to all federally funded infrastructure projects 
and requires funded infrastructure to not only be resilient but also contribute to broader 
societal resilience. 
Provincial and territorial governments should adopt similar criteria for funded public 
infrastructure projects and provincial/territorial standards. Provincial governments should 
also establish standards and regulations to ensure that climate change risks are reflected 
in provincial and municipal public infrastructure asset management. And provincial, 
territorial, Indigenous, and municipal governments should use their land-use planning 
authority to ensure that new development and infrastructure is built to avoid climate 
risk and to improve the resilience of existing communities.
3
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
70
Governments should create safety nets for the most vulnerable to make climate risk 
pricing equitable. 
More transparency, disclosure, and accounting for climate risk in markets, financial systems, 
and other venues of infrastructure decision making will create price signals that reduce 
investment in high-risk infrastructure and assets. This will have a beneficial effect in the 
long term and in the aggregate. But, if uncontrolled, the transition to an economy where 
climate change risk is priced into all transactions could create barriers to adaptation 
for communities and individuals who are already the most economically vulnerable to 
climate-related damage. For example, homeowners who are already struggling to find 
the funds to invest in home flood protection will have even less money to spend if banks 
raise mortgage rates and insurers raise property insurance premiums in flood-prone areas.
To avoid outcomes in which those who can least afford to pay are the most impacted, 
governments should ensure that economically vulnerable individuals, businesses, and 
communities that would be disproportionately and inequitably impacted by climate risk 
pricing are identified in adaptation planning. Prioritizing these groups for public invest­
ment in protective infrastructure or resources to support risk reduction actions they can 
undertake themselves will help prevent climate risk pricing from making existing inequities 
worse. All orders of government must work together to this end: the federal government 
should encourage these choices through conditions on adaptation funding, and provincial, 
territorial, Indigenous, and municipal governments should focus adaptation resources and 
investments on individuals, businesses, and communities at greatest risk without delay.
Adaptation will not always be able to eliminate the climate risks to homes, properties, and 
physical assets before risk pricing comes into broad effect. In these cases, governments 
should develop programs that allow economically vulnerable homeowners, businesses, and 
communities to access insurance and credit while long-term adaptation solutions are devel­
oped. For example, government-supported high-risk flood insurance pools—which exist in 
many countries, including the United States and United Kingdom, and are currently being 
contemplated in Canada by the federal Task Force on Flood Insurance and Relocation—can 
ensure that affected homeowners can continue to afford home insurance (PSC, 2020). The 
federal government should work with provincial, territorial, and Indigenous governments 
to identify areas and economically vulnerable groups that will require such supports. And 
all orders of government should collaborate, engaging the private sector as appropriate, in 
the creation of financially sustainable instruments to pool and share these risks at national 
or regional scales.
4
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
71
GLOSSARY
Adaptation 
Actions that reduce damage and loss from actual or expected climate 
change, while taking advantage of potential new opportunities. 
Adaptive capacity 
The strengths, attributes, and resources available to an individual, commu­
nity, society, or organization that can be used to adapt to climate change. 
Asphalt binder
An essential component of asphaltl that holds the aggregate together.
Baseline 
The state against which change is measured. A current baseline represents 
observable, present-day conditions. A future baseline is a projected future 
set of conditions excluding the driving factor of interest. Alternative inter­
pretations of the reference conditions can give rise to multiple baselines. 
Buckling 
The formation of large lateral misalignments in continuous welded rail 
track, often resulting in catastrophic derailments. One of the most fre­
quent causes of buckling is hot weather, which can weaken and distort 
the steel rails by essentially softening the tracks.
Climate
The average weather in a place over a long period of time, typically 30 
years or longer.
Climate change 
Changes in the climate of the Earth, predominantly caused by the burn­
ing of fossil fuels, which add heat-trapping gases to Earth’s atmosphere. 
It manifests as overall global warming but also in sea level rise, melting of 
previously permanent snow and ice fields, and more extreme weather. 
Climate model 
A climate simulation based on well-documented physical processes. 
Climate models, also known as general circulation models (GCMs), use 
mathematical equations to characterize how energy and matter interact 
in different parts of the ocean, atmosphere, and land. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
72
Climate projections 
A simulated response of the climate system to a scenario of future emis­
sion or concentration of greenhouse gases and aerosols, generally de­
rived using climate models. Climate projections are distinguished from 
climate predictions by their dependence on the emission, concentration, 
or radiative forcing scenario used, which is in turn based on assumptions 
concerning, for example, future socioeconomic and technological devel­
opments that may or may not be realized.
Climate-related 
hazards 
The potential occurrence of a climate-related physical event that may 
cause loss of life, injury, or damage and loss to property, infrastructure, 
service provision, and environmental resources. Due to climate change, 
frequencies of some hazards are expected to continue to increase.
Coastal flooding
Flooding of normally dry, low-lying land from an adjacent body of water. 
Typically the result of high water levels from tides and storm surges or 
from a combination of high water levels and stormy conditions in which 
waves and wind drive water onshore. Sea level rise caused by climate 
change will increase coastal flooding in the future.
Disaster 
Severe disruption of the normal functioning of a community or society 
due to hazardous physical events interacting with conditions of social 
vulnerability, leading to widespread negative human, material, economic, 
or environmental effects that require an immediate emergency response 
and may require external support for recovery. 
Electrical 
distribution 
infrastructure
The final stage of the electrical grid, which distributes electricity to 
homes, industry, and other end users. Distribution infrastructure reduces 
power to safe customer-usable levels through substation transformers.
Electrical 
transmission 
infrastructure
Infrastructure responsible for delivering generated electricity—usually 
over long distances through transmission power lines—to the distribu­
tion grid located in populated areas.
Exposure 
The presence of people; livelihoods; environmental services and resourc­
es; infrastructure; or economic, social, or cultural assets in places that 
could be adversely affected by climate change. 
Extreme weather 
The occurrence of a weather variable (such as temperature) that exceeds 
the upper or lower limit of observed values for that variable. These events 
are often short-lived and include heat waves, ice storms, heavy down­
pours, tornadoes, tropical cyclones, and floods. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
73
Flood maps
Maps that identify areas that are expected to experience periodic coastal 
or inland flooding. Flood maps or floodplain maps typically show ground 
elevation contours, the location of buildings and roads, and the horizonal 
extent of the high-water mark for one or more flood events, such as a 
100-year flood. In Canada, flood maps are typically developed by provin­
cial or municipal governments.
Floodplain 
An area of land adjacent to a river that stretches from the banks of its 
channel to the base of the enclosing valley, and which experiences flood­
ing during periods of high rainfall. Five-hundred, 100, 50, and 25-year flood­
ing events serve as a classification of statistical occurrence referring to a 0.2, 
one, two and four per cent chance of occurrence respectively in any given 
year. 
Fluvial flooding 
Occurs when the water level in a river or stream rises and overflows onto 
the surrounding banks, shores, and adjacent land. The severity of a flood 
is influenced by the amount of rainfall in the catchment area of the river 
as well as in-stream flow conditions such as ice jams or the operation of 
human-made dams.
Impacts 
Effects on natural and human systems. In this report, the term impacts 
is used to refer to the effects on natural and human systems of physical 
events, disasters, and/or climate change. 
Infrastructure gap
The difference between infrastructure investment needs and past or cur­
rent expenditures, resulting in inadequate stock of infrastructure overall, 
sparse and unequal investments in infrastructure, and unequal access to 
infrastructure services.
Inland flooding
Occurs when precipitation over land accumulates locally or runs off and 
elevates the water level in rivers, streams, and other inland water bodies. 
It can manifest as either fluvial flooding or pluvial flooding. 
Pluvial flooding 
Caused when heavy rainfall creates a flood event independent of an over­
flowing water body. It occurs when intense rain overwhelms urban drain­
age systems, causing water to flow out into streets and nearby structures, 
or when inense rain falls on surfaces that are unable to drain or absorb it, 
causing runoff to pool in low-lying areas. 
Public infrastructure
Infrastructure facilities, systems, and structures that are owned and oper­
ated by government.
Resilience 
The ability of a physical, social, or ecological system and its component 
parts to anticipate, absorb, accommodate, or recover from the effects of a 
disaster in a timely and efficient manner. 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
74
Risk 
The potential for consequences where something of value is at stake and 
where the outcome is uncertain. Risk is often represented as probability 
of the occurrence of hazardous events or trends, multiplied by the poten­
tial impacts if these events or trends occur. Risk results from the interac­
tion of vulnerability, exposure, and hazard. In this report, the term risk is 
used primarily to refer to the risks of impacts related to climate change. 
Sensitivity 
or susceptibility 
The degree to which an individual, asset, household, community, busi­
ness, or ecosystem is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by climate 
change. 
Speed orders 
Temporary speed limit reductions on trains because of dangerous con­
ditions. High heat is one of the main causes of speed orders, because it 
creates the risk of track buckling and train derailment.  
Strategic retreat 
The purposeful, coordinated relocation of people and assets away from a 
perceived or real risk. It can include buying out and removing the homes 
and buildings at greatest risk of coastal or inland flooding.
Vulnerability 
The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, 
negative effects of climate change, including climate variability and ex­
tremes.
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
75
REFERENCES
ACT (Adaptation to Climate Change Team). 2020. “Integrated Climate Action for BC Communities Initiative.” Simon 
Fraser University. https://act-adapt.org/icabcci/ 
ACT (Adaptation to Climate Change Team). 2021. “Low carbon resilience.” Simon Fraser University. https://act-adapt.org/
projects/low-carbon-resilience/ 
Ajibade, Idowu & Gordon McBean. 2014. “Climate extremes and housing rights: A political ecology of impacts, early 
warning and adaptation constraints in Lagos slum communities.” Geoforum 55 (August): 76–86.
Arsenault, Chris. 2019. “Canada’s building code is getting a climate change rewrite. Is your home ready?” CBC News, April 
11. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/canada-building-code-climate-change-resilience-1.5092732 
Atkin, Emily. 2017. “Should We Rebuild Homes in Wildfire Zones?” The New Republic, October 16. https://newrepublic.
com/article/145278/rebuild-homes-wildfire-zones 
Beck, Jason & Meimei Lin. 2020. “Impacts of sea level rise on real estate prices in coastal Georgia.” Review of Regional 
Studies 50(1): 43–52. https://doi.org/10.52324/001c.11643 
Becketti, Sean & Brock Lacy. 2016. Life’s a Beach. FREDDIE MAC ECON. & HOUSING RES. INSIGHT 6. http://www.freddie­
mac.com/fmac-resources/research/pdf/April Insight 04 26 16.pdf 
Berz, Kilian, Darwin Smith, Vinay Shandal, Warrick Lanagan, Keith Halliday, Nina Abdelmessih, Ishang Jawa, Ian Taylor, 
Helen He, Anguel Dimov, & Kate Jamieson. 2020. 15 Things to Know About Canadian Infrastructure. Boston Consulting 
Group. https://image-src.bcg.com/Images/canada-15-v9_tcm9-172433.pdf 
Bin, Okmyung & Craig E. Landry. 2013. “Changes in implicit flood risk premiums: Empirical evidence from the housing 
market.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 65(3): 361–376. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2012.12.002 
Boehlert, Brent, James E. Neumann, Jason Price, Charles Fant, Paul Chinowsky, Jacob Helman, Kenneth M. Strzepek, & 
Jacqueline Willwerth. 2021. “Costing Climate Change Impacts on Canada’s Infrastructure.” Prepared for the Canadian 
Institute for Climate Choices.
Boustan, Leah P., Matthew E. Kahn, Paul W. Rhode, & Maria Lucia Yanguas. 2017. The Effect of Natural Disasters on 
Economic Activity in US Counties: A Century of Data. National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/
papers/w23410 
Brown, Craig, Ewa Jackson, Deborah Harford, & Dan Sandink. 2021. “Cities and Towns.” In Canada in a Changing Cli­
mate: National Issues Report, eds. F. J. Warren and N. Lulham. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Bush, E. & D.S. Lemmen, eds. 2019. Canada’s Changing Climate Report. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://
changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/ 
CAA (Canadian Automobile Association). 2021. “Cost of Poor Roads in Canada: Final Report.” 
Carbon Brief. 2019. “Explainer: The high-emissions ‘RCP8.5’ global warming scenario.” https://www.carbonbrief.org/
explainer-the-high-emissions-rcp8-5-global-warming-scenario 
CCCS (Canadian Centre for Climate Services). 2021. “Canadian Centre for Climate Services.” Environment and Climate 
Change Canada. https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/climate-change/canadian-centre-cli­
mate-services.html 
CBC (Canadian Broadcast Corporation). 2019. “Quebec premier says province will cap flood compensation.” CBC News, 
April 22. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/gatineau-floods-ottawa-francois-legault-1.5106522 
CCA (Council of Canadian Academies). 2019. Canada’s top climate change risks. https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/07/Report-Canada-top-climate-change-risks.pdf 
CEA (Canadian Electricity Association). 2016. Adapting to climate change state of play and recommendations for the 
electricity sector in Canada. 
Chausson, Alexandre, Beth Turner, Dan Seddon, Nicole Chabaneix, Cécile A.J. Girardin, Valerie Kapos, Isabel Key, Dilys 
Roe, Alison Smith, Stephen Woroniecki, & Nathalie Seddon. 2020. “Mapping the effectiveness of nature-based solutions 
for climate change adaptation.” Global Change Biology 26(11): 6134–6155. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.15310 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
76
Chinowsky, Paul, Jacob Helman, Sahil Gulati, James Neumann, & Jeremy Martinich. 2019. “Impacts of climate change on 
operation of the US rail network.” Transport Policy 75: 183–191. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2017.05.007 
Chopik, Chris. 2019. “Canada’s real estate sector needs to own up to climate risks.” Corporate Knights, September 13. 
https://www.corporateknights.com/channels/climate-and-carbon/extreme-weather-impacting-real-estate-sector 
Ciscar, Juan-Carlos, James Rising, Robert E. Kopp, & Luc Feyen. 2019. “Assessing future climate change impacts in the EU 
and the USA: Insights and lessons from two continental-scale projects.” Environmental Research Letters 14(8): 84010. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab281e 
Clark, Dylan G. & Dena Coffman. 2020. “Underwater assets.” Canadian Institute for Climate Choices [blog], December 9. 
https://climatechoices.ca/underwater-assets/ 
Clark, Dylan G., Ryan Ness, Dena Coffman, & Dale Beugin. 2021. The Health Costs of Climate Change: How Canada Can 
Adapt, Prepare, and Save Lives. Canadian Institute for Climate Choices. Ottawa, ON. https://climatechoices.ca/reports/
the-health-costs-of-climate-change/ 
Claveau, Jeannine. 2020. The Canadian Housing Survey, 2018: Core Housing Need of Renter Households Living in Social 
and Affordable Housing. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
pub/75f0002m/75f0002m2020003-eng.htm 
Climate Action Tracker. 2020. Global update: Paris Agreement Turning Point. https://climateactiontracker.org/publica­
tions/global-update-paris-agreement-turning-point/ 
CN (Canadian National Railway). 2021. Canadian National 2020 Annual Report. 
Committee on Climate Change. 2017. UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017. https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2016/07/UK-CCRA-2017-Synthesis-Report-Committee-on-Climate-Change.pdf 
CP (Canadian Pacific Railway). 2021. Canadian Pacific Rail 2020 Annual Report.
Crawford, Blair. 2018. “Tornado aftermath: ‘The roof fell on us’ — Twisters leave residents awestruck and in the dark.” 
Ottawa Citizen, September 23. https://ottawacitizen.com/news/local-news/update-ottawa-tornado-cleanup 
Dachis, Benjamin. 2013. “Cars, Congestion and Costs: A New Approach to Evaluating Government Infrastructure Invest­
ment.” C.D. Howe Institute Commentary 385 (July). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2303900 
Davies, James B. 2020. 2020-3 Reforming Canada’s Disaster Assistance Programs. Department of Economics Research 
Reports, University of Western Ontario. London, Ontario. https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/economicsresrpt/834 
Delaney, Frances & Glenn Milner. 2019. The State of Climate Modeling in the Great Lakes Basin—A Synthesis in Support 
of a Workshop Held on June 27, 2019, in Ann Arbor, MI. Ontario Climate Consortium. https://climateconnections.ca/app/
uploads/2020/05/The-State-of-Climate-Modeling-in-the-Great-Lakes-Basin_Sept132019.pdf 
Deloitte. 2016. The Economic Cost of the Social Impact of Natural Disasters. Prepared for the Australian Business 
Roundtable for Disaster Resilience & Safer Communities. 
Dion, Jason, Anna Kanduth, Jeremy Moorhouse, & Dale Beugin. 2021. Canada’s Net Zero Future: Finding our way in the 
global transition. Canadian Institute for Climate Choices. Ottawa, ON. https://climatechoices.ca/wp-content/up­
loads/2021/02/Canadas-Net-Zero-Future_FINAL-2.pdf 
DMTI-Lightbox. 2020. “CanMap GIS Data for GIS Mapping Software — DMTI Spatial.” https://www.dmtispatial.com/
canmap/ 
Dolynny, Travis. 2019. “Climate change a leading factor in climbing home insurance costs.” CBC News, March 23. https://
www.cbc.ca/news/canada/london/climate-change-leads-to-higher-home-insurance-1.5065526 
Dowling, Paul. 2013. “The impact of climate change on the European energy system.” Energy Policy 60: 406–417. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.05.093 
Engineers Canada. 2016. PIEVC Engineering Protocol for Infrastructure Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation to a 
Changing Climate—Principles and Guidelines.
EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2015. Climate Change in the United States: Benefits of Global 
Action. Office of Atmospheric Programs, EPA 430-R-15-001.
EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2020. Climate Change Impacts and Risk Analysis (CIRA). https://
19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/climate-change-science/climate-change-impacts-and-risk-analysis-cira_.html 
Fant, Charles, Brent Boehlert, Kenneth Strzepek, Peter Larsen, Alisa White, Sahil Gulati, Yue Li, & Jeremy Martinich. 2020. 
“Climate change impacts and costs to U.S. electricity transmission and distribution infrastructure.” Energy 195 (March): 
116899. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.116899 
French, Clare E., Thomas D. Waite, Ben Armstrong, G. James Rubin, Charles R. Beck, & Isabel Oliver. 2019. “Impact of 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
77
repeat flooding on mental health and health-related quality of life: A cross-sectional analysis of the English National 
Study of Flooding and Health.” BMJ Open, 9(11): e031562. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2019-031562 
FSB (Financial Stability Board). 2020. The Implications of Climate Change for Financial Stability. https://www.fsb.
org/2020/11/the-implications-of-climate-change-for-financial-stability/ 
Gibson, Jamesine Rogers. 2017. Built to Last: Challenges and Opportunities for Climate-Smart Infrastructure in Califor­
nia. Union of Concerned Scientists. 
Gillingham, Kenneth, William Nordhaus, David Anthoff, Geoffrey Blanford, Valentina Bosetti, Peter Christensen, Haewon 
McJeon, & John Reilly. 2018. “Modeling uncertainty in integrated assessment of climate change: A multi-model compari­
son.” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 5(4): 791–826.
Government of British Columbia. 2019. Preliminary Strategic Climate Risk Assessment for British Columbia. Ministry of 
Environment and Climate Change Strategy. Victoria, B.C. https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/environment/cli­
mate-change/adaptation/prelim-strat-climate-risk-assessment.pdf
Government of Canada. 2019. Final Report of the Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance—Mobilizing Finance for Sustain­
able Growth. Environment and Climate Change Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Government of Canada. 2021. Budget 2021: A Recovery Plan for Jobs, Growth, and Resilience. Finance Canada. Ottawa, 
ON.
Gu, Wulong & Ryan MacDonald. 2009. The Impact of Public Infrastructure on Canadian Multifactor Productivity 
Estimates. The Canadian Productivity Review, Statistics Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Harchaoui, Tarek M., Faouzi Tarkhani, & Paul Warren. 2003. “Public Infrastructure in Canada: Where Do We Stand?” 
Insights on the Canadian Economy (November). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1427963 
Henstra, Daniel, Andrea Minano, & Jason Thistlethwaite. 2019. “Communicating disaster risk? An evaluation of the 
availability and quality of flood maps.” Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences 19(1): 313–323.
Hetherington, Erin, Sheila McDonald, Muci Wu, & Suzanne Tough. 2018. “Risk and protective factors for mental health 
and community cohesion after the 2013 Calgary flood.” Disaster medicine and public health preparedness 12(4): 
470-477.
Hino, Miyuki, & Marshall Burke. 2021. “The effect of information about climate risk on property values.” Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118(17). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2003374118 
IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada). 2020. “Insurers to pay a record $1.2 billion to Albertans recovering from Calgary 
hailstorm” [Media release]. http://www.ibc.ca/ab/resources/media-centre/media-releases/insurers-to-pay-a-record-1-2-
billion-to-albertans-recovering-from-calgary-hailstorm 
IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada) & FCM (Federation of Canadian Municipalities). 2020. Investing in Canada’s Future: 
The Cost of Climate Change Adaptation at the Local Level. https://data.fcm.ca/documents/reports/investing-in-cana­
das-future-the-cost-of-climate-adaptation.pdf 
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2020. Key World Energy Statistics 2020. https://www.iea.org/reports/key-world-ener­
gy-statistics-2020 
IESO (Independent Electricity System Operator). 2015. “On hot summer days, air conditioning accounts for roughly 
one-third of Ontario’s electricity use. Beat the heat and conserve energy this summer.” Media release. July 16. https://
www.ieso.ca/corporate-ieso/media/news-releases/2015/07/on-hot-summer-days-air-conditioning-accounts-for-roughly-
one-third-of-ontarios-electricity-use 
Indigenous Services Canada. 2021. “Remaining long-term drinking water advisories.” Government of Canada. https://
www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/1614387410146/1614387435325 
Infrastructure Canada. 2018. Investing in Canada: Canada’s Long-Term Infrastructure Plan. Government of Canada. 
Ottawa, ON. https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/site/alt-format/pdf/plan/icp-pic/IC-InvestingInCanadaPlan-ENG.pdf 
Infrastructure Canada. 2020 Climate Lens—General Guidance. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://www.
infrastructure.gc.ca/pub/other-autre/cl-occ-eng.html 
Infrastructure Canada. 2021. “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund: Program details.” Government of Canada. https://
www.infrastructure.gc.ca/dmaf-faac/details-eng.html 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2014. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of 
Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. https://
www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/  
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
78
James, T. S., Catherine Robin, Joseph Henton., & Michael Craymer. 2021. Relative Sea-Level Projections for Canada Based 
on the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report and the NAD83v70VG National Crustal Velocity Model. Geological Survey of 
Canada, Natural Resources Canada. 
JBA Risk Management. 2020. “Global Flood Maps.” https://www.jbarisk.com/flood-services/maps-and-analytics/global-
flood-maps/?web=1&wdLOR=c27066303-D89E-9A47-96E8-7CC5736061B5 
Johal, Sunil. 2019. The Case for Growing the Gas Tax Fund: A Report on the State of Municipal Finance in Canada. 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities. https://fcm.ca/en/resources/the-case-growing-the-gas-tax-fund 
Johnson, Kelsey. 2018. “Forestry industry says it lost $500 million this year due to rail delays.” iPolitics, December 3. 
https://ipolitics.ca/2018/12/03/forestry-industry-says-it-lost-500-million-this-year-due-to-rail-delays/ 
Joseph, Rebecca, & Erica Alini. 2017. “Flooding, flooding everywhere—do Canadians have insurance for it?” Global News, 
May 5. https://globalnews.ca/news/3425571/flood-insurance-canada/ 
Keys, Benjamin, & Philip Mulder. 2020. Neglected No More: Housing Markets, Mortgage Lending, and Sea Level Rise. 
National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27930 
Klima, Kelly, & M. Granger Morgan. 2015. “Ice storm frequencies in a warmer climate.” Climatic Change 133(2): 209–222. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-015-1460-9 
Kousky, Carolyn, Howard Kunreuther, Michael LaCour-Little, & Susan Wachter. 2020. “Flood Risk and the U.S. Housing 
Market.” Journal of Housing Research 29 (sup1): S3–S24. https://doi.org/10.1080/10527001.2020.1836915 
Küfeoğlu, Sinan, Samuel Prittinen, & Matti Lehtonen. 2014. “A summary of the recent extreme weather events and their 
impacts on electricity.” International Review of Electrical Engineering 9(4): 821–828. https://doi.org/10.15866/iree.v9i4.1239 
Lecomte, Eugene L., Alan W. Pang, & James W. Russell. 1998. Ice Storm ’98. Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. 
http://cip.management.dal.ca/publications/ICE%20STORM%2098.pdf 
Lewis, Jeff. 2019. “Gaps in wildfire science leave Canadian researchers fighting blind against growing risks.” The Globe 
and Mail, July 17. https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-gaps-in-wildfire-science-leave-canadian-research­
ers-fighting-blind /
Li, Charling, Sandra Banholzer, Christine Callihoo, & Guy Felio. 2019. “Seeing through a new climate lens: Canada’s policy 
approach to climate-resilient infrastructure.” Proceedings of the International Conference on Sustainable Infrastructure 
2019: Leading Resilient Communities through the 21st Century, 420–427. https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784482650.045 
Lorie, Mark, James E. Neumann, Marcus C. Sarofim, Russell Jones, Radley M. Horton, Robert E. Kopp, Charles Fant, 
Cameron Wobus, Jeremy Martinich, Megan O’Grady, & Lauren E. Gentile. 2020. “Modeling coastal flood risk and adapta­
tion response under future climate conditions.” Climate Risk Management 29: 100233. 
Mackenzie, Hugh. 2013. Canada’s Infrastructure Gap: Where It Came From and Why It Will Cost So Much To Close. 
Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives. https://www.policyalternatives.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/publications/
National%20Office/2013/01/Canada%27s%20Infrastructure%20Gap_0.pdf 
McAlpine, Steven A., & Jeremy R. Porter. 2018. “Estimating Recent Local Impacts of Sea-Level Rise on Current Real-Estate 
Losses: A Housing Market Case Study in Miami-Dade, Florida.” Population Research and Policy Review 37(6): 871–895. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11113-018-9473-5 
McMullen, Paul. 2018. “The True Cost of Outages in Canada: $12 Billion.” S&C Electric, December 12. https://www.sandc.
com/en/gridtalk/2018/december/12/the-true-cost-of-outages-in-canada/ 
Microsoft. 2019. “Microsoft Releases 12 million Canadian building footprints as Open Data.” Microsoft Bing Blogs [Media 
release], March 13. https://blogs.bing.com/maps/2019-03/microsoft-releases-12-million-canadian-building-foot­
prints-as-open-data 
Mills, Carys. 2013. “Toronto’s July flood listed as Ontario’s most costly natural disaster.” The Toronto Star, August 14. https://
www.thestar.com/business/2013/08/14/july_flood_ontarios_most_costly_natural_disaster.html 
MMM Group Limited. 2014. National Floodplain Mapping Assessment — Final Report. https://www.slideshare.net/
glennmcgillivray/national-floodplain-mapping-assessment   
Moorcraft, Bethan. 2020. “Insurers must consider climate change when tackling flood risk.” Insurance Business, Septem­
ber 11. https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/ca/news/commercial-liability/insurers-must-consider-climate-change-
when-tackling-flood-risk-233363.aspx 
Nasr, Amro, Erik Kjellström, Ivar Björnsson, Daniel Honfi, Oskar L. Ivanov, & Jonas Johansson. 2019. “Bridges in a changing 
climate: a study of the potential impacts of climate change on bridges and their possible adaptations.” Structure and 
Infrastructure Engineering 16(4): 738–749. https://doi.org/10.1080/15732479.2019.1670215
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
79
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2016. Methodology for Estimating the Value of Travel Time 
Reliability for Truck Freight System Users. The National Academies Press. Washington, DC. https://doi.org/10.17226/23547 
Navius Research. 2020. Impacts of Climate Change on Canada’s Electricity System. Prepared for the Canadian Institute 
for Climate Choices.
Neumann, James, Paul Chinowsky, Jacob Helman, Margaret Black, Charles Fant, Kenneth Strzepek, & Jeremy Martinich. 
“Climate effects on U.S. infrastructure: the economics of adaptation for rail, roads, and coastal development.” Under 
review.
NRCan (Natural Resources Canada). 2018. “The Atlas of Canada: Remote Communities Energy Database.” Government of 
Canada. https://atlas.gc.ca/rced-bdece/en/index.html 
NRCan (Natural Resources Canada). 2021. “About Electricity.” Government of Canada. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/our-natu­
ral-resources/energy-sources-distribution/electricity-infrastructure/about-electricity/7359 
Palko, Kathy G., & Donald Stanley Lemmen, eds. 2017. Climate Risks and Adaptation Practices for the Canadian Trans­
portation Sector 2016. Transport Canada, Government of Canada. 
PBO (Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer). 2016. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial 
Assistance Arrangements due to Weather Events. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/
web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf 
PCIC (Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium). 2019. “Statistically Downscaled Climate Scenarios.” University of Victoria. 
Victoria, B.C. https://www.pacificclimate.org/data/statistically-downscaled-climate-scenarios
Pfeffer, Amanda. 2017. “Sellers may want to wait a year for market to recover, agents warn flood victims.” CBC News, May 
14. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/wait-year-market-recover-ottawa-flood-1.4113966 
Posadzki, Alexandra. 2017. “Majority of Canadian homeowners not insured for flooding: experts.” The Globe and Mail, May 
8. https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/majority-of-canadian-homeowners-not-insured-for-flooding-ex­
perts/article34925679/ 
PSC (Public Safety Canada). 2020. Task Force on Flood Insurance and Relocation. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. 
https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-prvntn-mtgtn/tsk-frc-fld-en.aspx 
Rao, S. 2020. “A natural disaster and intimate partner violence: Evidence over time.” Social Science & Medicine 247: 
e112804. 
RATESDOTCA. 2021. “Climate Change has caused Ontario and Alberta home insurance rates to increase by 64 per cent 
and 140 per cent, respectively: RATESDOTCA.” Cision [Media release], June 2. https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/
climate-change-has-caused-ontario-and-alberta-home-insurance-rates-to-increase-by-64-per-cent-and-140-per-cent-
respectively-ratesdotca-813234492.html 
Resilient Analytics. 2021. “What is IPSS?” https://resilient-analytics.com/ipss 
Sawyer, Dave, Ryan Ness, Dylan G. Clark, & Dale Beugin. 2020. Tip of the Iceberg: Navigating the Known and Unknown 
Costs of Climate Change for Canada. Canadian Institute for Climate Choices.
Shaw, Gary & Neal Baumann. 2020. “2021 insurance industry outlook.” Deloitte Insights, December 3. https://www2.
deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/financial-services/financial-services-industry-outlooks/insurance-industry-out­
look.html?id=us:2em:3na:4di6304:5awa:6di:MMDDYY&pkid=1006608  
Siders, A. R. 2018. “Social justice implications of US managed retreat buyout programs.” Climatic Change 152(2): 239–257. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/S10584-018-2272-5  
Statistics Canada. 2017. “Commodity flows by mode in Canada: Canadian Freight Analysis Framework.” The Daily, May 14. 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/200514/dq200514c-eng.htm  
Statistics Canada. 2018. “Canada’s Core Public Infrastructure Survey: Roads, bridges and tunnels, 2016.” The Daily, August 
24. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/180824/dq180824a-eng.htm 
Statistics Canada. 2020a. “Detailed provincial and territorial transportation expenditures, by mode of transportation.” 
Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=2310026401  
Statistics Canada. 2020b. “Distributions of household economic accounts, wealth indicators, by characteristic, Canada, 
annual.” Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3610058901  
Statistics Canada. 2020c. “Infrastructure Statistics Hub.” Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
pub/71-607-x/71-607-x2018013-eng.htm 
Statistics Canada. 2020d. “Gross domestic product (GDP) at basic prices, by industry, provinces and territories.” Govern­
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
80
ment of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3610040201 
Statistics Canada. 2021a. “Infrastructure Economic Accounts, investment and net stock by asset, industry, and asset 
function.” Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3610060801  
Statistics Canada. 2021b. “National Balance Sheet Accounts.” Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/
tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3610058001 
Statistics Canada. 2021c. “Rail industry origin and destination of transported commodities.” Government of Canada. 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=2310006201 
Tamm, Kulli, & Christian Klose. 2019. Wildfire in Canada: Fostering Resilience through Advances in Modelling. Swiss Re 
Management Ltd. Zurich, Switzerland. https://www.swissre.com/dam/jcr:29e29c5f-9a04-44fa-91ba-465d52837b61/
Expertise_Publication_Wildfire_in_Canada_Fostering_resilience.pdf  
TCFD (Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures). 2017. Implementing the Recommendations of the Task 
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2020/10/FINAL-TCFD-An­
nex-Amended-121517.pdf 
Teufel, Bernardo, Gulilat T. Diro, Kirien Whan, Shawn M. Milrad, Dae-Il. Jeong, Ali Ganji, Oleksandr Huziy, Katja Winger, 
John R. Gyakum, Ramon de Elia, Francis W. Zwiers, & Laxmi Sushama. 2017. “Investigation of the 2013 Alberta flood from 
weather and climate perspectives.” Climate Dynamics 48: 2881–2899. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-016-3239-8 
Thistlethwaite, Jason, Andrea Minano, Daniel Henstra, & Daniel Scott. 2020. Indigenous Reserve Lands in Canada Face 
High Flood Risk. Centre for International Governance Innovation 159 (April). https://www.cigionline.org/static/docu­
ments/documents/PB%20no.159.pdf 
Thistlethwaite, Jason, Andrea Minano, Jordan A. Blake, Daniel Henstra, & Daniel Scott. 2018. “Application of re/insurance 
models to estimate increases in flood risk due to climate change.” Geoenvironmental Disasters 5(1). https://geoenviron­
mental-disasters.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40677-018-0101-9 
UN (United Nations). 2021. “For a livable climate: Net-zero commitments must be backed by credible action.” https://
www.un.org/en/climatechange/net-zero-coalition#tab3 
Waldron, Ingrid. 2021. “Environmental Racism and Climate Change: Determinants of Health in Mi’kmaw and African 
Nova Scotian Communities.” Canadian Institute for Climate Choices, July 22. https://climatechoices.ca/publications/
environmental-racism-and-climate-change/
Wesseler, Sarah. 2021. “Climate change increases renters’ risks.” Yale Climate Change Connections. https://yaleclimate­
connections.org/2021/05/climate-change-increases-renters-risks/ 
Withey, Patrick, Van A. Lantz, & Thomas O. Ochuodho. 2016. “Economic costs and impacts of climate-induced sea-level 
rise and storm surge in Canadian coastal provinces: a CGE approach.” Applied Economics 48(1): 59–71. https://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00036846.2015.1073843 
Ziolecki, Anna, Jason Thistlethwaite, Daniel Henstra, & Daniel Scott. 2020. Canadian Voices on Flood Risk: Findings from 
a National Survey About How We Should Manage an Increasingly Costly and Common Peril. Partners for Action, 
University of Waterloo. Waterloo, ON. https://uwaterloo.ca/partners-for-action/sites/ca.partners-for-action/files/uploads/
files/finalreport_nationalsurvey_sept20.pdf 
UNDER WATER: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure
81
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Authors:
Ryan Ness, Adaptation Director, Canadian Institute for 
Climate Choices
Dylan G. Clark, Senior Research Associate, Canadian 
Institute for Climate Choices
Julien Bourque, Research Associate, Canadian 
Institute for Climate Choices
Dena Coffman, Research Assistant, Canadian Institute 
for Climate Choices
Dale Beugin, Vice President Analysis and Research, 
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices
Adaptation Expert Panel Report 
Working Group: 
Jean Andrey, Dean of the Faculty of Environment, 
University of Waterloo
Alain Bourque, Executive Director, Ouranos
Bernadette Conant, Chief Executive Officer, Canadian 
Water Network
Blair Feltmate, Head, Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, Faculty of Environment, University 
of Waterloo
Brian Horton, Manager, Climate Change Research, 
Yukon University
External Reviewers:
Brian Mills, Research Scientist, Environment and 
Climate Change Canada
Roger Street, Research Associate, Environmental 
Change Institute, University of Oxford
Consultant Research Team:
Brent Boehlert, Industrial Economics, Inc.
James Neumann, Industrial Economics, Inc.
Jason Price, Industrial Economics, Inc.
Charles Fant, Industrial Economics, Inc.
Paul Chinowsky, Resilient Analytics and University of 
Colorado at Boulder
Jacob Helman, Resilient Analytics
Kenneth Strzepek, Industrial Economics, Inc. and 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Jacqueline Willwerth, Industrial Economics, Inc.
Brianne Riehl, Navius Research
Brett Zuehlke, Navius Research
Aurora Marstokk, Navius Research
Jotham Peters, Navius Research
Production Support:
Design  and  layout:  Laurie  Barnett,  Graphic  Designer 
Information  design  by  Voilà:  chezVoila.com 
Translation:  Edgar 
Cover  design:  Alex  Wittholz
Disclaimer: This report is the outcome of a collaborative 
process involving staff and Expert Panelists from 
the Canadian Institute for Climate Choices, external 
reviewers, and engaged stakeholders. It does not 
necessarily reflect the views of the individuals or 
organizations that provided input. Any potential errors 
in this report are attributable to the Institute.
Creative Commons: Published under a Creative 
Commons license by the Canadian Institute for 
Climate Choices. You are welcome to reproduce 
material in whole or part for non-commercial purposes, 
with a link to the original. Permission from copyright 
holders must be sought before any photographs are 
reproduced.
Recommended citation: 
Ness, Ryan, Dylan G. Clark, Julien Bourque, Dena 
Coffman, and Dale Beugin. 2021. Under Water: The 
Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s Infrastructure. 
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices. Ottawa, ON.
ISBN: 978-1-7779017-0-7
This project was undertaken with the financial support of:
MARKING THE WAY: 
How legislating climate milestones 
clarifies pathways to long-term goals 
11 WAYS TO MEASURE 
CLEAN GROWTH: 
Unlocking prosperity through progress 
on climate change, economic and 
social goals 
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: 
Navigating the known and unknown 
costs of climate change for Canada 
THE HEALTH COSTS 
OF CLIMATE CHANGE: 
How Canada can adapt, prepare, 
and save lives
CANADA’S NET ZERO FUTURE: 
Finding our way in the global transition 
MORE PUBLICATIONS FROM 
THE CLIMATE INSTITUTE:     
climatechoices.ca
