November 2020
UNDER ONE 
UMBRELLA: 
PRACTICAL 
APPROACHES 
FOR REDUCING 
FLOOD RISKS IN 
CANADA
Natalia Moudrak 
Dr. Blair Feltmate
SUPPORTED BY:
ABOUT THE INTACT CENTRE ON CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) 
is an applied research centre at the University of 
Waterloo. The Intact Centre was founded in 2015 with a 
gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s largest 
property and casualty insurer. The Intact Centre helps 
homeowners, communities and businesses to reduce risks 
associated with climate change and extreme weather 
events. For additional information, visit: 
www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca
ABOUT THE UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO
The University of Waterloo (UW) is Canada’s top 
innovation university. With more than 41,000 full-time and 
part-time students (Fall 2019), the university is home to 
the world’s largest co-operative education system of its 
kind. The unmatched entrepreneurial culture at UW, 
combined with its intensive focus on research, powers 
one of the top innovation hubs in the world. 
For additional information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca
ABOUT THE INTACT FINANCIAL CORPORATION 
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX: IFC) is the largest 
provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in 
Canada and a leading provider of specialty insurance 
in North America, with over CAD$11 billion in total 
annual premiums. The Company has approximately 
16,000 employees who serve more than five million 
personal, business and public sector clients through 
offices in Canada and the U.S. In Canada, Intact 
distributes insurance under the Intact Insurance brand 
through a wide network of brokers, including its wholly-
owned subsidiary BrokerLink, and directly to consumers 
through belairdirect. Frank Cowan Company, a leading 
MGA, distributes public entity insurance programs 
including risk and claims management services in 
Canada. In the U.S., Intact Insurance Specialty Solutions 
provides a range of specialty insurance products and 
services through independent agencies, regional and 
national brokers, and wholesalers and managing general 
agencies. Products are underwritten by the insurance 
company subsidiaries of Intact Insurance Group USA, 
LLC. For more information, visit: https://intactfc.com/
ABOUT THE STANDARDS COUNCIL OF CANADA 
Established in 1970 as a federal Crown corporation, 
the Standards Council of Canada (SCC) is Canada’s 
voice on standards and accreditation on the national 
and international stage. SCC works closely with a vast 
network of partners to promote the development of 
effective and efficient standards that protect the health, 
safety and well-being of Canadians while helping 
businesses prosper. As Canada’s leading accreditation 
organization, SCC creates market confidence at home 
and abroad by ensuring that conformity assessment 
bodies meet the highest national and international 
standards. SCC advances Canada’s interest on the 
international scene as a member of the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) by 
connecting thousands of people to global networks 
and resources, opening a world of possibilities for 
Canadians and businesses. For additional information, 
visit: https://www.scc.ca/ 
CITATION 
Moudrak, N. and Feltmate, B. 2020. “Under One 
Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood 
Risks in Canada.” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, 
University of Waterloo. 
	
For information about this report, contact 
Natalia Moudrak: nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca
	
DISCLAIMER 
The information in this report has, to the best of our 
knowledge, been collected and verified as conscientiously 
as possible. The Intact Centre cannot make any guarantees 
of any kind as to the completeness, accuracy, suitability or 
reliability of the data provided in the report. This report has 
been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only 
and does not constitute professional advice. You should not 
act upon the information contained in this publication without 
obtaining specific professional advice. No representation or 
warranty (express or implied) is given as to the accuracy or 
completeness of the information contained in this publication, 
and Intact Centre employees and affiliates do not accept or 
assume any liability, responsibility or duty of care for any 
consequences to you or anyone else acting, or refraining to act, 
in reliance on the information contained in this report or for 
any decision based upon it.
1
Under One Umbrella: An Overview of Canada’s Flood Risk Reduction Guidelines & Standards
Acknowledgments	
2
Executive Summary	
5
Chapter 1: 
Introduction – The Need for Improved Flood Resilience in Canada	
13
1.1 The Rising Cost of Floods in Canada	
13
Chapter 2: 
Approaches to Limiting Flood Risks at Home	
17
2.1 Engaging Residents in Home Flood Protection	
17
2.1.1 Mail Campaigns	
17
2.1.2 Home Flood Protection Check-Up Web App	
20
2.2 Scaling Up Home Flood Protection by Training Trusted Advisers	
20
2.2.1 Insurance, Mortgage and Home Inspection Professionals	
20
2.2.2 Government Employees	
22
Chapter 3: 
Approaches to Limiting Flood Risks for Commercial Real Estate	
25
Chapter 4: 
Approaches to Limiting Flood Risks in New and Existing Residential Communities	 31
4.1 Testimonials about the Utility of Guidelines and Standards for Flood
Risk-Reduction in Canada	
36
Chapter 5: 
Practical Uses of Natural Infrastructure to Enhance Flood Resilience	
41
Chapter 6: 
Factoring Climate Risk, Specifically Flooding, into Investment Decisions	
47
Chapter 7: 
Conclusions and Next Steps	
49
Definitions	
51
Endnotes	
52
TABLE OF 
CONTENTS
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
2
Scott Adams, Manager of Public Works, 
City of Charlottetown
Susan Ancel, Director, One Water Planning, EPCOR
Pascale Biron, Professor, Geography, Planning and 
Environment, Concordia University
Jody Boone, Project Engineer, Engineering & Operations, 
City of Fredericton
Peter Braid, Chief Executive Officer, Insurance Brokers 
Association of Canada
Roy Brooke, Executive Director, Municipal Natural 
Assets Initiative
Dustin Carey, Capacity Building Officer, Municipalities 
for Climate Innovation Program, Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities
Katie Caravaggio, Director, Education, 
Mortgage Professionals Canada
Remi Charron, Assistant Dean and Associate Professor, 
New York Institute of Technology
Adam Cheeseman, Director of Conservation, Nature NB
Claude Collerette, Acting Division Manager, Engineering, 
Technical Studies, Master Plans, City of Laval
Joanna Dafoe, National Director, Climate Change, 
Insurance Bureau of Canada
Angela Danyluk, Senior Sustainability Specialist, 
City of Vancouver
David Demers-Bouffard, Scientific Advisor, Landuse, 
impact assessment and climate adaptation, National Institute 
of Public Health of Québec (INSPQ)
Marc-André Demers, Project Manager, Watershed 
Organisation: Rivers Sainte-Anne, Portneuf and sector La 
Chevrotière (CAPSA)
Vanessa Delisle, Communications Advisor, Quebec 
Metropolitan Community
Stan Dueck, Chief Building Official, District of Sooke, B.C.
Philippe Dufour, Watershed Organisation: Rivers Sainte-
Anne, Portneuf and sector La Chevrotière (CAPSA)
Bert van Duin, Drainage Technical Lead, Development 
Planning, Infrastructure Planning, Water Resources, 
City of Calgary
Sharry Featherston, Executive Director, Canadian 
Association of Home and Property Inspectors
Chris Folkins, Analyst, Quinn & Partners Inc.
Geoff Fudurich, Sustainability Management Consultant, 
Quinn & Partners Inc.
Geneviève Gallerand, Managing Director, Watershed 
Organization of the Rouge, Petite Nation and Saumon Rivers
Philippe Gachon, General Manager, Intersectorial Flood 
Network of Quebec (RIISQ), University of Québec in 
Montréal (UQAM)
Jackie Hamilton, Senior Manager, Research and Policy, 
The Greenbelt Foundation
Jesse Hudecki, Manager, Conservation Finance, New 
Conservation Solutions, Nature Conservancy of Canada
Melanie Irvine, Project Geologist, Terrain Sciences and 
Geoscience Data, Geological Survey of Newfoundland and 
Labrador, Government of Newfoundland and Labrador
Ilana Judah, Architect and Student of the Institute for 
Resources, Environment and Sustainability, University of 
British Columbia
Jessica Kellerman, Senior Project Engineer, Water 
Resources, Engineering Services, Design & Construction, 
City of Waterloo
Peter Kennedy, National Director, Real Estate Practice, 
Canada, Aon
Amir Ali Khan, Manager Water Rights, Investigations, 
and Modelling Section, Water Resources Management 
Division, Department of Environment, Climate Change and 
Municipalities, Government of Newfoundland and Labrador
Kris Kolenc, Manager, Research & Sustainability, 
Real Property Association of Canada (REALPAC)
Mariève Lafontaine, Project Manager, Nature-Action 
Québec
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Intact Centre thanks Intact Financial 
Corporation and the Standards Council 
of Canada for funding the report. We also 
thank stakeholders across Canada for their 
time and advice throughout the report 
development, including:
3
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Wilma Leung, Senior Manager, Technical Research & 
Education, BC Housing
Élène Levasseur, Research Coordinator, Architecture 
without Borders in Québec
Emanuel Machado, Chief Administrative Officer and 
Chief Resiliency Officer, Town of Gibsons
David MacLeod, Senior Environmental Specialist, 
City of Toronto
Kathy Macpherson, Vice-president, Research and Policy, 
The Greenbelt Foundation
Mitch McMann, Stormwater Utility Manager, 
City of Saskatoon
Shannon Miedema, Energy & Environment Program 
Manager, Halifax Regional Municipality
Simon Mitchell, Vice-president, Resilient Habitats, 
World Wildlife Fund Canada
Robyn McMullen, Policy Planner, Growth Management, 
Integrated Planning and Public Works, City of Waterloo
Michelle Molnar, Technical Director, Municipal Natural 
Assets Initiative
Victoria Papp, Manager, Environmental Standards, Building 
Owners and Managers Association of Canada (BOMA Canada)
Stephen Penstone, Consultant, Quinn & Partners Inc.
Channa Perera, Vice-president of Policy Development, 
Canadian Electricity Association
Béatrice Pineau, Junior Engineer, Urban Infrastructure, 
EMS Engineering
Danika van Proosdij, Professor, Department of Geography 
and Environmental Studies, Saint Mary’s University
Francisca Quinn, President, Quinn & Partners Inc.
Harshan Radhakrishnan, Manager, Climate Change and 
Sustainability Initiatives, Engineers and Geoscientists British 
Columbia
Jo-Anne Rzadki, Business Development and Partnerships, 
Conservation Ontario
J.F. Sabourin, President and Director of Water Resources 
Projects, J.F. Sabourin and Associates Inc. (JFSA)
Hiran Sandanayake, Senior Engineer, Water Resources, 
City of Ottawa
Karen Savage, President, Horizon Engineering Inc.
Ron Scheckenberger, Principal, Water Resources, Wood 
Environment and Infrastructure Solutions
Angela Schmidt, Acting Engineering and Planning 
Manager, City of Saskatoon
Mark Seasons, Professor, School of Planning, Faculty of 
Environment, University of Waterloo
Jesal Shah, Manager, Dam Safety and Water Utilities, 
Water Management Branch, Ministry of Forests, Lands, 
Natural Resource Operations, and Rural Development, 
Government of British Columbia
Julie Simard, Flood Mapping Coordinator, Land Use 
Planning, Quebec Metropolitan Community
Angela Steward, Senior Planning Engineer, Integrated 
Water Management, City of Vancouver
Syzan Talo, Senior Vice-president, Guy Carpenter & 
Company, LLC
Amir Taleghani, Water Resources Engineer, Kerr Wood 
Leidal Associates Ltd.
Kendall Thiessen, Riverbank Management Engineer, 
City of Winnipeg
Jason Thistlethwaite, Associate Director, Partners for 
Action, University of Waterloo
Sarah Verret, Project Manager, Regional Environment 
Council
Antoine Verville, Network of Watershed Organizations of 
Quebec (ROBVQ)
David Viens, Natural Environment Project Coordinator, 
Regional Environment Council – National Capital Region
Jeff Walker, Program Manager, Natural Resources, 
CSA Group
Luke Westfall, Senior Consultant, Quinn & Partners Inc.
Mike Williams, Vice-president, Buildings, Rowan Williams 
Davies & Irwin Inc. (RWDI)
Robert Wilson, Director, Conservation Finance, New 
Conservation Strategies, Nature Conservancy of Canada
Michelle Xuereb, Director of Innovation, Quadrangle
Jimmy Zammar, Director, Integrated Strategy & Utilities 
Planning, Engineering Services, City of Vancouver
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
4
5
Under One Umbrella: An Overview of Canada’s Flood Risk Reduction Guidelines & Standards
To help alleviate the growing financial and social 
stresses caused by floods, Canadians have demonstrated 
leadership by developing a host of practical guidelines 
and standards designed to strengthen our individual 
and collective resilience to floods. Practical solutions 
outlined in these guidelines and standards can 
be deployed TODAY to limit and/or mitigate 
flood risks. These solutions range from simple home 
maintenance and renovations to more sophisticated 
community-planning approaches and regulations, 
business-wide activities, and infrastructure upgrades. The 
purpose of this report is to profile these solutions in a 
consolidated form — under one “umbrella” — so that 
Canadians can put them into action.
Since approximately 2010, flooding has emerged
as the costliest extreme weather disaster affecting
Canadians1, leading to increases in disaster-assistance 
payouts by federal, provincial and territorial 
governments, and in insurable and uninsurable losses. 
Additionally, the burden on the mental health of 
Canadians who have experienced losses from flooding 
is increasingly evident. 
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY
>
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
6
Experts from coast to coast participated in the 
development of the guidelines and standards for flood 
risk-reduction, contributing their knowledge of land-use
planning; professional engineering; watershed 
management; conservation practices; community 
development; homebuilding; property and casualty 
insurance, and banking. The principal support for this 
work comes from both the public and private sectors, 
including the Standards Council of Canada (SCC); 
National Research Council of Canada (NRC); Canadian 
Standards Association (CSA Group); Insurance Bureau 
of Canada (IBC); Engineers Canada; Real Property 
Association of Canada (REALPAC), and Building 
Owners and Managers Association of Canada 
(BOMA Canada). 
Collectively, Canadians now benefit from a range 
national guidelines and standards, including:
•	 Federal Flood Mapping Guidelines;
•	 Federal Climate Lens Guidelines;
•	 CSA W200: 18 Design of Bioretention Systems; 
•	 CSA W201: 18 Construction of Bioretention Systems; 
•	 CSA W204: 19 Flood resilient design for new 
residential communities;
•	 CSA W210: Prioritizing flood resilience work in 
existing residential communities (under development);
•	 CSA W211: Management Standard for Stormwater 
Systems (under development);
•	 CSA Z800: 18 Guideline on basement flood protection 
and risk reduction;
•	 CSA PLUS 4013: 19 Technical guide: development, 
interpretation and use of rainfall intensity-duration 
frequency (IDF) information: guideline for Canadian 
water resources practitioners; 
•	 Insurance Bureau of Canada / International Institute 
for Sustainable Development / Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation: Framework for assessing the 
business case for natural infrastructure investments; 
and
•	 Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation / REALPAC 
/ BOMA Canada: Flood resilience guideline for 
Canada’s commercial real estate.
As illustrated above, the technical knowledge regarding 
ways to limit Canada’s vulnerability to flooding is robust. 
However, what has been lacking – until now – is a 
summary of practical actions that stakeholders 
in Canada can undertake to materially improve 
flood resilience in their homes, businesses and 
communities. This “whole-of-society” approach, 
detailed in Table 1, is necessary to ensure that the expert 
guidance available is not overlooked by anyone who 
could act to reduce their flood risk in Canada.
The technical knowledge regarding 
ways to limit Canada’s vulnerability 
to flooding is robust.”
“
7
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Table 1: Examples of Actions to Limit Flood Risks: A “Whole of Society Approach”
STAKEHOLDERS
SUGGESTED FLOOD RISK REDUCTION ACTIONS
Residents 
(homeowners and 
tenants)
Implement no-cost or low-cost flood risk-reduction actions, including:
•	 Remove leaves and debris from roof gutters and catch basins;
•	 Extend downspout and sump pump discharge pipes >2m away from foundation walls;
•	 Install plastic covers over basement window wells;
•	 Test sump pumps and install backup power and alarm systems to ensure that the pumps are 
operational, even during power outages;
•	 Install and subsequently clean backwater valves to reduce the risk of backup flooding from 
storm and sanitary sewer surcharge;
•	 Elevate electronics off the floor and store valuables in watertight containers; and
•	 Landscape around the house to maintain a positive grade and increase permeable surfaces.
Investigate your property’s flood risk (for example, request flood-risk information from local 
governments and conservation authorities).
Take advantage of the incentive programs that may be available through local governments 
and utilities to limit your flood risk.
Learn about local flood forecasting and warning systems, and prepare an emergency plan and 
an emergency kit.
Local, regional, 
provincial 
and territorial 
governments
Provide up-to-date and future-looking flood-risk maps and property-level flood risk 
information through a free online portal, similar to the service provided by Flood Factor in the 
United States.
Adopt nationally recognized best practices for flood resilience in policy and regulations, 
land use, urban planning and in design requirements for existing and new developments (for 
example, as outlined in CSA Z800, CSA W204, CSA W210, CSA 211, CSA W200, CSA 
W201 and CSA PLUS 4013).
Distribute home flood-protection materials to residents through property-tax mailings and 
online channels (such as emails, newsletters, and social media) to encourage the use of simple 
actions to reduce the risks of basement flooding.
Collaborate with partners, such as the Canadian Red Cross, who have trained staff and 
volunteers to promote flood resilience measures with door-to-door campaigns, events and 
online learning opportunities.
Incorporate flood resilience measures into government asset-management plans and long-
term financial planning; establish funding programs to offset the costs of flood resilience 
retrofits to homeowners.
Ensure that flood forecasting and warning systems are in place and provide sufficient time to 
deploy flood-protection measures in case of a flood emergency.
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
8
STAKEHOLDERS
SUGGESTED FLOOD RISK REDUCTION ACTIONS
Federal 
government and 
agencies
Provide up-to-date and forward-looking flood-risk maps and property-level flood-risk 
information through a free online portal, similar to the service provided by Flood Factor in the 
United States.
Co-operate with other jurisdictions to assess natural infrastructure assets at the watershed 
scale, in relation to the role they play in mitigating flood risks. 
For federally supported infrastructure projects, continue to require “Climate Lens” 
assessments, including resilience assessments.
Update the National Building Code of Canada to reflect methods of reducing flood risks that 
were accepted during the development of national guidelines and standards.
Architects, 
developers, 
home builders 
and home 
renovation 
specialists
Use nationally recognized best practices for flood resilience in new home/community 
construction designs and redevelopments.
When designing new subdivisions, maximize the amount of open natural space that will be 
permanently protected.
Participate in professional training about adapting to climate change and reducing flood risks.
Insurance 
brokers
Participate in the professional training about home flood protection offered through the 
Insurance Brokers Association of Canada.
When clients are buying or renewing homeowners’ or tenants’ insurance, inform them 
about practical ways to reduce the risk of basement flooding, as well as about available flood 
insurance coverage. Some insurance companies offer discounted premiums to homeowners 
who act decisively to reduce their risks.
Mortgage 
lenders
Develop incentives to encourage home buyers and homeowners to retrofit their homes to 
be more resilient to flooding (for example, through extending green mortgage programs to 
include support for flood resilience retrofits).
Mortgage 
brokers
Participate in professional training about home flood protection offered through Mortgage 
Professionals Canada.
Educate clients who are securing or renewing mortgages about practical ways to mitigate 
flood risks at home.
Real estate 
agents
Participate in professional training about home flood protection.
Give clients information about property flood risks, and practical ways to protect their homes. 
Home 
Inspectors
Participate in professional training about home flood protection offered through the Canadian 
Association of Home and Property Inspectors and Carson Dunlop.
Include an assessment of flood risks in home-inspection reports, and educate clients about 
how to mitigate their flood risk at home.
Retailers
Engage customers in campaigns to reduce their flood risks, focusing on people who are 
undertaking home renovations.
9
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
STAKEHOLDERS
SUGGESTED FLOOD RISK REDUCTION ACTIONS
Landscaping 
professionals
Offer clients advice about landscaping practices that would help to mitigate flood risks and 
reduce stormwater runoff.
Commercial real 
estate owners 
and managers
Adopt nationally recognized best practices for flood resilience. An in-depth analysis of such 
information can be found in the report Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood Resilience 
Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate.
Educate tenants about steps they can take to minimize the potential for property damage, 
business disruptions and loss of life related to flooding.
Integrate flood resilience into commercial asset-management plans and long-term financial 
planning.
Conservation 
and watershed 
authorities
Continue to assess the role that natural infrastructure plays in reducing flood risks and 
providing economic benefits. Work with local community groups, businesses and governments 
to publicize these benefits. 
Continue to protect existing natural infrastructure assets and prioritize restoration in areas 
with the greatest potential benefit.
Continue to support local governments in managing flood and erosion hazards, and with 
flood forecasting and warning services. 
Publicly disclose existing data about flood risks, and assessments of the condition of flood-
control structures within the purview of conservation authorities. 
Environmental 
not-for-profit 
organizations
Continue to assess the role that natural infrastructure plays in reducing flood risks and 
providing economic benefits. Work with local community groups, businesses and governments 
to publicize these benefits.
Continue to protect existing natural infrastructure assets and prioritize restoration in areas 
with the greatest potential benefit.
Neighbourhood 
associations and 
local community 
groups
Educate residents about available flood-risk maps and no-cost or low-cost flood risk-reduction 
actions using door-to-door campaigns, events and online learning opportunities. Send home 
flood-protection materials to residents in the mail.
Educate residents about incentive programs that may be available through local governments 
and utilities to limit their flood risk.
Learn about local flood forecasting and warning systems and help residents prepare 
emergency plans and emergency kits.
Local utility 
companies
Distribute home flood-protection materials to residents through utility bill mailings and online 
channels such as emails, newsletters, and social media.
Engage with local businesses, as well as with owners and managers of industrial and 
commercial real estate about initiatives they can take to reduce their risk of flooding and 
related property damage. 
Develop incentives for utility customers to retrofit their properties to increase flood resilience; 
offer credits for actions that reduce stormwater runoff.
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
10
STAKEHOLDERS
SUGGESTED FLOOD RISK REDUCTION ACTIONS
Institutional 
investors
Identify the most material physical climate risks that can affect the performances of 
companies within a given industry sector. If flooding is a material risk, inquire whether 
appropriate steps have been taken to mitigate it. 
Professional 
regulatory 
bodies
Establish, monitor and enforce standards of practice for flood assessments that take into 
account the changing climate. 
Provide continuing-education opportunities to support members in offering professional 
services that consider flood risk reduction and climate adaptation best practices. 
The risk of flooding will continue to challenge Canada, 
driven by several forces: climate change that is effectively 
irreversible, aging infrastructure, and rapid urbanization 
and densification that are accelerating the loss of 
natural infrastructure. Despite this foreboding challenge, 
however, there is good news. A proliferation of data and 
technology can help us identify geographic areas at the 
greatest flood risk, and experience has given us solutions 
to mitigate these risks. 
As we head into a challenging future, one of Canada’s 
most important tasks is to apply our knowledge 
about reducing flood risks — as reflected above — 
with immediate and unremitting resolve.
One of Canada’s most 
important tasks is to apply our 
knowledge about reducing flood 
risks with immediate and 
unremitting resolve.”
“
11
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
12
13
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION – THE NEED FOR 
IMPROVED FLOOD RESILIENCE IN 
CANADA
Natural disasters and extreme weather 
events are on the rise in Canada. Driven by 
climate change, these calamities are resulting 
in ever-increasing costs to governments, 
businesses, and ultimately all Canadians.2
Over the past decade (2009-2019), flooding has emerged 
as the costliest and most pervasive type of natural 
disaster in Canada, causing many Canadians to suffer 
financial and mental distress. 
This report highlights examples of practical approaches 
that can be deployed by a wide range of stakeholders to 
limit flood-related risks in Canada. It focuses primarily 
on methods of mitigating flood risks in urban and sub-
urban settings. Further consideration will be required 
for coastal and riverine flood risks, as well as northern 
environments. Although the measures outlined here are 
expected to be relevant across Canada, their application 
will be limited in areas with permafrost, such as Yukon, 
Northwest Territories and Nunavut, and in coastal areas 
of Canada, where sea level rise, coastal erosion and 
storm surge pose additional flood risks.
1.1 The Rising Cost of 
Floods in Canada
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
the United Nations body for assessing climate science, 
projects that global warming is effectively 
irreversible and that there will be an increase in 
the frequency, intensity and duration of extreme 
weather events, causing floods, droughts and heat 
waves, throughout the 21st century.3
Canada is warming, on average, at twice the global rate, 
with annual mean temperatures increasing by 1.7 ºC 
between 1948 and 2016.4 This anthropogenic (human-
induced) change in climate has resulted in more extreme 
precipitation events, which are projected to become even 
more frequent and severe in the future.5
>
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
14
In concert with the changing climate, the costs of 
natural disasters and extreme weather events are rising. 
According to Public Safety Canada, the number of 
natural disasters for which provinces and territories 
in Canada required and obtained federal assistance, 
under the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements 
(DFAA) program, increased dramatically between 1970 
and 2015. In the six years from 2009 to 2015, DFAA’s 
compensation to provinces and territories was greater 
than that in the previous 39 years combined, with 
flooding accounting for 75 per cent of all weather-related 
expenditures. The annual expected cost of the DFAA 
program currently exceeds $900-million.
The Insurance Bureau of Canada has found that, 
since the 1980s, property and casualty (P&C) insurance 
payouts from extreme weather have more than doubled 
every five to 10 years. While P&C insurance payouts 
in Canada averaged $405-million per year from 
1983 to 2008, the next decade saw those figures 
more than double; in 11 of the 12 years leading 
up to 2020, payouts  exceeded $1-billion. 
Water-related losses were a significant driver of bigger 
payouts, accounting for more than 50 per cent of 
the increase.  The insurance gap in Canada is also 
significant: for every dollar of losses borne by insurers in 
Canada, three to four dollars are borne by governments, 
homeowners and business owners.
5.0
4.0
$CAD Billions
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2020
Loss & Loss Adjustment Expenses
Estimated Trend 
Insured Catastrophic Losses in Canada
Figure 1:	 Catastrophic insured loss payments, Canada, 1983 – 2020. Total losses are normalized for inflation 
	
($2020 CAN) and per-capita wealth accumulation, as of November 2020. Source: CatIQ, PCS, 
	
IBC Facts Book.
>
15
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
However, the heaviest financial and social burdens 
associated with flood events are borne by individual 
homeowners. In some residential areas in Canada, where 
repeated flooding has occurred, home flood insurance 
has become more expensive, or coverage is limited or 
no longer available. With limited coverage or no 
flood insurance, some homeowners bear the 
full cost of flood repairs and may be unable to 
pay for damages when the next flood strikes. 
This hardship may force people to leave their 
homes, delay mortgage payments or even default 
on mortgages, if flooding renders their homes 
uninhabitable.
“	The industry average premium for homeowner insurance 
has risen by 20 to 25 per cent over the past five years 
in Canada. More than half  of  this increase is directly 
attributable to water damage and other extreme weather 
events. The remainder is due to the increase in insured 
values.” 
– Patrick Barbeau, Senior Vice-president, Claims at 
Intact Insurance, March 2019.
Furthermore, the physical and mental health effects 
of  disasters often linger, with some people resorting 
to anti-anxiety medication, sleep aids and other 
prescription drugs for years following the events.9 
Research found that homeowners who experienced 
basement flooding were required to take an average 
of  seven days off of  work, which further exacerbated 
their financial burdens and stress.10 A research study 
conducted after the 2019 floods in Québec found that 
people affected by the floods were four to five times 
more likely to suffer from anxiety, post-traumatic 
stress and mood disorders than people who were 
not affected by floods.11
Although Canada has been working hard on 
procedures to limit the risks of flooding and 
property damage, the country is not moving fast 
enough.12 To help address this challenge, the chapters 
that follow offer a summary of immediately executable 
actions that can help protect Canadians from more 
challenging storms to come.
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
16
17
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
CHAPTER 2
To Canada’s credit, information about 
how to protect homes from flooding 
is plentiful, with many communities 
producing educational materials and/or 
issuing subsidies to encourage homeowners 
and tenants to act to reduce their risks. 
However, relatively few people (less than 
10 per cent) have taken advantage of the 
subsidy programs, even in places that have 
experienced repeated flooding in the past.13 
In an effort to reach more property owners and tenants, 
several organizations have developed programs that 
can be used to increase participation in home flood-
protection programs. Below are some examples.
2.1 Engaging 
Residents in Home 
Flood Protection 
2.1.1 Mail Campaigns
Local governments and their industry partners, as well 
as not-for-profit organizations across Canada, can use 
infographics to motivate residents to take no-cost or 
low-cost actions in and around their properties to reduce 
the risks of flooding. 
Such educational materials can be distributed to 
residents with utility bills or property tax mailings or 
through online channels (such as email, newsletters and 
>
APPROACHES TO LIMITING FLOOD 
RISKS AT HOME
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
18
social media) to encourage the uptake of simple actions 
to reduce basement flooding risks. For example, to reflect 
the most actionable measures described in the CSA 
Z800 Guideline on Basement Flood Protection and Risk 
Reduction, the Intact Centre created an infographic 
called Three Steps to Cost-Effective Home Flood 
Protection. 
Some local governments in Canada have distributed 
the infographic to their residents through property tax 
mailings (Case Study 1), followed with reminders by 
newsletter and social media. More local governments 
across Canada could adopt this approach to raise 
residents’ awareness of practical ways to mitigate flood 
risks at home. 
More than 25,000 residents received the information 
through a combination of property tax bill inserts, 
newsletters from councillors, posters in community 
centres, and hand-delivered flyers.
The infographic illustrates 15 things residents can 
do to protect their property; 10 of these are simple 
to implement, and cost either nothing or less than a 
few hundred dollars. Some examples of “no-cost” 
actions include testing sump pumps to ensure they are 
in working order; removing leaves and debris from 
catch basins, storm drains and eavestroughs to allow 
stormwater to drain; and regularly cleaning backwater 
valves. The infographic also highlights some “low-cost” 
actions, such as installing plastic covers over basement 
window wells, extending downspouts and sump pump 
discharge pipes a safe distance from the house, and 
storing valuable items in watertight containers.
The partners have found that residents are more likely 
to read the page of information — rather than dismiss 
it as junk mail — if it is distributed as part of the 
property tax mailing, and if it shows the logos of all 
the parties or businesses involved.
Antigonish County, the Town of Antigonish and 
Paqtnkek Mi’kmaw Nation have set an example that 
can be followed by other governments in Canada, as 
well as local utility companies, conservation authorities, 
neighbourhood associations and community groups.
CASE STUDY 1: 
Home Flood 
Protection Campaign 
in Nova Scotia
In June 2020, Antigonish County, 
the Town of Antigonish, and the 
Paqtnkek Mi’kmaw Nation in Nova 
Scotia collaborated to launch 
a coordinated, region-wide 
distribution of the infographic 
Three Steps to Cost-Effective 
Home Flood Protection.
19
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
STEP 1: MAINTAIN WHAT YOU’VE GOT AT LEAST TWICE PER YEAR
STEP 2: COMPLETE SIMPLE UPGRADES
STEP 3: COMPLETE MORE COMPLEX UPGRADES
THREE STEPS TO COST-EFFECTIVE HOME FLOOD PROTECTION
Complete these 3 steps to reduce your risk of flooding and lower the cost of cleanup if flooding occurs. For items 
listed under step 3 check with your municipality about any permit requirements and the availability of flood 
protection subsidies. *Applicable only in homes with basements
Remove debris from 
nearest storm drain or 
ditch & culvert 
Clean out eaves 
troughs
Check for leaks in 
plumbing, fixtures and 
appliances
Test your sump 
pump*
Clean out your back­
water valve
Do-It-Yourself 
for $0
Install window well 
covers (where fire 
escape requirements 
permit)*
Extend downspouts 
and sump discharge 
pipes at least 2m from 
foundation
Store valuables and 
hazardous materials in 
watertight containers 
& secure fuel tanks
Remove obstructions 
to floor drain 
Install and maintain 
flood alarms
Install window wells 
that sit 10-15cm above 
ground and upgrade 
to water resistant 
windows*
Disconnect downspouts, 
cap foundation drains 
and extend downspouts 
to direct water at least 
2m from foundation
Correct grading to di­
rect water at least 2m 
away from foundation
Install backwater valve
Install backup sump 
pump and battery*
Note: Not all actions will be applicable to each home. Completing these steps does not guarantee the prevention of flooding. 
Do-It-Yourself 
for Under $250
Work with a 
Contractor for 
Over $250
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
20
2.1.2 Home Flood Protection Check-Up Web App
The Home Flood Protection Check-Up web app takes a 
resident on a 10-minute journey inside and outside their 
home to assess the most common flood vulnerabilities 
and identify actions they can take to limit their flood risk. 
Created by the Intact Centre, the app is user-friendly, 
free, and contains tips and links to relevant sources 
of information. It includes questions that people can 
ask their insurance broker about flood insurance, and 
information about subsidies available for retrofitting a 
home to better protect it from flooding. 
In the spring of 2020, Green Learning Canada, a 
national not-for-profit organization that creates free 
online education programs about energy, climate change 
and the green economy, used the app to help elementary 
and high-school students better understand their 
household’s flood risk and what they could do to reduce 
it. Local governments, utility companies, conservation 
authorities, neighbourhood associations and community 
groups can also encourage their residents and customers 
to use the app.
2.2 Scaling Up Home Flood 
Protection by Training 
Trusted Advisers
2.2.1 Insurance, Mortgage and Home Inspection 
Professionals
A lack of easy-to-digest information about the risks of 
flooding is a significant barrier that may be preventing 
Canadians from maintaining and upgrading their homes 
in ways that could make them more flood-resilient. 
Research shows that residents tend to be overly optimistic 
about their exposure to flood risks,14 and that they have 
difficulty appreciating the long-term benefits of flood-
resilience investments.15
However, when a trusted adviser (such as a home 
inspector, insurance broker or mortgage specialist) 
explains flood-risk exposure and provides practical and 
actionable guidance about how to limit the risks for a 
particular property, people tend to listen and act. This 
is why industry associations — which can provide their 
members with professional training about home flood 
protection — are critical for expanding a network of 
trusted advisers who can teach Canadians about flood 
risks, and encourage them to protect themselves. 
The Intact Centre has collaborated with industry 
associations to advance efforts to reach out and educate 
Canadians about protecting their properties (Case Study 
2). Amplifying this example could help raise public 
awareness about the initiatives taking place 
across Canada to reduce flood risks to property. 
For example, it is important to engage real estate 
professionals, who act as advocates, agents and 
consultants for potential home buyers, in this effort. 
Real estate agents offer their clients local knowledge 
about homes and neighbourhoods, and should be 
encouraged to make sure that their clients are aware of 
regional and property-specific flood-related risks. In the 
United States, real estate listings already contain flood 
risk information on prominent platforms, including 
realtor.com, and agents help their clients understand 
practical ways to improve their property’s score. 
Similarly, home renovators educated about ways to 
reduce the risks of flooding can help their clients better 
assess priority retrofits that improve their home’s value 
and minimize its flood risk.
>
21
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Based on the CSA Z800 guideline, Seneca College and 
Fleming College produced a 14-week online Home 
Flood Risk Assessment Training Course that aims 
to enhance the understanding of the most common 
vulnerabilities to flooding that properties can have, 
and to correct them through home maintenance 
and retrofitting. The course is offered by Fleming 
College and is intended for home and property 
inspectors; insurance brokers and adjusters; mortgage 
professionals; engineers and planners; emergency 
managers and first responders; real estate brokers and 
agents; landscapers and home builders and renovators.
A condensed, 1.5-hour version of the course has been 
prepared for industry associations seeking to provide 
continuing-education and professional-development 
opportunities to their members about flood risk-
reduction. Currently, five industry associations are 
offering the 1.5-hour course:
•	 Insurance Brokers Association of Canada 
(IBAC): A national association representing more 
than 38,000 property and casualty (P&C) insurance 
brokers to advocate for the best interests of brokers 
and consumers.
•	 Mortgage Professionals Canada (MPC): A 
national mortgage industry association representing 
12,000 individuals and 1,000 companies, including 
mortgage brokerages, lenders, insurers and industry 
service providers.
•	 Canadian Association of Home & Property 
Inspectors (CAHPI): A national association that 
represents more than 500 professionals and whose 
mission is to promote and develop the home-
inspection profession.
•	 Carson Dunlop: An international inspection and 
training company that offers inspectors education, 
report-writing solutions, and successful inspection 
concepts. It represents more than 1,500 professionals 
in Canada.
CASE STUDY 2:
Home Flood Risk 
Assessment 
Training
In July 2018, CSA Group published 
its Guideline on Basement Flood 
Protection and Risk Reduction, 
(CSA Z800), which was the first 
national, standardized approach 
for reducing the risks of home 
flooding in Canada.
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
22
2.2.2 Government Employees
In 2017, Natural Resources Canada launched a program 
called Building Regional Adaptation Capacity and 
Expertise (BRACE). Its objective is to help communities 
and a variety of other organizations find and use 
information that can help them adapt to climate change, 
thus building resilience to the impacts of flooding and 
other climate-related challenges. The BRACE program, 
which runs to 2022, will establish priorities for building 
region-specific resilience that is informed by local 
community needs and priorities, as outlined in the 
Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and 
Climate Change. 
Every province applied for BRACE funding. In 2019, 
the Government of Prince Edward Island and the 
University of Prince Edward Island’s Climate Lab were 
awarded funding for a proposal to develop and run two 
climate-adaptation programs: (1) The “Early Career 
Adaptation Professional” program, intended to enhance 
knowledge about climate-change adaptation for new 
climate-change students and recent graduates at UPEI; 
and (2) a program to educate 350 employees of the PEI 
government about the rising risks of coastal and urban 
flooding, using the “Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation 
Training and Professional Development” course. 
The Intact Centre course will provide free resources 
about flood risk-reduction to PEI government officials 
and other interested parties, including local home 
inspectors, insurance brokers, mortgage professionals and 
community groups. The course provides a broad national 
perspective on home flood protection, and highlights 
specific resources available to support on-the-ground 
action by PEI residents. Participants who successfully 
complete its training programs will receive certificates. 
The goal is to adapt this course to each province. 
Among other projects supported through BRACE 
funding, the New Brunswick Environmental Network 
(NBEN) will promote the use of nature-based solutions, 
including natural infrastructure, for reducing flood risks 
and adapting to climate change. It will prepare a public 
inventory of existing initiatives in the province, develop 
and deliver training programs, and facilitate a regional 
community of practice to promote knowledge-sharing 
and collaboration in implementing and monitoring 
nature-based solutions. 
As natural disasters intensify over time, governments 
should also seek to deepen their expertise in flooding 
and responses to other climate-related emergencies. 
This expertise may be distributed across offices of 
planning, engineering, water and waste, public works 
and emergency management, or concentrated in an 
internal support office focusing on climate adaptation 
and resilience.
23
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
As natural disasters intensify over time, 
governments should also seek to deepen 
their expertise in flooding and responses 
to other climate-related emergencies.”
“
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
24
25
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Commercial real estate owners and 
managers are not immune to the effects 
of flooding. Apart from property damages, 
their tenants are becoming increasingly 
concerned about the potential for life loss, 
property damages and business disruptions 
associated with flood events. 
To illustrate, following the 2013 floods in Alberta, 
between 150,000 and 180,000 people could not 
access office buildings in downtown Calgary 
for approximately two weeks. This resulted in 
5.1 million lost work hours, equivalent to half a 
billion dollars in GDP loss to the province.16 
In August 2018, when a flash flood occurred in Toronto, 
two men were trapped in an elevator in a commercial 
building and nearly drowned, as the elevator was stuck 
at the basement level, nearly full of water.17
In 2019, the publication Ahead of the Storm: 
Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s 
Commercial Real Estate, included a concise list of 
flood-resilience measures (Table 2) that commercial 
real estate owners can implement to reduce their 
vulnerability to floods. These measures were developed 
by a consortium of people with a diverse range of 
flood-risk expertise, supported by the REALPAC and the 
BOMA Canada. This guidance is already being used by 
commercial real estate owners and property managers 
to inform flood-resilience assessments and retrofits 
(Case Study 3).
CHAPTER 3
APPROACHES TO LIMITING FLOOD RISKS 
FOR COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE 
>
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
26
In collaboration with Quinn & Partners and AON, 
HOOPP undertook an assessment of climate-
change risk and resilience across its global $14-billion 
commercial real estate portfolio. Completed in 2018, 
the research clarified that the main climate-related 
risk to HOOPP’s properties in Canada is flooding. 
In response to this finding, in 2019 HOOPP 
introduced flood-resilience guidelines for all its 
high-value and high-flood-risk properties, leveraging 
insights from “Ahead of the Storm: Developing 
Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial 
Real Estate.” The pension plan now has the capacity 
to understand how its properties are improving their 
climate-change resilience, and which investments in 
flood-protection pay off.18
HOOPP is also using property-level resilience 
measures to reduce exposure to climate change-related 
risks in its investment, development and 
asset-management practices.19
CASE STUDY 3:
Healthcare of 
Ontario Pension 
Plan: Climate Risk 
and Resilience 
Assessment
The Healthcare of Ontario 
Pension Plan (HOOPP) is a major 
commercial property owner that 
has investigated its exposure to 
climate-change risks and ways 
that it can use flood-resilience 
strategies to protect its assets.
HOOPP Real Estate
2019 Sustainability
Report
27
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Table 2: Key Flood-Resilience Measures for Commercial Real Estate*
PLANS AND PROCEDURES
EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 
MAJOR RETROFITS
Flood-risk assessment: Each property 
is assessed relative to its flood-risk exposure, 
and mitigation measures put in place to 
limit damages. This assessment considers 
interdependencies with local actors engaged 
in flood-risk management and emergency 
response (including local government and 
providers of transportation, electricity and 
telecommunications), and forms the basis of 
investment planning and risk mitigation efforts.
Emergency preparedness and 
response plans: Emergency 
preparedness and response plans are 
in place and include procedures to be 
followed in the event of floods, and pre-
established conditions that would trigger 
an emergency response.
Practice drills: Building operations staff 
are trained in flood-event procedures. 
Annually, practice drills are performed 
with building tenants and procedures are 
updated as required. 
Emergency funds: Dedicated funds 
are available for emergency operations, 
including floods. Designated employees 
have access to both credit cards and 
sufficient amounts of cash for emergency 
operations. 
Tenant communications: 
Communication channels are established 
with tenants and stakeholders for 
emergency situations, including flood 
events. Tenant contact details are regularly 
updated. 
Business continuity planning: Tenants are 
given information that helps them to prepare 
business-continuity plans (such as standardized 
checklists, damage-assessment forms, etc.) 
Critical equipment and supplies: 
Critical equipment and supplies are 
available on site to respond to flood 
emergencies (such as sandbags; sump 
pumps; portable generators; fuel; portable 
lights; extension cords; dehumidifiers; 
protective clothing, etc.). 
Portable flood barriers and 
sandbags: In buildings with critical 
operations, such as data centres, portable 
flood barriers and sandbags are available 
to protect the property from overland 
flooding.
Backup generation: On-site backup 
generation equipment and fuel are 
available and have the capacity to provide 
electrical power to: at least one elevator; 
all building sump pumps; potable water 
pumps; heat pumps; boilers; smoke 
evacuation fans; fire sprinkler and fire 
alarm systems; stairwell pressurization 
systems and emergency lighting equipment 
for 24 to 72 hours.
Emergency lighting: Battery-operated 
emergency lighting is available in critical 
mechanical and electrical rooms, as well 
as in emergency exit stairwells for building 
evacuations, should backup generation 
equipment malfunction. A process is in 
place to regularly test all battery-operated 
lighting and systems. 
Elevator water sensors: Elevators are 
equipped with water sensors that prevent 
them from traveling to flood-inundated 
floors of the building.
Backwater valves: Backwater valves 
are installed on storm and sanitary sewer 
pipes.
Critical equipment: Heating, ventilation 
and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment, 
switchgear and service panels, electrical 
transformers and communication systems 
are protected by being elevated above 
expected flood levels.
Server rooms: Server rooms are located 
on higher floors, preferably on a raised 
platform, with a sump pump installed at 
the lowest point. Water sensors and alarms 
are installed to detect leaks. 
High-voltage and 
telecommunications pull rooms: 
High-voltage and telecommunication pull 
rooms are waterproofed and equipped 
with drainage.
Electrical circuits: In multi-level and 
underground parkades, there is a separate 
electrical circuit for each parking level. 
Electrical panels: Electrical panels are 
equipped with WIFI-enabled breaker 
switches to allow them to be shut off 
remotely.
Building materials: Building retrofits 
below ground should consider materials 
capable of withstanding direct and 
prolonged contact with flood waters 
without sustaining significant damage, and 
which are resistant to mould.
Table continues on following page
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
28
PLANS AND PROCEDURES
EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 
Building condition assessments: 
Building inspection and maintenance 
procedures are updated to include 
preventive maintenance activities that 
reduce the risk of flooding and increase 
climate-change resilience. Results are 
integrated into building condition 
assessments.
Emergency operations centres: Space 
is designated for building operations staff 
to use as emergency operations centres. 
This space is equipped with water, non-
perishable food supplies and emergency 
kits, and is located above expected flood 
levels.
Emergency response contracts: 
Standing orders are in place with fuel 
suppliers and restoration and landscaping 
companies to provide goods and services at 
pre-arranged prices, under set terms and 
conditions, as required for flood events.
Emergency contact information: 
Contact information for risk-management 
personnel, insurance adjusters and 
insurance brokers is up-to-date 
and regularly maintained. Regular 
communication is maintained with 
local personnel involved in flood-risk 
management and emergency response.
Insurance documentation: 
Documentation required to apply for 
business-interruption insurance (such as 
financial statements, lease agreements and 
inventory counts) is updated regularly, 
backed up electronically, and stored off site.
Hazardous materials storage: 
Hazardous materials are protected from 
flooding. For example, chemicals used in 
building operations are stored in sealed 
containers or non-flammable cabinets 
located above expected flood levels). 
Where hazardous materials are stored, 
floor drains are protected from spills.
Landscaping: Green roofs, bioswales, 
rain gardens and other landscaping 
features are installed on the property to 
contain stormwater on site and minimize 
runoff.
Building automation systems: 
The building’s automation systems are 
upgraded to allow remote access and 
management. 
* 	Many measures described in this table apply to other asset classes, including 
retail, industrial and multi-unit residential buildings.
Commercial real 
estate tenants 
are becoming 
increasingly 
concerned about 
potential for life 
loss, property 
damages and 
business 
disruptions 
associated with 
flood events.” 
“
>
29
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
30
31
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
In Canada, flood risk mitigation is typically 
the responsibility of local government 
(Indigenous communities, municipalities, 
regional governments, conservation 
authorities, boards and commissions). 
Local governments plan, review and approve 
new developments, maintain stormwater 
management systems, leverage land-use 
regulations to guide developments away 
from high flood-risk areas, and facilitate the 
adoption of flood-resilient standards for the 
design of residential communities. 
A combination of these efforts helps local governments 
to limit the potential for flood damages, reduce insurable 
losses, and minimize the probability of flood-related 
lawsuits and downgraded credit ratings in the aftermath 
of a flood.
One way local governments can demonstrate due 
diligence when managing flood risks is to incorporate 
nationally recognized guidelines and standards in their 
official plans; urban-planning policies; zoning bylaws; 
climate-adaptation plans; engineering design standards 
and stormwater management guidelines.
Similarly, regional, provincial and territorial governments 
could adopt the same guidelines and standards for 
inclusion in their regulations and policies. The resulting 
agreement among different jurisdictions would help to 
streamline flood risk-reduction efforts.
The following guidelines and standards are of relevance:
•	 CSA W200-18 Design of bioretention systems; 
•	 CSA W201-18 Construction of bioretention systems;
•	 CSA W204-19 Flood resilient design of new residential 
communities;
CHAPTER 4
APPROACHES TO LIMITING FLOOD RISKS 
IN NEW AND EXISTING RESIDENTIAL 
COMMUNITIES 
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
32
•	 CSA W210: Prioritizing flood-resilience work in 
existing residential communities (under development); 
•	 CSA W211: Management Standard for Stormwater 
Systems (under development) and,
•	 CSA Z800-18 Guideline on basement flood protection 
and risk reduction;
•	 CSA PLUS 4013: 19 Technical guide: development, 
interpretation and use of rainfall intensity-duration 
frequency (IDF) information: Guideline for Canadian 
water resources practitioners.
Table 3 shows examples of flood-resilient considerations 
for designing new housing developments, referenced 
in the Intact Centre report Preventing Disaster Before 
It Strikes: Developing a Canadian Standard for Flood-
Resilient Residential Communities, which served as a 
foundation for “Flood resilient design for new residential 
communities” (CSA W204). Table 4 shows some risk-
reduction approaches for existing communities that are 
referenced in the Intact Centre report Weathering the 
Storm: Developing a Canadian Standard for Flood-
Resilient Existing Communities, which informed 
the development of the forthcoming CSA standard 
“Prioritizing flood-resilience work in existing residential 
communities” (CSA W210). In Section 4.1, testimonials 
from professionals in the field support the utility of 
guidelines and standards to inform flood risk-reduction 
activities in Canada.
Table 3: Examples of Flood Risk Reduction Approaches for New Communities
CATEGORIES
EXAMPLES OF FLOOD-RESILIENT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
General Principles
•	 Residential buildings and structures should not be located in areas where 
flood-risk assessments and local and traditional knowledge indicate a high 
exposure to risk (such as exceeding a 1 percent annual probability of a flood 
event), including erosion, debris and ice jams.
•	 Existing and future climate-change impacts should be accounted for in the 
placement, design and drainage modeling for new communities, and should 
factor into new infrastructure design, especially of bridges and culverts.
•	 Natural infrastructure features and associated flood-plain functions should 
be preserved to avoid increasing flood risks. Any discharges to natural 
infrastructure systems should not exceed their carrying capacity.
•	 Construction of new communities should not increase the risk of flooding 
and erosion elsewhere in the watershed. 
•	 After construction, the quantity of stormwater runoff should not increase, 
as compared with predevelopment conditions.
33
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Table 3: Examples of Flood Risk Reduction Approaches for New Communities
CATEGORIES
EXAMPLES OF FLOOD-RESILIENT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
Stormwater system design
•	 Major and minor stormwater systems should be planned and designed 
concurrently, taking into account pedestrian and vehicular safety during 
major storm events.
•	 Storm and sanitary sewer systems should be fully separated.
•	 In grading designs for new communities, depressed (reverse-slope) 
driveways should be avoided.
•	 Street patterns should be designed to minimize runoff flowing through 
private properties.
•	 During major storm events, the maximum depth of water flowing on local 
roads should not exceed 0.3 metres and velocity should not exceed 3 metres 
per second.
•	 Roads should be designed to channel excess water flows to a safe outlet 
during major storm events.
•	 Bridge and culvert design should consider potential high water levels and 
debris blockage.
Sanitary sewer system design*
•	 Discharges from downspouts, foundation drains and sump pumps should 
not be directed to sanitary sewers.
•	 The design of sanitary sewers should consider infiltration and inflow during 
major storms.
•	 Sanitary sewer manholes should not be located in low-lying areas. If 
low-lying areas cannot be avoided, manhole covers should be sealed to 
minimize stormwater runoff flowing into the sewer.
Wastewater pumping stations
•	 Wastewater pumping stations should be located in areas where they can be 
fully operational and accessible during major flood events.
•	 Wastewater pumping stations should be equipped with backup power 
generators and/or alternative power supplies.
•	 Wastewater pumping stations should be designed to accommodate major 
storm events even if the largest pump is out of service.
*	 Note: Please refer to Reducing the Risk of Inflow and Infiltration (I/I) in New Sewer Construction: A National Foundational 
Document for the Development of a National Standard of Canada by Barbara Robinson, Dan Sandink and David Lapp, for 
comprehensive guidance on sanitary sewer system design considerations.
>
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
34
Table 4: Examples of Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Existing Communities
CATEGORIES
EXAMPLES OF FLOOD-RESILIENT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
Riverine/Fluvial Flooding 
Occurs when water levels in 
watercourses rise and spill 
over their banks. Flooding is a 
natural river process but may be 
exacerbated by climate change, as 
well as past human intervention in 
the watershed. Riverine flooding 
is often seasonal, with contributing 
and compounding factors including 
snowmelt, spring thaw, extreme 
rainfall, ice and debris jams.
•	 Proactively maintain and replace culverts, bridges, dikes, levees, pump 
stations and other flood-control structures, and resize these structures 
during infrastructure replacement/renewal cycles to accommodate extreme 
weather event conditions.
•	 Proactively manage vegetation and maintain riparian buffer zones — 
vegetated “buffer-strips” — along watercourses, including debris removal.
•	 Flood-proof properties on flood plains through the use of elevation, 
flood-resilient materials and design, and the elevation of mechanical and 
electrical equipment, to achieve a level of tolerable flood risk as defined by 
a local, regional, or provincial/territorial authority.
•	 In high-risk areas, build community-scale structural flood mitigation works 
(such as berms and dikes) to supplement other flood-proofing measures.
•	 In areas of chronic flood concern, buy out property owners and/or relocate 
properties.
•	 Establish forecasting and warning systems that can provide sufficient 
operational lead time to deploy flood-protection measures in case of a flood 
emergency.
Overland/Pluvial Flooding
Occurs when excess stormwater 
flows over private properties, entering 
homes through their lowest openings 
(such as basement windows and 
doors) and causing damage.
•	 Proactively clear catch basins and culverts.
•	 Remove snow from critical overland flow paths before the spring thaw.
•	 Regrade lots and roadways to carry overland water away from properties, 
onto rights-of-way.
•	 Upstream of populated areas, attenuate and store stormwater and runoff 
using natural systems and grey infrastructure.
Storm/Sanitary Sewer Backup*
Occurs when the storm and/
or sanitary sewer systems are 
overloaded, causing surcharge and 
backup into basements.
•	 Install backwater valves on storm and sanitary sewer laterals.
•	 Disconnect roof leaders from storm and sanitary sewers.
•	 Seal and bolt manhole covers in low-lying areas, where stormwater 
accumulates and has a higher risk of contributing to sewer surcharge.
•	 Implement stormwater diversion projects (for example, install pipes to carry 
excess stormwater from overwhelmed areas to areas with greater capacity).
Foundation System Failures*
Occurs when foundation drainage 
systems fail and water enters 
basements though foundation 
drains or seeps through foundation 
walls.
•	 Disconnect downspouts and sump pump discharge pipes from foundation 
drains.
•	 Install sump pumps and sump pump backup power systems, equipped with 
alarms.
•	 Repair foundation cracks and install flood-damage-resistant materials in 
basements during home renovations.
•	 Install an impermeable layer of soil around homes (that is, in foundation 
backfill areas) to reduce the risk of water infiltration and seepage through 
foundation walls.
*	 Note: Please refer to the Guideline on Basement Flood Protection and Risk Reduction (CSA Z800:18) for a comprehensive list 
of best practices to address storm and sanitary sewer backup, and foundation system failure risks.
35
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
One way local governments can 
demonstrate due diligence when 
managing flood risks is to incorporate 
nationally recognized guidelines 
and standards in their official plans; 
urban-planning policies; zoning bylaws; 
climate-adaptation plans; engineering 
design standards and stormwater 
management guidelines.” 
“
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
36
4.1 Testimonials about the Utility of Guidelines and Standards for Flood Risk-Reduction in Canada
Testimonials from the City of Calgary and from EPCOR, a utility company owned by the 
City of Edmonton, illustrate the practical utility of national guidelines and standards for 
local governments as they work to reduce flood risks and manage stormwater. 
“Severe thunderstorms are a fact of  life in the City of  Edmonton. 
Often, during the summer months, rainstorms drench the city in 
short periods of  time and cause flooding issues.
	 EPCOR’s Stormwater Integrated Resource Plan (SIRP) envisions 
citizens, businesses, industry, the City of  Edmonton and EPCOR 
working together to address flooding issues to build a more flood-
resilient future. The goal of  the SIRP is to slow, move, secure, 
predict, and respond to flooding events to prevent or reduce the 
impact of  flooding.
	 SIRP, supported by the City of  Edmonton council in May 2019, 
reflects public input relative to flood-management priorities, and 
expert input on optimal flood risk-reduction approaches. SIRP 
development also leveraged best-practice guidance outlined in national 
guidelines and standards on flood resilience and climate adaptation. 
	 For example, to slow the entry of  stormwater into the drainage 
network, green infrastructure and low-impact development (LID) 
projects will be implemented at the City of  Edmonton. The 
LID projects will utilize guidance available through the CSA 
W200 and CSA W201 standards on bioretention systems 
design and construction. 
	 To move excess water safely away from areas at risk, storm 
and sanitary sewers will be separated in some areas of  the city, 
reflective of  the guidance provided in the CSA W204 standard. 
	 To secure individual properties in higher-risk areas against sewer 
backups, overland flooding and river flooding, 40,000 homeowners 
in targeted areas will be engaged to identify and implement flood-
proofing measures on their properties, including backwater-valve 
installation and repairs to reduce stormwater inflow/infiltration 
issues. These approaches are consistent with the CSA Z800 
guideline on basement flood protection and risk reduction. 
	 Lastly, parts of  the CSA 4013 standard will be utilized for 
regional storm modeling to predict and manage the movement of  
stormwater through smart sensors and technologies that integrate 
into the stormwater collection system.
	 As EPCOR and the City of  Edmonton move forward to 
implement best-in-class flood resilience approaches for the benefit 
of  citizens, businesses and industry, national guidelines and 
standards on flood risk-reduction and climate adaptation will 
continue to provide valuable insight.”
– 	Susan Ancel, Director One Water Planning, 
EPCOR, Edmonton, Alberta
37
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
“Flooding can occur at any time in the City of  Calgary. Reducing 
flood damage is a collaborative effort among the city, the provincial 
and federal governments, and Calgarians.
	 Calgary’s Flood Resilience Plan provides guidance on timely, 
cost-effective, and practical flood risk management, while respecting 
community values and staying adaptable to future uncertainties. The 
plan includes three components: (1) upstream risk mitigation, (2) 
community-level risk mitigation and (3) property-level risk mitigation.
	 The actions outlined in the plan are complemented by a range 
of  policies, zoning bylaws and building regulations that are well 
aligned with national standards and guidelines, including CSA 
Z800, CSA W200, CSA W201 and CSA W204. 
	 The City of  Calgary welcomes further effort by the Standards 
Council of  Canada and the standards development organizations 
to create standards for enhanced stormwater management and 
flood risk-reduction, and will continue providing expert [advice] on 
the relevant technical committees to advance national dialogue on 
climate resilience and adaptation.”
– Bert van Duin, Drainage Technical Lead, 
Development Planning, Infrastructure Planning, 
Water Resources, City of Calgary
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
38
Guidelines and standards help engineering firms 
and contractors carry out flood-resilience work 
more efficiently by specifying the correct design 
approaches, optimal methods of construction, and 
most appropriate materials. They reduce project risks 
and improve transparency in performance monitoring. 
The testimonial below from EMS Ingénierie, a civil 
and structural engineering firm headquartered in 
Québec, illustrates the practical value of the standard in 
informing engineering design.
“The standards “CSA W200: Design of  bioretention systems” 
and “CSA W201: Construction of  bioretention systems” 
were used in the design and construction phases of  the project 
Réaménagement de l’espace Roland-Beaudin (Redevelopment of  
the Roland-Beaudin space) in Québec City. 
	 Québec City chose this four-hectare site to implement multiple 
stormwater-management strategies to create additional relief  for 
sewer systems located downstream. Bioretention systems were 
chosen as an optimal solution to provide relief, based on their 
hydraulic performance and potential to improve water quality. 
	 The CSA W200 standard offered clear guidance to EMS 
Ingénierie when we were in the conception phase of  the project. 
It helped us chose the appropriate materials, size the system, 
determine bioretention system dimensions and select the other 
parameters for bioretention system design. 
	 A particular strength of  this standard is that it proposes a range 
of  parameter values that can be adapted, depending on the 
objectives of  the system (such as to maximize infiltration rates 
or to maximize water treatment performance). It also provides 
great information relative to the choice of  plants to consider for 
cold climates such as the climate of  Québec City. Thus, the CSA 
W200 standard makes it easier for engineers to design a well-
performing bioretention system, depending on the context it is 
implemented in.
	 However, your design won’t be worth anything if  it is poorly 
constructed. The CSA W201 standard provides a good overview 
of  the pitfalls to avoid during bioretention system construction 
that could compromise its performance. Since bioretention systems 
are somewhat new in the Québec City area, most construction 
contractors are not familiar with the required precautions while 
constructing these systems. 
	 There were delays in execution of  the Réaménagement de l’espace 
Roland-Beaudin project, leading to surface drainage into the 
bioretention system, while surrounding areas remained unpaved 
for a number of  months (during winter). Since EMS Ingénierie 
included references to the CSA W201 in our tender documents, 
the contractor responsible for bioretention system construction was 
well aware he could not build all the bioretention layers before 
the adjacent surfaces were paved, and he could hardly divert the 
stormwater elsewhere. This would have led to premature clogging 
of  the bioretention system due to the high total-suspended-solids 
content, as well as resulted in other contamination issues. The 
contractor was able to proactively address the problem, by filling 
the excavation trenches with material to protect it while all the 
remaining landscaping work was being completed, respecting all 
of  the recommendations in the CSA W201. The CSA W201 
standard truly is a step-by-step educational tool and a guide, which 
is easy to follow for the contractors. It is also a great tool for our field 
supervisors to ensure that our plans and specifications for bioretention 
systems are followed well throughout the construction cycle. Lastly, 
the standard helped us plan infiltration testing and informed the 
development of  a bioretention system monitoring program.”
– Béatrice Pineau, Junior Engineer, Urban 
Infrastructure, EMS Engineering, Québec
39
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Provincial and territorial governments in Canada 
set regulations and policies that direct flood risk-
reduction efforts at regional and local scales. They also 
provide funding for a range of water and wastewater 
infrastructure projects, including flood risk-reduction and 
disaster-mitigation projects. The following testimonial, 
from the British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Lands, 
Natural Resource Operations, and Rural Development, 
indicates the relevance of national guidelines and 
standards for ensuring efficient funding allocations in 
existing communities.
“Flooding is a common occurrence in British Columbia. The most 
common occurrences of  flooding in British Columbia, are the result 
of  freshet, heavy rain, storm surges and ice jams.
	 Fortunately, a range of  practical solutions can be deployed to reduce 
and limit risks of  flooding, including an integrated approach of:
•	 Managing land use in flood hazard areas;
•	 Managing flood-protection systems and maintaining dike safety; and
•	 Mitigating, responding to and recovering from flood emergencies.
	 Each of these measures individually contributes to the reduction of flood 
risk and damage, but the most effective strategies combine all three.
	 In order to implement suitable protection measures, and to avoid 
making a problem worse or displacing the problem to another 
jurisdiction, it is important to understand: 
•	 Type of  flood;
•	 Source of  flooding;
•	 Probability of  flooding; and
•	 Vulnerability of  assets. 
	 The CSA W210 standard will outline voluntary guidance on 
a flood-hazard and vulnerability-screening framework that local 
governments can use to prioritize flood risk-reduction work within 
existing residential neighbourhoods. 
	 We recognize that the application of  the CSA W210 standard 
will help local governments select flood resiliency initiatives in a 
transparent and cost-efficient manner and welcome this effort to 
further inform flood risk-management in British Columbia”
– Jesal Shah, Manager, Dam Safety and Water Utilities, 
Water Management Branch, Ministry of Forests, 
Lands, Natural Resource Operations, and Rural 
Development, British Columbia
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
40
41
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
There is growing evidence in Canada 
that natural infrastructure assets 
provide demonstrable and valuable 
climate-resilience benefits. 
Natural assets — intact ecosystems, including wetlands, 
forests, coastal marshes, dunes and other naturally 
occurring systems, as well as engineered systems that 
mimic natural processes — can be strong complements, 
or viable alternatives, to grey infrastructure solutions for 
flood mitigation20 and other infrastructure services 
(Case Study 4). Moreover, natural infrastructure 
assets offer additional environmental and social 
benefits that are often not attained through 
the use of only traditional, grey infrastructure 
solutions. Additional benefits (often referred to as 
“co-benefits” or “ancillary benefits”) can include 
increased biodiversity; habitat protection; carbon storage 
and sequestration; improved water and air quality; a 
reduced “heat island” effect, and aesthetic, cultural, 
recreational and health benefits.
The value of natural infrastructure can be assessed in 
dollars and cents (Case Study 4). Governments at all 
levels, conservation and watershed authorities, non-
government organizations and others working “on 
the ground” to protect environmentally sensitive lands 
should be aware that methods exist to calculate the 
economic value of natural infrastructure assets. These 
stakeholders should develop and maintain inventories 
of natural features (including their condition), assess 
the services and benefits that they provide (including 
stormwater management and flood risk-reduction) and 
include them in their overall asset-management plans, 
alongside traditional grey infrastructure.
CHAPTER 5
PRACTICAL USES OF NATURAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE 
FLOOD RESILIENCE
>
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
42
Since 2016, various groups across Canada, including 
the Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI), have 
made inventories of natural infrastructure assets and 
determined their economic contributions in a variety 
of potential future climate scenarios. The work is 
done in partnership with local governments and 
engineering firms. Efforts like these help local 
governments to understand the value of the 
ecological goods and services provided by 
natural infrastructure, and to include it as an 
asset on their books (just as they do with built 
infrastructure).
To illustrate the significance of natural assets applied 
to stormwater management and flood resilience, here 
are a few examples from the MNAI assessments:
•	 A seven-kilometre-long riverbank in the Oshawa 
Creek watershed in Ontario provides $18.9-million 
worth of stormwater conveyance benefit to nearby 
communities;
•	 Naturally occurring ponds in White Tower Park in 
Gibsons, British Columbia, provide between $3.5-million 
and $4-million in stormwater storage services;
•	 Widening and naturalizing 1,292 metres of  the 
Courtenay River riverbank in Courtenay, British 
Columbia, would provide $2.4-million worth of 
protection from flood damage to downstream properties 
affected by a one-in-200-years flood event; and
•	 Protecting four wetlands covering nearly 13,800 
square metres (1.38 hectares) in the Mill Creek 
watershed near Moncton, New Brunswick. would 
deliver $1.4-million in benefits in the event of a one-
in-100-years flood.22
Other organizations in Canada have also assessed 
the economic value of natural infrastructure, and 
documented a business case for its retention and 
maintenance over time:
•	 A restored and engineered wetland in Manitoba was 
valued at $3.7-million for reducing floods, improving 
water quality, sequestering carbon, and other 
benefits.23
•	 The ability of wetlands to manage excess rainwater 
helps to reduce flood damages in the metropolitan 
area of Québec City, and is worth $49.8-million.24
CASE STUDY 4: 
Quantifying 
the Economic 
Value of Natural 
Infrastructure Assets 
for Flood Resilience 
Benefits
Natural infrastructure assets play a role 
in climate resilience, and much of their 
financial contribution can be quantified. 
In 2016, a framework was established 
by the Insurance Bureau of Canada, the 
International Institute for Sustainable 
Development and the Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation to help assess this 
contribution, highlighting the value of 
natural assets for flood resilience.21
43
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
•	 In the National Capital Region, which contains the 
cities of Ottawa, Ontario and Gatineau, Quebec, 
urban and rural forests provide annual erosion-
control services worth an estimated $327,500 and 
more than $5.2-million respectively.25
•	 In the City of Hamilton, Ontario, a wetland 
complex that cost approximately $15.3-million 
to restore (compared with $28.5-million for an 
engineered solution) will reduce floods and provide 
recreation and other services valued at up to 
$44.2-million.26
Generally, in order of preference, the most cost-effective 
ways of using natural systems to mitigate flood losses are 
these:
(i)	 retain and maintain what you have;
(ii)	 restore what you’ve lost; and
(iii)	  build what you must.
However, despite a growing recognition of the ecological, 
economic and societal benefits of natural infrastructure, 
Canada continues to lose natural features at a rapid pace. 
Wetlands are a prime example. 
In southern Ontario, an estimated 72 per cent of 
naturally occurring wetlands have been lost to land 
conversion such as agriculture, housing development and 
mineral extraction over the past century.27 In Alberta, 
approximately 64 per cent of naturally occurring 
wetlands in settled areas no longer exist.28 In British 
Columbia, more than 70 per cent of naturally occurring 
wetlands have disappeared in the lower Fraser Valley and 
parts of Vancouver Island, and an 85-per-cent wetland 
loss has been documented in the South Okanagan.29 
Saskatchewan has lost 70 per cent of its original wetlands 
in the settled areas of the province, and as much as 90 
per cent in some areas.30 In the Montreal region, more 
than 80 per cent of the St. Lawrence wetlands present 
during the earliest days of colonization have disappeared.31
A few jurisdictions have enacted policies or laws aimed 
at wetland conservation and restoration, including the 
charging of fees for permanent wetland loss. Examples 
are The Alberta Wetland Policy 32 and in Quebec, Bill 
132, An Act Respecting the Conservation of  Wetlands and Bodies 
of  Water.33 However, most areas of Canada lack even a 
“no-net-loss” policy for wetlands. 
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
44
Furthermore, public-sector financial statements do not 
recognize natural infrastructure as a valuable asset. 
A prohibition in the “CPA Canada Public Sector 
Accounting Handbook” states:
“Purchased natural resources and 
Crown lands are recognized in 
government financial statements. 
However, when natural resources and 
Crown lands have been inherited by 
the government in right of the Crown 
and have not been purchased, they 
are not given accounting recognition 
as assets in government financial 
statements. These items are not 
recognized as assets because the 
costs, benefits and economic value of 
such items cannot be reasonably and 
verifiably quantified using existing 
methods.” 34
This exclusion includes the outdated belief that the value 
of natural infrastructure cannot be quantified. This 
results in conservative financial reporting, and means that 
users of financial statements have no way of knowing 
the extent or value of the natural infrastructure on 
public property. Without assessing and recognizing their 
value, it is impossible to know how natural assets may 
contribute to a public-sector entity’s ability to provide 
future services, or the extent of any liability should the 
natural assets become degraded and result in a failure 
to continue providing services. Users of public-sector 
financial statements also have no way to gauge changes 
in the value of these natural assets (for example, their 
deterioration over time). 
Ultimately this accounting approach creates a 
gap or failure in public-sector financial reporting, 
as important contributions to financial health 
are overlooked: the enormous fiscal benefits to 
be gained by protecting underappreciated and 
undervalued ecological goods and services, and 
the loss of economic value when natural assets are 
degraded or lost, go virtually unnoticed in Canada.35
To correct this problem, it is crucial for all levels of 
government to begin to assess the value of natural 
infrastructure assets (including those on private land) 
in partnership with NGOs, watershed groups and 
conservation authorities. These values should be 
disclosed, and where flood-resilience benefits are 
apparent, a coordinated effort should be mounted to 
conserve, restore and manage these assets.
45
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
It is critical to consider natural infrastructure at the 
watershed scale, because often, upstream conservation 
and restoration efforts govern the flood risks for 
downstream communities. An example of inter-
jurisdictional coordination for a large watershed is 
the Red River Basin Commission, which oversees the 
management of, and flood risk-reduction activities for, 
the Red River, which flows through North Dakota, South 
Dakota, Minnesota and southern Manitoba.36
Finally, it would be of strategic importance 
for Canada to develop a national standard for 
assessing the value of natural infrastructure 
assets, based on the ecosystem, economic and 
societal benefits that they provide. Such a standard 
would align Canada with international efforts to include 
nature-based solutions and natural infrastructure in 
various aspects of government planning and decision-
making.37 It would support Canada’s role as a co-chair of 
the Nature-Based Solutions Action Track, which is part 
of the Global Commission on Adaptation and is trying to 
motivate leaders “to implement large-scale, coordinated 
approaches to nature-based solutions” that can minimize 
climate-related risks and maximize economic, social, and 
environmental benefits.38
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
46
47
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
CHAPTER 6
Damages caused by worldwide flooding, 
including rising sea levels, could range 
between $14-trillion and $27-trillion (U.S.) 
annually by 2100, according to a projection 
by the UK National Oceanographic 
Centre.39 Such losses would result in a 
2.8-per-cent drop in global Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) by 2100.40 
Society’s failure to integrate the impacts of climate 
change into economic decisions puts investors, financial 
institutions, credit rating agencies, securities commissions 
and capital markets at unnecessary risk. With regard 
to climate change, institutional investors in particular 
are faced with two outstanding challenges: (1) to 
identify which extreme weather events have the highest 
probability of affecting individual industry sectors, and 
(2) to assess whether potential investment recipients have 
implemented appropriate actions to mitigate extreme 
weather risks specific to their sectors. 
To address this challenge, the Global Risk Institute, 
Scotiabank and the Intact Centre developed a 
unique framework 41 to incorporate the risks 
from the physical impacts of climate change 
and extreme weather into capital markets. The 
Climate Risk Matrix framework identifies the top one 
or two climate-related physical risks in any given sector 
that investment portfolio managers should prioritize, 
because they have the most potential to materially affect 
the performance of companies within that sector.
The top climate-related risks for each sector were 
determined with expert advice from operations officers 
or similarly experienced personnel who were best 
positioned to identify a short list of material ways that 
flooding, drought, fire, wind and other events may convey 
particular risks to companies in specific sectors.
It is established that flooding is the costliest and most 
pervasive natural disaster in Canada. The financial 
burdens on society include increases in government 
disaster-assistance spending and insurable and 
FACTORING CLIMATE RISK, 
SPECIFICALLY FLOODING, INTO 
INVESTMENT DECISIONS
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
48
uninsurable losses; unscheduled repairs to buildings 
and infrastructure; lost revenue; and damage to 
public infrastructure. Therefore, institutional investors 
should pay particular attention to whether flood risks 
are mitigated appropriately by the companies and 
communities in which they invest – that is, in line with 
the aforementioned national standards and guidelines.
This guidance is consistent with the direction 
of the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial 
Disclosures, an international panel of 32 
members from G20 countries, and with the 
Government of Canada’s Expert Panel on 
Sustainable Finance. It will help investors 
maintain fiduciary responsibility, while 
promoting sustainable business practices. 
49
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
CHAPTER 7
Canada deserves praise for having developed 
well informed, practical and cost-effective 
guidance to limit the risks to society of 
flooding and flood damage.
This guidance has benefited from the leadership of such 
organizations as the Standards Council of Canada; 
National Research Council of Canada; Canadian 
Standards Association; Insurance Bureau of Canada; 
Engineers Canada; REALPAC; BOMA Canada, and a 
diverse array of flood-mitigation experts.
Looking ahead, the challenge for Canada resides 
not in a lack of practical information about how 
to limit exposure to flood risks, but rather in the 
need to act with resolve and haste to incorporate 
existing guidelines and standards on flood-risk 
mitigation and adaptation into the design of 
new developments, and the refurbishment and 
upgrades of existing infrastructure.
Why should the public and private sectors act 
immediately to mitigate the risks of flooding? Simply put, 
it will help Canadians, and it is the only economically 
sensible thing to do:
•	 The “Build it Right” Approach Maximizes 
Return on Investment: The cost of building 
something “right” to adapt to climate change is not 
materially different than the cost of building “wrong,” 
without flood-resilience and risk-reduction measures. 
But if something is built “wrong” from the start, the 
costs of fixing it later can be substantial. Therefore, 
the “build it right” approach maximizes the return on 
investment.
•	 Benefits of Adaptation Accrue Locally: For every 
dollar invested in adaptation, benefits accrue directly to 
the local economy.
•	 Adaptation is the “Gift that Keeps on Giving”: 
Climate-adaptation activities, once in place, not only 
CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
50
help to limit the financial and social costs resulting 
from the “next flood,” but will also continue to do so 
for all floods to follow.
Whether it is viewed through a financial, social, 
environmental or political lens, the “upside” of using 
Canada’s existing guidelines and standards to reduce the 
risk of flooding is overwhelmingly positive. Steps taken 
to mitigate flood risks result in new jobs, environmental 
protection, economic stability and fewer insurance 
claims. Canada must act with urgency to mitigate flood 
risk NOW – we have the knowledge, tools and hopefully 
the collective national wisdom to do so. Time is not a 
luxury, as the risk of flooding grows in concert 
with the warming climate.
51
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Backwater valve: A device that prevents storm or 
sanitary sewage in an overloaded main sewer line from 
backing up into a basement. The valve in a home 
automatically closes if the flow from storm or sanitary 
sewage reverses and attempts to back up into a basement 
from the main sewer.
Flood Plain: An area adjacent to a coast, lake, river or 
creek that can be expected to be regularly inundated or 
covered with water. 
Flood Risk: Flood risk is a combination of the 
likelihood of occurrence of a flood event and the social 
or economic consequences of that event when it occurs. 
Flood Risk Map: A map that shows the flood hazard 
or inundation delineations, along with additional socio-
economic values, such as potential losses or property 
vulnerability levels. These maps serve to identify the 
social, economic and environmental consequences to 
communities during a potential flood event.
Flood Protection: Any combination of structural and 
non-structural improvements, additions, changes, or 
adjustments that reduce or eliminate the risk of flood 
damage to real estate, or improve real property, water 
and sanitation facilities. 
Flood-proofing: Any combination of structural or non-
structural measures that reduce or prevent flood damage 
to the structure and/or its contents.
Groundwater Seepage: Groundwater that enters 
through weeping tiles, sump pits, crawl spaces, cracks, 
cracked pipes, pores or gaps in foundation walls, or other 
openings.
Infiltration (sewer): Extraneous water from the ground 
that enters a sewer system (sanitary or storm), including 
sewers in buildings, through defective pipes, pipe joints, 
connections or manhole walls.
Inflow: Stormwater that enters sewer systems at points 
of direct connection to the systems.
Intensification: A land-use planning term to indicate 
place where existing urban lands are transformed into 
higher densities (of people and coverage).
Minor Drainage System: Storm sewers, catch basins, 
inlets, inlet control devices, street and roadway gutters, 
ditches and swales designed to convey runoff from 
frequent storms.
Major Drainage System: Streets, trunk sewers, 
channels, ponds, ditches, swales, natural streams and 
valleys that accommodate runoff, including excess runoff 
from storms over and above the capacity of the minor 
drainage system.
Runoff: The amount of water deriving from 
precipitation or snowmelt, not otherwise evaporated or 
stored, that flows across the landscape.
Stormwater: Precipitation that washes off of driveways, 
parking lots, roads, yards, rooftops and other surfaces, 
and enters a surface or subsurface collection and 
conveyance system to be discharged, typically into a 
natural water body or watercourse such as a river, a lake 
or ocean. 
Sump pump: A mechanical device located in a sump 
pit (a depression proximate to the foundation, which 
collects the foundation water), used to pump foundation 
drainage discharge and/or groundwater to the surface of 
the lot, or to a sewer lateral.
DEFINITIONS
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
52
ENDNOTES
1 	The average cost to repair a house after a basement flood event 
in Canada, including insured and uninsured losses, is $43,000.
2 	Bush, E., and D.S. Lemmen, editors (2019): “Canada’s 
Changing Climate Report.” Government of Canada. Accessed 
Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/. 
3 	Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. .2018. “Summary 
for Policymakers.” In Global Warming of  1.5°C. An IPCC Special 
Report on the impacts of  global warming of  1.5°C above pre-industrial 
levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of  
strengthening the global response to the threat of  climate change, sustainable 
development, and efforts to eradicate poverty. World Meteorological 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: 
https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/spm/. 
4 	Bush, E., and D.S. Lemmen, editors (2019): “Canada’s 
Changing Climate Report.” Government of Canada. Accessed 
Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/. 
 5	Kirchmeier-Young, Megan C. and Xuebin Zhang. 2020. 
“Human influence has intensified extreme precipitation in 
North America.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://www.pnas.org/
content/pnas/early/2020/05/26/1921628117.full.pdf. 
6 	Parliamentary Budget Officer of Canada. “Estimate of 
the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial Assistance 
Arrangements due to Weather Events.” 2016. Accessed Oct. 
26, 2020 at: http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/
Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf. 
7 	Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2019. “2019 Facts of the Property 
and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada.” Accessed Oct. 
26, 2020 at: http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/
Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf. 
8 	Canadian property insurers started to offer overland flood 
insurance in 2015, which may explain some of this increase.
9 	Zhong, S., L. Yang, S. Toloo, Z. Wang, S. Tong, X. Sun, D. 
Crompton, G. FitzGerald and C. Huang. 2018. “The long-
term physical and psychological health impacts of flooding: a 
systematic mapping.” Science of  The Total Environment 626: 165-
194. Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/abs/pii/S0048969718300494?via%3Dihub 
10 Decent, D. and B. Feltmate. 2018. “After the Flood: The Impact 
of Climate Change on Mental Health and Lost Time From 
Work.” Prepared for Manulife Canada. Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 
at: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/06/After-The-Flood.pdf 
 11 Généreux, M., A.L. Lansard, D. Maltais and P. Gachon. 2020. 
“Impacts des inondations sur la santé mentale des Québécois: 
pourquoi certains citoyens sont-ils plus affectés que d’autres?” 
Institut national de santé du Québec. Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: 
http://www.monclimatmasante.qc.ca/impacts-des-inondations-
sur-la-sante-mentale-des-quebecois 
12 Feltmate, B., N. Moudrak and K. Bakos. 2020. “Climate 
Change and the Preparedness of Canadian Provinces and 
Territories to Limit Flood Risk.” Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Lik7NyfkvBP470pbEw6mqk
odFleDHvFv/view
13 Green Communities Canada. 2019. “Ready, set, rain! 
Urban flood resilience in Ontario.” Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 
at: http://www.raincommunitysolutions.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/ReadySetRainApril2019.pdf 
14 Thistlethwaite, J., D. Henstra, C. Brown, et al. 2020. “Barriers 
to Insurance as a Flood Risk Management Tool: Evidence from 
a Survey of Property Owners.” International Journal of  Disaster 
Risk Science 11, 263–273. Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13753-020-00272-z
15 Oakley, M., S. Mohun Himmelweit, P. Leinster and M.R. 
Casado. 2020. “Protection Motivation Theory: A Proposed 
Theoretical Extension and Moving Beyond Rationality—The 
Case of Flooding.” Water 2020 12(7). Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at 
https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/12/7/1848/htm 
16 Government of Alberta. 2013. “Impact of Southern Alberta 
Flooding on Hours Worked and GDP.” Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 
at: https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/1432b50b-1935-4a24-
8920-ab0491b54a1c/resource/ab6bcab2-5382-40d8-87f5-
37c2166f2525/download/sp-commentary-09-06-13.pdf. 
17 Canadian Broadcasting Corp. 2018. “Police Rescue Two 
Men from Water-filled Elevator during Toronto Flooding.” 
Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: https://www.cbc.ca/news/%20
canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111 and Global News. 
2018. “Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood 
‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What.’ “Accessed Oct. 
24, 2020 at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-
flooding-rescueelevator/. 
18 Healthcare of Ontario Pension Plan (HOOPP) Real Estate 
2019 Sustainability Report. Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: 
https://hoopp.com/docs/default-source/investments-library/
general/2019_sustainablity_repErt.pdf. 	
19 Moudrak, N. and B. Feltmate. 2019. “Ahead of the Storm: 
Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s 
Commercial Real Estate.” Prepared for REALPAC and 
BOMA Canada. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, 
University of Waterloo. Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: https://
www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/10/Ahead-of-the-Storm-1.pdf. 
20 UK Environment Agency. 2020. “Natural flood management 
– part of the nation’s flood resilience.” Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/natural-flood-
management-part-of-the-nations-flood-resilience 
21 Moudrak, N., B. Feltmate, H. Venema and H. Osman. 
2018. “Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural 
infrastructure is an underutilized option.” Prepared for the 
Insurance Bureau of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate 
53
Under One Umbrella: Practical Approaches for Reducing Flood Risks in Canada
Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: 
https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/09/IBC_Wetlands-Report-2018_FINAL.pdf. 
22 Municipal Natural Assets Initiative. 2020. “Cohort 2 National 
Projects Overview.” Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: https://mnai.
ca/media/2020/02/MNAI-CohortSummary.pdf. 
23 Grosshans, R. E. 2014. “Cattail (Typha spp.) Biomass 
Harvesting for Nutrient Capture and Sustainable Bioenergy for 
Integrated Watershed Management.” PhD Thesis. University 
of Manitoba. Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://mspace.lib.
umanitoba.ca/bitstream/handle/1993/23564/Grosshans_
Richard.pdf?sequence=5&isAllowed=y 
24 Wood, S.L.R., J. Dupras, C. Bergevin and C. Kermagoret. 
2019. “La valeur économique des écosystèmes naturels et 
agricoles de la Communauté métropolitaine de Québec et de 
la Table de concertation régionale pour la gestion intégrée du 
Saint-Laurent.” Ouranos.
25 Dupras, J., C. L’Ecuyer-Sauvageau, Jeoffrey Auclair, J. He, and 
T. Poder. 2016. “Natural Capital: The economic value of NCC 
Green Spaces.” Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://ncc-ccn.
gc.ca/news/natural-capital-the-economic-value-of-ncc-green-
spaces-1 
26 The Greenbelt Foundation. 2019. “Investing in the Future: The 
Economic Case for Natural Infrastructure in Ontario.” Accessed 
Oct. 24, 2020 at: https://www.greenbelt.ca/economic_case.
27 Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry. 2017. 
“A Wetland Conservation Strategy for Ontario 2017-2030.” 
Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: www.ontario.ca/page/wetland-
conservation-strategy.
28 Alberta Environment and Parks. 2013. “Alberta Wetland 
Policy.” Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://www.alberta.ca/
alberta-wetland-policy.aspx
29 Brooke, R., S. Cairns, E. Machado, M. Molnar and S.J. O’Neill. 
2017. “Municipal Natural Asset Management as a Sustainable 
Infrastructure Strategy: The Emerging Evidence.” Accessed 
Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://www.greengrowthknowledge.org/
research/municipal-natural-asset-management-sustainable-
infrastructure-strategy-emerging-evidence 
30 Nature Conservancy of Canada. 2019. “Wetlands are a major 
conservation priority in Saskatchewan.” Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 
at: https://www.natureconservancy.ca/en/where-we-work/
saskatchewan/news/world-wetlands-day.html. 
31 Environment and Climate Change Canada. “Wetlands of 
the St. Lawrence River: Habitats between Land and Water.” 
Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: https://www.ec.gc.ca/stl/
default.asp?lang=En&n=4710f858-1#:~:text=It%20is%20
estimated%20that%3A,to%20urban%20development%20
and%20agriculture. 
32 Government of Alberta. 2018. Alberta Wetland Mitigation 
Directive. Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: https://open.alberta.ca/
dataset/2e6ebc5f-3172-4920-9cd5-0c472a22f0e8/resource/
dfbea0b8-df23-4ddd-8038-a51f69fbfff7/download/albertawetla
ndmitigationdirective-june-2018.pdf. 
33 Assemblée nationale du Québec. 2012. Bill 132, An Act 
respecting the conservation of wetlands and bodies of water. 
Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: http://www.assnat.qc.ca/en/
travaux-parlementaires/projets-loi/projet-loi-132-41-1.html.
34 CPA Canada. 2020. Section PS 1000, Paragraph 0.57 in 
“Financial Statement Concepts.” In CPA Canada Public Sector 
Accounting Handbook. Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: https://www.
cpacanada.ca/en/business-and-accounting-resources/cpa-
canada-handbook-the-standards-and-guidance-collection/cpa-
canada-public-sector-accounting-handbook 
35 Corporate Knights. 2020. “It’s time for our financial statements 
to reflect the vital value of nature.” Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: 
https://www.corporateknights.com/channels/natural-capital/
valuing-nature-15901362. 
36 Moudrak, N., and B. Feltmate. 2019. “Weathering the Storm: 
Developing a Canadian Standard for Flood-Resilient Existing 
Communities.” Prepared for Standards Council of Canada 
and National Research Council of Canada. Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed Oct. 24, 
2020 at: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/Weathering-the-Storm.pdf.
37 International Union for Conservation of Nature. 2020. “IUCN 
Global Standard for NbS.” Accessed Oct. 24, 2020 at: https://
www.iucn.org/theme/nature-based-solutions/resources/iucn-
global-standard-nbs.
38 Global Commission on Adaptation. 2020. “Natural 
Environment Action Track.” Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: 
https://gca.org/global-commission-on-adaptation/action-
tracks/natural-environment. 
39  Jevrejeva, S., L.P. Jackson, A. Grinsted, D. Lincke and B. 
Marzeion. “Flood damage costs under the sea level rise with 
warming of 1.5 °C and 2 °C.” Environmental Research Letters 13 (7). 
Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: 
https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aacc76 
40 As a rule, calculations of GDP do not tend to incorporate 
environmental factors.
41 Feltmate, B., N. Moudrak, K. Bakos and B. Schofield. 
2020. “Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation.” 
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University 
of Waterloo. Accessed Oct. 26, 2020 at: https://
www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2020/03/Factoring-Climate-Risk-into-Financial-
Valuation.pdf.
For further information about the report, please contact:
Natalia Moudrak
Director, Climate Resilience
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, 
University of Waterloo
EV3 4334 – 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1
E.	 nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca
T.	 226 220 4982
