RISING SEAS AND 
SHIFTING SANDS 
Joanna Eyquem P.Geo.
ENV SP. CWEM. CEnv.
December 2021
COMBINING NATURAL AND 
GREY INFRASTRUCTURE 
TO PROTECT CANADA’S 
EASTERN AND WESTERN 
COASTAL COMMUNITIES
Supported by:
2
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
About the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation 
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is an applied research centre at the University of Waterloo. The 
Intact Centre was founded in 2015 with a gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s largest property and casualty 
insurer. The Intact Centre helps homeowners, communities and businesses to reduce risks associated with climate change and 
extreme weather events.  For additional information, visit: www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca
About the University of Waterloo 
The University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation university. With more than 42,000 full and part-time students (Fall 
2020), the university is home to the world’s largest co-operative education system of its kind. The university’s unmatched 
entrepreneurial culture, combined with an intensive focus on research, powers one of the top innovation hubs in the world. 
For additional information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca
About the Standards Council of Canada
Established in 1970 as a federal Crown corporation, the Standards Council of Canada (SCC) is Canada’s voice on standards 
and accreditation on the national and international stage. SCC works closely with a vast network of partners to promote 
the development of effective and efficient standards that protect the health, safety and well-being of Canadians while 
helping businesses prosper. As Canada’s leading accreditation organization, SCC creates market confidence at home and 
abroad by ensuring that conformity assessment bodies meet the highest national and international standards. SCC advances 
Canada’s interest on the international scene as a member of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) by connecting thousands of people to global networks and resources, 
opening a world of possibilities for Canadians and businesses. For additional information, visit www.scc-ccn.ca
About the National Reseach Council of Canada
The National Research Council Canada (NRC) is the Government of Canada’s premier organization for research and 
development. The NRC partners with Canadian industry to take research impacts from the lab to the marketplace, where 
people can experience the benefits. This market-driven focus delivers innovation faster, enhances peoples’ lives and addresses 
some of the world’s most pressing problems. For additional information, visit: nrc.canada.ca
About the Intact Financial Corporation 
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX: IFC) is the largest provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in Canada, a 
leading provider of global specialty insurance, and, with RSA, a leader in the U.K. and Ireland. Our business has grown 
organically and through acquisitions to over $20 billion of total annual premiums. In Canada, Intact distributes insurance 
under the Intact Insurance brand through a wide network of brokers, including its wholly-owned subsidiary BrokerLink, 
and directly to consumers through belairdirect. Intact also provides affinity insurance solutions through the Johnson Affinity 
Groups. In the U.S., Intact Insurance Specialty Solutions provides a range of specialty insurance products and services 
through independent agencies, regional and national brokers, and wholesalers and managing general agencies. Outside of 
North America, the Company provides personal, commercial and specialty insurance solutions across the U.K., Ireland, 
Europe and the Middle East through the RSA brands. For additional information, visit: https://intactfc.com/  
Citation 
Eyquem, J. L. 2021. Rising Tides and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s 
Coastal Communities. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo.
For information about this report, contact Joanna Eyquem: joanna.eyquem@uwaterloo.ca 
Disclaimer 
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible. The Intact Centre 
cannot make any guarantees of any kind, as to the completeness, accuracy, suitability or reliability of the data provided in the report. This 
report has been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only and does not constitute professional advice. You should not act 
upon the information contained in this publication without obtaining specific professional advice. No representation or warranty (express 
or implied) is given as to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this publication, and Intact Centre employees and 
affiliates do not accept or assume any liability, responsibility, or duty of care for any consequences to you or anyone else acting, or refraining 
to act, in reliance on the information contained in this report or for any decision based upon it. 
3
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Table of Contents
Executive Summary	
6
1. Canada’s Coastline in a Changing Climate	
10
1.1 Canada’s Coastal Population
13
1.2 Coastal Hazards in a Changing Climate
14
1.3 Coastal Ecosystems 
17
2. Coastal Risk Management Around the World 	
21
2.1 International Coastal Adaptation Responses and Trends
22
2.2 Country-Based Case Studies 
24
3. Coastal Protection in Canada	
30
3.1 Classification of Measures
31
3.2 Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages 
	
and Disadvantages
32
3.3 Canadian Case Studies
43
4. Scaling-Up Use of Coastal Protection Measures that Work with Nature	
49
4.1 Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
51
4.2 Improving Performance Monitoring to Demonstrate Benefits of 
	
Nature-based Solutions
59
4.3 Building Capacity to Deliver by Engaging the Private Sector
63
5. Conclusions and Next Steps	
66
Appendix A: Practical Examples of Coastal Protection Measures Utilized 
in Canada 	
69
Appendix B: Online Workshops – Overview and Outputs	
81
References	
87
4
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Acknowledgements
We thank stakeholders across Canada for their contributions, advice, and participation in workshops that informed 
the development of the report, including:
Enda Murphy, P.Eng.; Senior Research Engineer, Ocean, Coastal and River Engineering, National Research 
Council Canada
Adrienne Yuen, Sector Specialist, Climate Resilience and Sustainability, Standards Council of Canada 
Scott Adams, P.Eng.; Manager of Public Works, City of Charlottetown
Trevor Andrews, Aquatics Specialist, Vancouver Fraser Port Authority
Marianne Armstrong, Initiative Leader, Climate Resilient Built Environment Initiative, National Research 
Council of Canada
Matthew Armstrong, P.Eng.; Coastal Engineer, Baird and Associates
Rowland Atkins, P.Geo.; Self-employed (formerly Golder)
Christopher Benosky, PE., CFM.; Vice President, AECOM
Jason Bernier, P.Eng. PMP.; Vice President, Earth & Environment, CBCL Limited
DG Blair, Executive Director, Stewardship Centre for BC
Ursule Boyer-Villemaire, Project Manager, Adaptation, flood and natural & climate risks management, Ouranos
Jan Brownridge, Vice President Western Region Munich Reinsurance Company of Canada, Munich Re Canada
Alex Brunton, Ph.D.; Coastal and River Environmental, Baird and Associates
Robert Capozi, Director, Climate Change Adaptation, Climate Change Secretariat, Department of 
Environment and Local Government, Government of New Brunswick
Bridget Carle, Vice President | Public Sector Solutions, Swiss Re
Adam Cheeseman, Director of Conservation, Nature NB,  
Charmaine Chiu, Intern, Climate Action Planning, Engineers and Geoscientists BC
Angela Danyluk, Senior Sustainability Specialist, City of Vancouver
Michael Davies Ph.D.; P.Eng.; President, Coldwater Consulting Ltd.
Tjasa Demsar, Climate Adaptation Coordinator, City of Surrey
Cheryl Evans, Director, Home Flood & Fire Protection, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Blair Feltmate, Ph.D.; Head, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Raelene Fewer, Director of Research and Development, Helping Nature Heal Inc.
Lisa-Marie Gagnon, urbaniste; Project Manager, Ville de Percé
Kevin Gallant, P.Eng.; Engineer / Researcher, Anqotum Resource Management
Shilo Gempton, MCIP., LPP.; Planner, Regional Planning, Planning & Development, Halifax Regional 
Municipality
Cherie Grey, Global Lead, Sustainability & Market Development, Swiss Re
Frédéric Haché, Chargé de projet en développement durable, Valorès
Mitchell Hahn, Inspector of Dikes / Head Flood Safety Section (BC), Government of British Columbia
Robin Hawker, RPP., MCIP.; Climate Resilience Associate, Integral Group (formerly Kerr Wood Leidal 
Associates Ltd)
Cindie Hébert, Ph.D., P.Eng.; Professor of Engineering, University of Moncton
Debra Hickey, Project Engineer, Parks Canada
5
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Thomas James, Ph.D.; Research Scientist, Natural Resources Canada and School of Earth and Ocean 
Sciences, University of Victoria
Amir Ali Khan, Ph.D., P.Eng.; Manager, Water Rights, Investigations, and Modelling Section, Water 
Resources, Department of Municipal Affairs and Environment, Newfoundland and Labrador
Danker Kolijn, P.Eng.; Senior Coastal Engineer & Project Manager, DHI (formerly CBCL Limited)
Vincent Lambert-Song, BRACE Project Coordinator, New Brunswick Environmental Network
Jeannie Lee, P.Eng.; Flood Management Engineer, City of Vancouver
Sean Lee, P.Eng.; Assistant Director of Engineering & Operations, City of Fredericton
Taylor Legere, Manager, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Kelly Loch, Green Shores Projects Coordinator, Stewardship Centre for BC
Vanessa Lueck, JD, Ph.D.; Researcher-in-Residence Coastal Adaptation, Living with Water, Pacific Institute 
for Climate Solutions
Tamsin Lyle, P.Eng.; Principal, Ebbwater Consulting
Jordan Matthieu, P.Eng.; Project Manager - Coastal Engineering, WSP
Keyvan Mahlujy, P.Eng.; Senior Principal Coastal Engineer, Golder 
Bernard McDonell, Flood Specialist, Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations, 
Government of British Columbia
Reid McLean, GIS Data Analyst, Government of New Brunswick
Caroline Metz, Manager Director, Economics and Resiliency, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation 
Shannon Miedema, Energy & Environment Program Manager, Planning & Development, Halifax Regional 
Municipality
Michelle Molnar, Technical Director, Municipal Natural Assets Initiative
Eric Morris, P.Eng.; Senior Coastal Engineer, Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd
Natalia Moudrak, Managing Director, Climate Resiliency Leader, Public Sector Partnership, Aon
Marina Moudrak, Researcher, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Charlotte Olson, P.Geo., PMP.; Manager, Infrastructure Habitat Development, Port of Vancouver
Phil Osborne, Ph.D., P.Geo.; Principal, Senior Coastal Geomorphologist, Golder 
Matt Osler, P.Eng.; Senior Project Engineer, City of Surrey
Qi (Vivian) Peng, Junior Planner, Southwest New Brunswick Service Commission
Harshan Radhakrishnan, P.Eng.; Manager, Climate Change and Sustainability Initiatives, Engineers and 
Geoscientists BC
Lewnanny Richardson, Species at Risk Program Director, Nature NB
Jean-François Rolland, FCSLA.; Project Director, AECOM 
Sybil Seitzinger, Ph.D.; Executive Director, Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions
Al Souid, PhD., PE., CFM.; Associate – Water Resources, Environment & Infrastructure, Wood 
Amir Taleghani, P.Eng.; Senior Flood & Drainage Planning Engineer, City of Vancouver (formerly Kerr Wood 
Leidal Associates Ltd)
Danika Van Proosdij, Ph.D.; Chair of Geography, Faculty of Arts, Geography and Environmental Studies, 
Saint Mary’s University
Sarah Van Veen, Former Co-op Student, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Derek Williamson, Coastal Engineer, Baird & Associates
Régis Xhardé, Ph.D.; Oceanographer, Water, Tetra Tech
Queenie Yip, P.Eng.; Senior Flood Safety Engineer, Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resources and Rural 
Development, Gov of BC
6
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Executive 
Summary
Victoria, British Columbia
7
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Coastal flooding and erosion are a direct threat 
to the health and safety of people living in 
coastal communities, and cause damage to 
local infrastructure and property. The majority 
of Canada’s coastal population are located 
along the East (Atlantic) and West (Pacific) 
coastlines, where sea levels are rising due to 
effectively irreversible climate change.1 Action 
is required NOW to manage the growing risks 
to coastal communities. 
This report describes how Canada can scale-up the use of nature-based solutions, in tandem 
with grey infrastructure, to protect communities along the East and West coastlines.
Importantly, action must consider natural processes along the coast to a greater extent than 
has occurred to date. Reduction of flooding and erosion at one site, if not carefully designed, 
can cause instability further along the coast and degradation of coastal ecosystems on which 
communities depend. 
Canada does not yet have a strategic planning framework or standard classification of 
approaches for coastal risk management. Coastal risk management responses identified by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) include Protection, Accommodation, 
Retreat and Avoidance, as well as non-intervention.2 A suite of options should be appraised 
to select appropriate approaches along Canada’s East and West coasts.
Coastal protection measures can be divided into two key categories:
•	 Grey Infrastructure: hard, engineered coastal protection measures, and;
•	 Nature-Based Solutions: measures that depend on, or mimic, natural systems to 
manage flood and erosion risk,3 that may be a) predominantly sediment-based, such 
as adding sediment to beaches through beach nourishment, or b) predominantly 
vegetation-based, such as saltmarsh restoration.
Table 1 presents an overview of different coastal protection measures utilized in Canada 
according to the above classification. Each of the measures has associated advantages and 
Executive Summary
8
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
disadvantages, and different measures can be combined to fulfill multiple objectives within 
coastal communities. 
Table 1: Overview of coastal protection measures utilized in Canada
Grey Infrastructure
Underutilized Nature-Based Solutions
Predominantly 
sediment-based
Predominantly 
vegetation-based
•	 Seawalls
•	 Detached / Nearshore Breakwaters
•	 Attached Breakwaters / Headlands
•	 Submerged Breakwaters / Reefs
•	 Permeable Revetments*
•	 Impermeable Revetments* / 
Retaining Walls
•	 Groynes
•	 Storm Surge Barriers / Tidal Sluices
•	 Sea Dikes / Embankments / Levees 
•	 Dynamic Revetment* / Cobble Berm
•	 Submerged Sills / Perched Beach
•	 Beach Nourishment
•	 Island Restoration or Enhancement
•	 Dune Restoration or Stabilization
•	 Cliff Stabilization / Revegetation
•	 Salt Marsh and Coastal Wetland 
Restoration
•	 Submerged Aquatic Vegetation
•	 Bioengineering - Coir Rolls (made of 
coconut fibre)
•	 Bioengineering - Natural Fibre Blankets
* Revetments are sloped coastal treatments used to protect the coastline.
Nature-based solutions, in particular, have a vital role to play in managing 
coastal flood and erosion risk in Canada. International experience and guidance 
demonstrate that these measures not only provide protection against coastal flooding 
and erosion, they also deliver multiple benefits, including improved biodiversity, carbon 
sequestration and storage, enhanced wellbeing and opportunities for recreational activities. 
Three courses of action are recommended to scale-up the use of nature-based solutions for 
coastal protection in Canada:
1.	 Develop national standards to support consistent evaluation of the 
benefits of nature-based solutions when comparing infrastructure 
options, including for coastal protection. This should include minimum 
requirements, regional-specific standards, engagement with Indigenous people and 
recommended methodologies for reflecting the financial value of benefits provided 
by nature-based solutions. 
2.	 Develop national monitoring standards for coastal protection 
measures, focused on nature-based solutions. This should include 
Executive Summary
9
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
consideration of minimum monitoring requirements, as well as how monitoring 
should be tailored to document performance against project-specific objectives. 
Funding for long-term monitoring and engagement with Indigenous people could 
be considered as minimum monitoring requirements.
3.	 Build capacity to finance and deliver nature-based solutions by 
engaging the private sector. Public-private partnerships can potentially assist 
in financing, delivering, monitoring, and maintaining nature-based solutions. The 
insurance industry can also assist in managing construction risks and offering 
innovative insurance products that provide funds to restore natural features 
protecting the coastline, should they be damaged during extreme events.
The outcomes of these actions will help governments and other organizations make robust 
management decisions regarding coastal flooding and erosion along Canada’s East and 
West coastlines.
Perhaps the greatest challenge in Canada, and globally, in preparing for climate change and 
sea-level rise along the coast, is a limited sense of urgency to act. For around the past 6,000 
years, global sea-level has remained relatively steady.4 This makes the recent, comparably rapid 
rise in sea-level caused by human-induced climate change less easy to grasp. Decision makers 
in Canada must realize, sooner rather than later, that the sea level of the past will not be the 
sea level of the future, and prepare coastal communities accordingly.
Executive Summary
10
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Canada’s 
Coastline in a 
Changing Climate
Storm waves off the north shore of Prince Edward Island
Chapter 
1
11
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Canada’s climate is warming twice as fast 
as the global average and this warming is 
effectively irreversible.5 The changing climate 
is having widespread and worsening effects 
on both human and natural systems along the 
coastline.6 In 2019, coastal communities were 
identified as one of the top six areas of climate 
risk facing Canada.7 
Canada’s diverse and dynamic coastline is the longest in the world.8 The biodiversity, beauty 
and resources of the coast contribute significantly to the culture, economy, and identity of  the 
country and traditional ways of  life.9 
However, coastal communities are exposed to hazards, including flooding and coastal erosion, 
that will become more frequent and intense as a result of climate change. These hazards 
pose a direct threat to the health and safety of people, and may cause damage to coastal 
infrastructure and property. Action is urgently required to manage the growing risks to coastal 
communities, while working with natural processes along the coast. If not carefully designed, 
measures to reduce flooding and erosion at one site may cause instability further along the 
coast and degradation of coastal ecosystems on which communities depend.
A range of alternative strategic approaches should be considered in managing coastal flooding 
and erosion, including Protection, Accommodation, Retreat, Avoidance, and Non-
intervention (see Section 2.1). 
This report outlines the range of practical measures that can be used to protect coastal 
communities on Canada’s East and West coasts from flooding and erosion. Coastal protection 
measures include:
a.
b.
Grey Infrastructure
Hard, engineered 
coastal protection 
measures
Nature-Based Solutions
Measures that depend on, or mimic, natural systems to 
manage flood and erosion risk,10 and may be a) predominantly 
sediment-based or b) predominantly vegetation-based
Chapter 1: Canada’s Coastline in a Changing Climate
1 of top 6 areas 
of climate risk in 
Canada
Coastal 
Communities
12
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
The report is divided into four key parts. Chapter 1 (this chapter) introduces coastal 
hazards and vulnerabilities along Canada’s East and West coastlines and the impacts of 
climate change, Chapter 2 provides an overview of international approaches to coastal risk 
management, Chapter 3 describes measures used in Canada to reduce flooding and erosion 
in coastal communities, and Chapter 4 discusses practical steps that are required for Canada 
to scale-up the use of measures that work with nature to deliver coastal protection, alongside 
multiple other benefits. 
The report focuses on the East and West Coast Regions (Figure 1). It does not specificially 
address the unique challenges facing coastal communities in Canada’s North coast region, 
which are significantly different to those along the East and West coastlines.
The report is designed to inform stakeholders in Canada involved in funding, design, 
implementation, management and insurance of coastal protection measures and their 
communities, including:
•	 Coastal communities, including Indigenous communities;
•	 All levels of government;
•	 Infrastructure designers, owners and managers;
•	 Industry and governmental associations;
•	 Institutional investors, pension funds, banks and other project financing institutions;
•	 Insurers (property and casualty; life and health; marine and re-insurance)
•	 Credit rating agencies;
•	 Commercial and residential real estate owners and managers; developers 
and homebuilders; 
•	 Non-Governmental Organizations; and
•	 Academic institutions
Figure 1: Canada’s West, North and East Coast Regions (adapted from Lemmen, et.al., 2016)11
CANADA
USA
West 
Coast
Region
East
Coast
Region
North Coast Region
Chapter 1: Canada’s Coastline in a Changing Climate
13
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
1.1 Canada’s Coastal Population
In 2016, nearly 4.8 million Canadians, representing 13.5% of the population, lived within ten 
kilometres of Canada’s coastline.12 Most of these people were living in Canada’s East and West 
Coast Regions, which form the focus of this report (Figure 1). Within the East and West Coast 
Regions, populations are particularly concentrated within ten kilometres of the coast in the 
provinces of British Columbia, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Prince Edward 
Island (Table 2). 
People living near the coast benefit from the ocean and its resources, including through 
employment and recreational activities. They, and many others, also enjoy the services 
provided by the ocean and coastal ecosystems, often referred to as “ecosystem services”, 
including fish and seafood, opportunities for tourism and recreation, and wider societal benefits 
such as climate regulation and carbon storage.13 These important services may be impacted by 
climate change, and consequently those living along the coast are likely to be greatly affected.
Table 2: Canada’s coast and coastal population, 2016 (Source: Statistics Canada, 2021)14 
British
Columbia
Canada
247,007
35,151,728
4,755,541
–
26,507
4,648,055
2,981,321
Nova Scotia
8,122
923,598
754,012
Newfoundland
and Labrador
25,940
519,716
454,093
New Brunswick
2,732
747,101
242,035
Prince Edward 
Island
1,371
142,907
138,142
Quebec
15,699
8,164,361
147,138
Other provinces
and territories
166,635
20,005,990
38,799
–
Share of Canada’s population 
living within 10 km of coast 
located within the province (%)
Total 
population 
(people)
Share of provincial 
population living within 
10 km of coast (%)
Population 
within 10 km of 
coast (people)
Coastline 
(km)
64.1
62.7
81.6
15.9
87.4
9.5
32.4
5.1
96.7
2.9
1.8
3.1
0.8
13.5
live within
10 km of Canada’s 
coastline 
4.8
Million People
10km
Chapter 1: Canada’s Coastal Population
14
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
1.2 Coastal Hazards in a Changing Climate
Coasts are dynamic environments. The coast is shaped by ongoing natural processes, such as 
sediment erosion and deposition, which may be more pronounced during extreme weather 
events, such as storms. In the longer-term, change is also driven by adjustments in the relative 
levels of land and sea. 
Flooding and erosion are natural processes that are fundamental to the function of coastal 
ecosystems. However, risks arise along the coast when coastal hazards, such as flooding and 
erosion, interact with exposed and vulnerable people, infrastructure, or ecosystems (see Box 1 
for definitions).
Box 1 
Definitions: Risk, Hazards, Exposure and Vulnerability
Risk: The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems. In the context of 
climate change impacts, risks result from dynamic interactions between climate-related hazards 
with the exposure and vulnerability of the affected human or ecological system to the hazards.
Hazard: The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event or trend that 
may cause loss of life, injury, or other health impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, 
infrastructure, livelihoods, service provision, ecosystems and environmental resources.
Exposure: The presence of people; livelihoods; species or ecosystems; environmental functions, 
services, and resources; infrastructure; or economic, social, or cultural assets in places and settings 
that could be adversely affected.
Vulnerability: The predisposition to be adversely affected. Vulnerability encompasses sensitivity 
or susceptibility to harm and lack of capacity to cope and adapt. 
(Source: IPCC, 2021)15
This chapter describes how the changing climate is increasing the severity and frequency of 
coastal flooding and erosion along much of Canada’s marine coasts, with a focus on the West 
and East Coast Regions. 
1.2.1 Extreme Water Levels and Coastal Flooding
Extreme water levels along the marine coast are a result of a combination of different 
processes, including storm surge, tides, and ocean waves. Future projections indicate that rising 
global sea levels and retreating sea ice will continue to cause changes in the frequency and 
magniture of extreme water levels, which will impact Canada’s coastlines.16
Chapter 1: Coastal Hazards in a Changing Climate
15
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Relative sea-level change
Global sea levels are rising due to ocean thermal expansion and water delivered to the 
oceans from melting land-based glaciers, ice caps and ice sheets. Changes in sea level relative 
to Canada’s coastline are also affected by vertical land motion (upward, called “uplift” or 
downward, called “subsidence”) in response to the retreat of the last glacial ice sheet. 17  
Figure 2 shows projected relative sea-level change along Canadian coastlines at the end of the 
21st century, assuming a “high carbon” greenhouse gas emissions scenario (RCP 8.5). Relative 
sea level is projected to rise along most of the East and West Coast Regions. 
Projected relative sea-level changes shown at 2100 for the median of a high emission scenario (RCP8.5) at 69 coastal 
locations in Canada and the northern United States.
Figure 2: Projected relative sea-level change along Canadian coastlines at the end of the 
century (Source: James et al. 2014,18 201519; Lemmen et al, 201620).
The greatest rates of relative sea-level rise in Canada are projected to occur along the East 
(Atlantic) coast, in locations where the land is currently subsiding (red dots in Figure 2). 
This includes the coastline of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, the southern coast of 
Nova Scotia and the upper Bay of Fundy.21 Along the Quebec coastline and eastern coast of 
Paciﬁc Ocean
Atlantic
Ocean
Arctic Ocean
CANADA
USA
75 to 100
50 to 75
25 to 50
0 to 25
-25 to 0
-50 to -25
-75 to -50
-90 to -75
Sea-Level Change (cm)
Chapter 1: Coastal Hazards in a Changing Climate
16
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Newfoundland and Labrador, relative sea-level rise is projected to be greater than 50cm by 
under the “high carbon” scenario (RCP 8.5) (orange dots in Figure 2).
Along the West Coast, vertical motion rates vary from negligible values near Vancouver to 
uplift of almost 4 mm per year in the middle part of Vancouver Island, and smaller rates of 
uplift further north.22 The largest relative sea-level rises by 2100 are projected to occur along 
the coast of the Fraser Lowland, southern Vancouver Island and the north coast.23
Where relative sea level is projected to rise, the frequency and magnitude of extreme high 
water-level events will increase. This will result in increased flooding, and potential for coastal 
erosion, that may place coastal communities at increased risk.
Further information relating to extreme water levels can be obtained using the “Canadian 
Extreme Water Level Adaptation Tool” (CAN-EWLAT).24 
Storm surges
Storm surges are changes (rises 
or falls) in water levels occurring 
in response to the direct effects 
of wind and atmospheric 
pressure fluctuations during 
the passage of storms. 25 The 
low pressures and high wind 
speeds associated with intense 
storm systems typically result 
in positive storm surges (rises 
in sea level). These rises in sea 
level may cause coastal flooding, 
depending on their timing and 
magnitude relative to tides, and 
other effects such as storm waves.
In some coastal regions, 
extreme storm surges can 
exceed 1 m above tide levels, and can lead to flooding when coincident with high tides. Wave 
effects, together with breaching or overtopping of coastal features and defences, can further 
exacerbate flooding. Where relative sea level is projected to rise, extreme high-water levels are 
expected to be even higher and more frequent in the future26.
Changing Sea Ice Conditions in Atlantic Canada
Sea ice interacts with and affects waves and storm surges, which contribute to coastal flood 
hazards. While relatively low to moderate ice concentrations can result in increased storm 
Meet Cove, Nova Scotia
Chapter 1: Coastal Hazards in a Changing Climate
17
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
surges relative to equivalent open-water conditions, higher concentrations and shore-fast ice 
conditions attenuate waves and storm surges, reducing their impacts on the shore. 
In Atlantic Canada, some projections indicate that the Gulf of St. Lawrence will be free of 
winter sea ice by the end of this century. Reduced sea ice cover will result in longer open water 
fetches and increased wave heights and storm surges during winter.27 More prolonged open 
water seasons will also result in increased exposure of shorelines to wave action and extreme 
water levels, increasing erosion in some areas. 
1.2.2 Coastal Erosion
Coastal erosion is a natural process by which sediment is removed from an area and 
transported along or away from the coast, usually by wind, waves and/or currents. As 
described in the previous section, the dynamics of the coastal system are being affected by 
climate change. Sea level rise and reduction in seasonal sea ice cover is expected to increase 
coastal erosion as well as flooding, depending on the nature of the coastline.28
Human influence can also contribute to or accelerate coastal erosion. For example, the 
installation of hard coastal protection or erosion control measures, can reduce sediment supply 
to downdrift areas further along the coast. Where sediment supply is limited, this can result in, 
or accelerate, erosion along adjacent coastlines. A functional systems-based approach to coastal 
management must be adopted to avoid undesirable impacts elsewhere within the system.
1.3 Coastal Ecosystems 
At least seven coastal ecosystem types are found along the East and West Coast regions of 
Canada, namely: estuaries; coastal sand systems; intertidal flats; salt marshes; cobble beaches; 
Chapter 1: Coastal Ecosystems
18
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
cliffs/bluffs; and rocky shore ecosystems. Table 3 illustrates the features of these ecosystems 
and describes the potential impacts of climate change in terms of coastal flooding and erosion.
Coastal landforms and habitats have previously adapted to rises in relative sea level by shifting 
further inland to a higher elevation (depending on the type of coast, wave dynamics and 
sediment supply). A key challenge is that infrastructure and communities are generally fixed in 
place and may limit the landward migration of coastal ecosystems. This may result in “coastal 
squeeze” whereby inter-tidal zone habitats are caught between rising sea levels and fixed 
infrastructure, for example sea walls.29 Since coastal ecosystems often play a role in natural 
coastal protection by storing water and diffusing wave energy, their loss can also make coastal 
flooding and erosion worse in coastal communities.
Table 3: Flood and Erosion Impacts on Seven Common Coastal Ecosystems along East and 
West Coastlines of Canada (Source: Adapting to Climate Change in Coastal Communities 
of the Atlantic Provinces, Canada, 201630)
Ecosystem
Example
Impacts of Climate Change
Estuary 
An area where a 
freshwater river or stream 
meets the ocean.31
Courtenay Estuary, Vancouver 
Island, British Columbia
•	 Low-lying and highly vulnerable to 
flooding.
•	 Rising sea levels will increase 
flood extent and depth in already 
vulnerable areas.
•	 Storm surges will increase inland 
reach and intensity of flooding.
•	 Ecosystems are diverse and sensitive 
to change, including changes in 
mixing of salt and freshwater.
•	 Many urban coastal communities are 
located at estuaries. 
Coastal Sand 
Systems 
The terrestrial portion of 
beaches, spits, barrier 
islands and dunes 
in which sand is the 
dominant substrate.32
Sand dunes, Prince 
Edward Island
•	 Rising sea levels will increase flooding 
and erosion in areas previously not 
exposed to water.
•	 Storm surges may result in 
overtopping and flattening of coastal 
features as sediment moves landward 
or is carried offshore by ocean 
currents.
•	 Sensitive to interventions that disrupt 
natural sediment movement.
Chapter 1: Coastal Ecosystems
19
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Ecosystem
Example
Impacts of Climate Change
Intertidal flats
Generally non-vegetated 
expanses of mud, sand or 
rock lying between high 
and low water marks.33
Intertidal flats, Fundy National 
Park, New Brunswick 
•	 Low-lying and highly vulnerable to 
flooding.
•	 Rising sea levels will increase flooding 
and erosion in areas previously not 
exposed to water.
•	 Wave action resulting from storm 
surges may result in movement of 
large volumes of material.
•	 Sensitive to interventions that disrupt 
natural sediment movement. 
Salt marshes
Coastal wetlands that 
are flooded and drained 
by salt water brought 
in by the tides, with soil 
typically composed of 
deep mud and peat.34
Rissers Beach Provincial Park, 
Nova Scotia
•	 Diverse habitats that are sensitive to 
change.
•	 Rising sea levels may cause excessive 
sediment deposition, burying and 
killing vegetation. 
•	 Vegetation can also drown if not 
exposed to air during low tide.
•	 Without vegetation, habitat may 
be degraded, reducing carbon 
sequestration and storage.
Cobble beaches
beaches that are made 
up of glacial till and 
other rock materials 
from the sediment that 
accumulated along the 
coast when the glaciers 
retreated.
Qualicum Beach on  Vancouver 
Island, British Columbia
•	 Cobble material may shift inland in 
response to sea level rise.
•	 Higher wave energy during storm 
surges may transport cobbles inland, 
potentially causing damage to 
infrastructure.
Chapter 1: Coastal Ecosystems
20
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Ecosystem
Example
Impacts of Climate Change
Cliffs / bluffs
Cliffs are vertical, or 
nearly vertical, rock 
exposures. Bluffs are 
broad, rounded cliffs. 35
Eroded cliffs, Cape Enrage, 
New Brunswick
•	 Sea level rise can lead to 
submergence of cliffs and bluffs and 
backshore flooding.
•	 Higher wave energy during storm 
surges can exacerbate erosion both at 
the top and bottom of a cliff / bluff.
•	 If the undercutting is significant, cliffs/
bluffs may fail.
Rocky shore 
ecosystems
Coastal shores made 
from solid rock
Blanc Sablon, Gulf of St. 
Lawrence, Quebec
•	 Sea level rise can lead to 
submergence of rocky shores and 
backshore flooding.
•	 During storm surges, water can travel 
further inland.
•	 Rocky shores may fail due to 
undercutting by increased wave 
action.
Chapter 1: Coastal Ecosystems
21
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Coastal Risk 
Management 
Around the World 
Erosion on a coastal path, St Andrews, New Brunswick
Chapter 
2
22
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
According to the IPCC’s “Special Report on 
the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing 
Climate”, adaptation responses to coastal 
risks have been implemented globally 
mainly in response to existing coastal risk or 
experienced disasters.36 
This chapter opens with an overview of  international coastal adaptation responses and 
trends, followed by country-based case studies that illustrate evolving approaches to coastal 
risk management.
2.1 International Coastal Adaptation Responses and Trends
Six key types of adaptation responses were identified by IPCC, namely: No Response, 
Advance, Protection, Accommodation, Retreat and Ecosystem-based Adaptation (illustrated 
in Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3 : Different types of responses to coastal risk and sea level rise (Source: 
Oppenheimer, et al. 2019)37
No Response
Protection
Accommodation
Advance
Retreat
Ecosystem-based Adaption
Sea level risk
Chapter 2: International Coastal Adaptation Responses and Trends 
23
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
In reference to the different types of response, the report notes:38
•	 Hard coastal protection measures (dikes, embankments, sea walls and surge 
barriers) are widespread, concentrated particularly in northwest Europe, East Asia, 
and around many coastal cities and deltas. The application of sediment-based 
protection measures also has a long history
•	 Accommodation measures, such as early warning systems for extreme sea level 
events, are widespread.
•	 Advance, which refers to the creation of new land by building into the sea 
(e.g., land reclamation), has a long history in most areas where there are dense 
coastal populations.
•	 Retreat is observed but largely restricted to small communities or carried out 
for the purpose of creating new wetland habitat
•	 Ecosystem-based adaptation is continuing to gain traction worldwide, 
providing multiple co-benefits, but there is still low agreement on its cost and 
long-term effectiveness. 
The IPCC report also states, with high confidence, that “well-designed coastal protection 
is very effective in reducing expected damages and is cost efficient for urban and densely 
populated regions”.39
In 2018, a study of the economic robustness of protection against 21st century sea-level rise 
also concluded that it is economically beneficial to protect 13% of the global coastline, a 
proportion which encompasses 90% of the global floodplain population.40 It should be noted 
that this study did not consider social and environmental costs and benefits, which add to the 
overall value of interventions and should also be taken into account in decision-making.
While “grey” infrastructure and sediment-based protection measures have a long history, 
experience in the design, implementation and management of vegetation-based protection 
has been gathering pace internationally since around 2000. Building on this experience, in 
2021, subject matter experts from across the world came together to publish the “International 
Guidelines on Natural and Nature-Based Features for Flood Risk Management”, drawing 
on expertise from the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Rijkswaterstaat Ministry 
of Infrastructure and Water Management in the Netherlands, and the Environment Agency 
in the United Kingdom among many others, including organizations from Canada.41 These 
guidelines cover the use of nature-based solutions for coastal flood protection, including 
beaches and dunes, coastal wetlands, islands, reefs and submerged aquatic vegetation. The 
trend towards the use of measures that work with natural processes is evident in several of the 
county-based case studies that follow. 
Chapter 2: International Coastal Adaptation Responses and Trends 
affects 90% of the 
global floodplain 
population
Protecting 13% of 
global coastline
24
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
2.2 Country-Based Case Studies 
The following sections provide an insight into approaches to coastal risk management in the 
Netherlands, England, Japan, the United States of America and Australia.
Two common themes are increasing 
recognition of the need for coastal protection 
measures to work with natural processes and 
the selection of measures that deliver multiple 
benefits while protecting communities from 
coastal flooding and erosion.
2.2.1 The Netherlands –Working with Natural Sediment Processes
The Netherlands is a low-lying, flood prone country located in a delta. With 350 km of 
coastline, nine million residents living in coastal areas and vast regions located below the 
mean sea level, it is severely exposed to coastal risks. However, the country is also a source of 
extensive experience and innovation in approaches to coastal protection. 
Coastal flood and erosion protection in the Netherlands is governed by the Delta Programme 
Commissioner.42 The first Delta Committee was established after the dramatic storm surge of 
1953 and provided direction for engineering works to protect areas that had been damaged. 
The Second Delta Committee, however, was not commissioned in response to a disaster, but to 
provide direction on how to protect the Netherlands against the expected impacts of climate 
change, including sea level rise. The 2008 recommendations, entitled “Working together with 
water,” resulted in the Delta Act, the associated Delta Programme and Delta Fund, to protect 
the country against flooding (both riverine and coastal) and make it climate-proof.43
At the core of coastal protection under the Delta Programme is the concept of working with 
natural sediment processes. Managing the sediment budget of the sandy coast is one of the 
main strategies for coastal protection. This is coupled with dike defenses further inland44. 
Sand nourishment has been practiced since 1990 to maintain dunes and beaches in their 
1990 position, referred to as the Coastal Foundation Zone. A total of about 12 million m3 is 
nourished every year and the effects last around 5 years.45
  
In 2011, the Sand Motor (Zandmotor) pilot project was implemented along the Delfland 
coast to provide a longer-lasting source of sand, deposited in a single operation. It involved 
21.5 million cubic metres of sand being extracted ten kilometres offshore and deposited along 
Chapter 2: Country-Based Case Studies
25
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
the coast, to form a hook-shaped 
peninsula of 128 ha, including 
a dune lake and a lagoon.46 
Monitoring over the last ten 
years indicates the Sand Motor 
contributes to long-term coastal 
protection broadly as anticipated 
and with a lifespan that is longer 
than expected.47
2.2.2 England – Shoreline 
Management Planning
Strategic planning of coastal protection is carried out in 
England within the framework of Shoreline Management 
Plans (SMPs). The boundaries of SMPs divide the shoreline 
into a number of cells that reflect the coastal sediment 
processes occurring along the coast. In England, there have 
been two rounds of planning to date, and 22 SMPs are 
currently in place.48 These plans were developed by “Coastal 
Groups”, led by local councils and/or the Environment 
Agency. The SMPs set a strategic policy direction for coastal 
management and identify the most sustainable approaches 
to managing risks to the coastline in the short-term (0 to 20 
years), medium term (20 to 50 years) and long term (50 to 100 
years). Four broad policy options are available for SMPs:49
•	 Hold the Line: an aspiration to build or maintain artificial defences so that the 
current position of the shoreline remains as it is. This can involve maintaining or 
changing the standard of protection.
•	 Advance the Line (ATL): by building new defences on the seaward side of the 
original defences. This is rarely used. 
•	 Managed Realignment (MR): by allowing the shoreline to move backwards or 
forwards naturally but managing the process to direct it in certain areas. 
•	 No Active Intervention (NAI): where there is no planned investment in 
coastal defences or operations, regardless of whether an artificial defence has 
existed previously.
ENGLAND
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
22
Young dune and kitesurfers, Zandmotor, The Netherlands
SMPs in England
Chapter 2: Country-Based Case Studies
26
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
The National Coastal Erosion Risk Map is a portal that enables citizens to view the policies in 
place around the coastline.50
Traditionally, coastal protection measures in England were focused on defending the coast 
using hard engineering measures – in 2009 it was estimated that around half of England’s 
coast was protected by hard defences.51 However, over the last 30 years, managed realignment 
and approaches that work with natural processes have gained increasing traction. Managed 
realignment may involve the deliberate breaching of hard defences, or not renewing defences 
when they reach the end of their expected life, to allow the coastline to move inland. The first 
official managed realignment project was carried out in the UK in 1991 on Northey Island in 
the upper reaches of the Blackwater Estuary in Essex52 and since then, 75 other realignment 
schemes have been completed.53
 
There is strong information exchange with the Netherlands, and the recent Bacton to Walcott 
Sandscaping Scheme, Norfolk, implemented in 2019,54 closely mirrors the Dutch ‘Zandmotor’ 
project. The project entailed placing 1.8 million cubic metres of  sand on the foreshore in 
front of Bacton Gas terminal and nearby villages that were at risk of both coastal erosion and 
sea flooding. 
2.2.3 Japan – The Challenge of Tackling Catastrophic and Ongoing 
Coastal Risks
Japan is prone to coastal natural disasters, including typhoon-induced flooding and high waves, 
and tsunamis or tidal waves. While these natural disasters cause enormous damage over a short 
period of time, the most serious damage to coastal areas has arguably been by ongoing coastal 
erosion over a long period of time.55
Japan’s coastline was significantly 
hardened as part of post-war 
development in the 1950s. In 
response to the 2011 earthquake 
and tsunami, Japan’s hard 
protection was reinforced. 
Further reinforcement and 
raising of defences have recently 
been undertaken in response 
to sea level rise projections. For 
example, a system of flood gates 
and 54 km of seawalls, built up 
to +7 m above mean water level, 
protect Tokyo against storm 
surge, high tides and tsunamis.56 While these measures protect urban areas against natural 
disaster, they do not address ongoing coastal erosion.
Tetrapods
Chapter 2: Country-Based Case Studies
in the UK
since 1991
75
realignment 
projects
27
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Beach erosion in Japan has accelerated since the 1970s, largely due to artificial land 
alterations. Sediment supply along the coastline has been disturbed by the construction of 
port breakwaters, offshore barriers and hard protection, while port and dam developments 
have reduced sediment supply from rivers. With reduced sediment input, beach erosion has 
occurred at a faster rate.57 Hard protection measures, such as “tetrapods”, have been used to 
stabilise beaches, but do not address the issue of sediment supply.58 Climate change is likely to 
significantly worsen beach erosion,59 highlighting the ongoing importance of considering natural 
processes in the design of coastal protection. 
2.2.4 United States of America – Towards Living Shorelines 
Coastal hazards threaten approximately $1 trillion in real estate along U.S. coasts.60 The 
National Coastal Zone Management Program is a voluntary partnership between the federal 
government, and coastal and Great Lakes states and territories. Authorized by the Coastal 
Zone Management Act of 1972, the program provides the basis for protecting, restoring, and 
responsibly developing coastal communities.61
Protecting the coast in the United States has historically been achieved primarily using grey 
infrastructure and sediment-based protection measures. In 1956, the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers was authorized to carry out beach nourishment for shoreline protection and has 
since participated in beach nourishment projects on approximately 350 miles of shoreline, 
mostly on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of the United States. However, the impacts of these 
projects are temporary and repeated nourishment is required.
According to the U.S. 
Climate Resilience 
Toolkit, there is 
growing recognition 
of the adverse impacts 
of grey infrastructure 
protection measures 
on natural coastal 
processes.62 This, 
together with high 
installation and 
maintenance costs, 
has led many states to shift their focus from hard protection to the creation of so-called “living 
shorelines.” A recent survey of regulatory responses to sea level rise and shoreline protection 
in U.S. coastal states, found that 21 of the 22 states surveyed have endorsed living shorelines 
or other “soft” coastal resiliency approaches in statute, regulation, state policy or guidance. 
In addition, many states have introduced much tighter permitting controls on hard coastal 
protection, and certain states and local governments have even banned new hard defences (e.g. 
the 2003 ban in North Carolina and the Town of Nantucket, Massachusetts).63
Example Living Shoreline Project
Immediately after planting
After growing season
Chapter 2: Country-Based Case Studies
28
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) actively encourages the use 
of living shorelines over hard protection where appropriate, particularly along sheltered coasts 
(i.e., coasts not exposed to open ocean wave energy). In 2015, NOAA issued national guidelines 
for considering the application of living shorelines64 and continues to provide an expanding 
library of resources for practitioners, emphasising the multiple benefits of such approaches.65
2.2.5 Australia – Emergence of Nature-Based Approaches to 
Coastal Protection
Australia has strong historic ties to the UK and has introduced a strategic framework for 
coastal management based on Coastal Sediment Compartments, similar to the UK’s Shoreline 
Management Plan (SMP) approach. A nested framework of primary, secondary and tertiary 
compartments has been identified to facilitate management over different scales of space and 
time (Figure 4).66 Within this framework, there are differing approaches to coastal management 
between states and territories in Australia. New South Wales has been particularly proactive in 
developing strategic Coastal Management Programs (CMPs).
Figure 4: Primary, secondary and tertiary compartments used to manage Australia’s 
coastline. (Source: Thom, 201467).
The CoastAdapt portal, provided by the National Climate Change Adaptation Research 
Facility and funded by the Australia Government, is a key public resource of information on 
coastal adaptation to climate change.68 The CoastAdapt Shoreline Explorer portal enables the 
public to readily view data for the 359 secondary sediment compartments identified around 
the Australian coast, including natural characteristics and sensitivity to climate change.69
  
In terms of coastal protection measures, the publication “Climate Change Adaptation 
Primary
Large landforms (headlands, rivers).
Suitable for large scale engineering 
works and long-term strategic plans.
Secondary
Sediment movement on shoreface 
within and between beaches.
Suitable for regional planning 
and engineering decisions.
Tertiary
Sediment moves in the nearshore 
area (often individual beaches).
Suitable for detailed impact studies 
and local management plans for 
vulnerable areas.
Managment Timeframes
Decadal, 10 years
Managment Timeframes
Interdecadal, 25 years 
Managment Timeframes
Long Term, 50 years 
Chapter 2: Country-Based Case Studies
29
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Guidelines in Coastal Management and Planning”, prepared in 2012 by Engineers Australia, 
described engineering solutions, including shoreline protection, offshore protection and 
estuarine and entrance management measures, with nature-based solutions being described 
under emerging technology and novel solutions.70 There is currently no national guideline on 
implementing nature-based coastal defence in place of traditional structures for protection 
in Australia. Since 2016, Living Shoreline projects have been piloted, but efforts have largely 
been led by NGOs such as Ocean Watch and Estuary Care Foundation. Improved knowledge 
at the local government level, and industry accreditation and guidelines for approaches have 
been identified as necessary to increase uptake of nature-based solutions.71
Chapter 2: Country-Based Case Studies
30
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Coastal Protection 
in Canada
Repairing sea wall in Stanley Park, May 2018
Chapter 
3
Photo 117598054 © 
Modfos | Dreamstime.com
31
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
This chapter presents an overview of different types of coastal protection measures, their 
associated advantages and disadvantages, and examples of their application in Canada. 
3.1 Classification of Measures
Canada does not yet have a strategic planning 
framework or standard classification of 
approaches for coastal risk management. 
A “Protect, Accommodate, Retreat and Avoid” (PARA) framework has been proposed for 
the Canadian context (Figure 5).72 This classification reflects four of the six types of coastal 
management responses identified by the IPCC in 2019 (illustrated previously in Figure 3). 
The IPCC also identified ecosystem-based measures as an emerging approach in coastal 
management (see Section 2.1). However, nature-based solutions can play a role in both coastal 
protection and retreat, as reflected in the modified PARA framework presented in in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Protect, Accommodate, Retreat and Avoid (PARA) framework (proposed by 
Doberstein et al., 2019), amended to reflect the role of nature-based solutions in coastal 
protection and retreat.
RESILIENCE
• Flood construction levels
• Wet ﬂood prooﬁng
• Elevated homes
• Flood storage areas
• Restrictions
• Zoning
• Land acquisition
• Transfer of 
 development rights
• Sea walls, dykes
• Scour protection
• Planting or revegetation
• Dune building
• Beach nourishment
• Easements
• Land acquisition
• Wetland restoration
Accommodate
Avoid
Retreat
Protect
Natural-based 
Solutions
Chapter 3: Classification of Measures
32
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
The 2021 “International Guidelines on Natural and Nature-Based Features for Flood Risk 
Management” affirm that nature-based solutions can contribute to protection against coastal 
flooding and erosion by:73
•	 Attenuating the energy and height of incoming waves
•	 Attenuating storm surge water levels along the shoreline
•	 Providing storage of ﬂoodwater in the upper tidal reaches of estuaries
•	 Reducing erosion of sediments and soils
•	 Attracting and stabilizing sediments
•	 Attracting and sustaining ﬂora and fauna, which can stabilize structures such as dikes
In this report, coastal protection measures are organized into two main categories:
a.
b.
Grey Infrastructure 
Hard, engineered coastal 
protection measures
Nature-Based Solutions
Measures that depend on, or mimic, natural 
systems to manage flood and erosion risk,74 and 
may be a) predominantly sediment-based or b) 
predominantly vegetation-based
Importantly, nature-based solutions deliver a suite of environmental and other societal co-
benefits alongside improved flood and erosion management.75 These measures may also be 
referred to as approaches based on “natural infrastructure” or “natural assets”. Bioengineering 
solutions that involve a combination of engineered infrastructure and vegetation are also 
discussed under vegetation-based protection measures.
3.2 Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages 
and Disadvantages
Table 4 provides an overview of coastal protection measures that may be utilized in Canada, as 
well as generic advantages and disadvantages associated with their practical implementation, 
as informed by literature review and input from coastal specialists. Grey infrastructure 
measures are shaded in grey, nature-based solutions that are predominantly sediment-based 
are shaded in gold, and nature-based solutions that are predominantly vegetation-based are 
shaded in green.
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
33
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
In addition to the measures presented in Table 4, research to develop guidance for nature-
based solutions is also ongoing in Canada. For example, anchored driftwood (termed “large 
woody debris”) is a technique that has been used in coastal British Columbia as a method to 
help stabilize beaches, possibly since the mid-1900s. Research suggests that this could be a 
viable alternative to grey infrastructure in some coastal situations, although its usage for coastal 
protection is considered experimental at present due to the limited design guidance available.76
Table 4: Coastal Protection Measures: Description, Objectives, Advantages and Disadvantages 
GREY INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION MEASURES 
Seawalls
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
Onshore impermeable 
freestanding structures, 
often made of concrete or 
masonry, built parallel to 
the shoreline in order to 
intercept wave energy and 
reinforce part of the beach 
profile.
Steel products (gabions, 
sheetpile) deteriorate 
quickly in saline waters and 
are not recommended in 
new design.
Protect assets and 
infrastructure 
immediately 
behind the seawalls 
from flooding and 
erosion.
Provide a high degree of 
localised protection against 
flooding and erosion 
inland along high-energy 
coasts.
Smaller structural footprint 
compared to other 
hard coastal protection 
structures.
Can be used for built-up 
areas that have limited 
land available. 
Breaching of seawalls may be catastrophic with high 
potential to cause loss of life and property damage.
When used in erodible coastal areas, increased erosion 
is likely to occur in front and down drift of the structure.
May obstruct natural inland migration of coastal 
systems driven by sea level rise, resulting in “coastal 
squeeze” of intertidal habitats.
Expensive approach with high life-cycle costs, including 
design, construction and maintenance.
Susceptible to geotechnical failures and erosion. If 
drainage behind the seawall is not adequate, it can 
cause the seawall to buckle, move, or collapse.
Sea level rise may mean that seawalls have to be 
frequently raised higher to provide the desired 
protection.
May reduce attractiveness and access to the coastal area.
Seawall, Stanley Park, Vancouver, British Columbia
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
34
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Detached / Nearshore Breakwaters
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
Offshore structures, usually 
made from concrete or 
rock, built parallel to the 
shoreline to dissipate wave 
energy in the lee of the 
structure. 
Reduce rate of 
beach erosion.
Effective at protecting the 
shoreline of high-energy 
coasts.
Can extend lifespan 
of beach nourishment 
projects and create wave 
environments suitable for 
wetland creation projects.
Often associated with 
recreational activities 
with associated social and 
economic benefits.
Expensive approach with high life-cycle costs, including 
design, construction and maintenance.
May require beach nourishment for erosion control 
where sediment is limited.
Trapping of sediment between the shore and the 
breakwater disrupts longshore drift and may increase 
coastal erosion down drift.
Susceptible to geotechnical failures and nearshore 
erosion.
Attached Breakwaters / Headlands
Shore-connected structures 
extending outward 
from the shore, built to 
dissipate/reflect wave 
energy. 
Reduce rate of 
beach erosion.
Effective at protecting the 
shoreline of high-energy 
coasts. 
Can extend lifespan 
of beach nourishment 
projects.
Intercept and retain 
sediments transported 
alongshore.
Useful substitutes for 
traditional groynes.
Improvement of marine life 
in certain areas.
An expensive form of coastal protection due to high 
costs of the design, construction and maintenance.
Trapping of sediment between the shore and the 
breakwater disrupts longshore drift and may increase 
coastal erosion down drift.
Sea level rise may result in increased lee side erosion.
Souris Harbor, Prince Edward Island
Detached breakwater, Cowes, UK
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
35
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Submerged Breakwaters / Reefs
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
Offshore structures with 
crest below the water 
surface, built parallel to the 
shoreline to dissipate wave 
energy before it reaches 
the shore. 
Attenuate waves.
Reduce rate of 
beach erosion.
Can be effectively 
combined with other 
protection measures. 
For example, to extend 
the lifespan of beach 
nourishment projects or 
contribute to shoreline 
stabilization.
Improvement of marine life 
in certain areas.
Increase economic and 
social benefits of coastal 
recreational activities.
Limited potential to reduce flooding in areas with large 
tidal ranges (above 4m), as is the case in many areas of 
Canada that are exposed to flood risk.
Potential for artificial reef structures to become habitat 
for invasive species.
Trapping of sediment between the shore and the 
breakwater disrupts longshore drift and may increase 
coastal erosion down drift.
As sea levels rise, the effectiveness of submerged 
breakwaters may be reduced.
May pose a navigation risk at high tide or during storm 
surge.
Permeable Revetments
Onshore structures to 
dissipate wave energy and 
reduce erosive power of 
waves.
The design of the 
revetment and materials 
selection will depend upon 
wave energy, with large 
armour rock or concrete 
armour units best-suited 
for the most exposed 
coasts.
Reduce rate of 
coastal erosion.
Protect coasts subject 
to severe and ongoing 
erosion. 
Large structural footprint may increase the cost of 
structures.
Reduced sediment supply for longshore drift may 
increase coastal erosion down drift.
May obstruct natural inland migration of coastal 
systems driven by sea level rise, resulting in “coastal 
squeeze” of intertidal habitats.
Can require frequent maintenance as a result of 
settlement, scour and destabilization of the revetment 
slope.
May reduce attractiveness of the beach.
Artifical reefs, Stratford, Connecticut, US. Photo source: Scott Kruitbosch/RTPI
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
36
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Impermeable Revetments / Retaining Walls
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
Onshore continuous 
sloping or vertical 
structures that act as a 
barrier against wave action 
and erosion. 
Steel products (gabions, 
sheetpile) deteriorate 
quickly in saline waters 
and are not recommended 
in new design.
Stabilize slope of 
adjacent land. 
Reduce rate of 
coastal erosion.
Provide a fixed line of 
defense for high value 
assets exposed to wave-
induced erosion.
Obstructs sediment processes and should not be used 
in beach-dune sand systems.
When used on erodible coastal areas, increases erosion 
in front and down drift of the structure.
Reduced sediment supply for longshore drift may 
increase coastal erosion down drift.
Groynes
Structures usually made 
from rock or timber, built 
perpendicular to the 
shoreline and over the 
beach to reduce longshore 
drift and trap sediments.
Reduce beach 
erosion updrift of 
structure.
Intercepts and retains 
sediment to maintain the 
beach environment at the 
site of implementation.
Can help extend lifespan 
of beach nourishment or 
island restoration projects.
Trapping of sediment between the shore and the 
groynes disrupts longshore drift and may increase 
coastal erosion down drift. 
Sea level rise may result in increased lee side erosion.
May restrict access to and along the beach.
Groynes at low tide
North Beach retaining wall, Swanage, UK
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
37
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Storm Surge Barriers / Tidal Barriers
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
Movable gates constructed 
near the entrance of river 
estuaries and tidal inlets 
to prevent flooding during 
storm surge events.
Small-scale barriers or 
sluices, frequently termed 
“aboiteaux”, allow inland 
runoff to drain from lands 
behind the structure during 
low tide and prevent 
seawater from coming in 
during high tide.
Reduce storm 
surge flooding and 
seawater intrusion 
into estuaries. 
Allow maritime traffic and 
natural movements of 
water.
Prevent seawater from 
flowing inland during high 
tide.
Expensive approach with high life-cycle costs, including 
design, construction and maintenance.
Require frequent maintenance to be effective.
Disturb natural exchange of flow and sediments in 
estuaries and intertidal habitats.
Increase erosion of shoals and sedimentation of inlet 
channels.
Sea Dikes / Embankments / Levees
Onshore, often earth-filled 
structures, constructed 
parallel to low-lying 
coastlines in order to 
separate the shoreline from 
hinterland.
Protect low-lying 
coastal areas 
against flooding.
Effective at protecting a 
shoreline of low-moderate 
coasts.
When armored with rock, 
can resist wave action.
Breaching of dikes may be catastrophic with high 
potential for loss of life and property damage.
Often require a one-way culvert, or aboiteau, to allow 
the lowlands to drain during low tide and to prevent 
seawater from coming in during high tide.
Require frequent maintenance and incremental 
raising in response to sea level rise to maintain level 
of protection.
An expensive form of coastal protection due to high 
costs of design, construction and maintenance.
Disturb natural exchange of flow and sediments 
between the sea and intertidal habitats.
May obstruct natural inland migration of coastal 
systems in response to the sea level rise.
Photo 111764898 © Ruud Morijn | Dreamstime.com
Storm surge barrier,  Netherlands
Wadden Sea at Schiermonnikoog,  Netherlands
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
38
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS - PREDOMINANTLY SEDIMENT-BASED PROTECTION MEASURES 
Dynamic Revetment / Cobble Berm
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
Use of gravel or cobble-
sized rocks to mimic a 
natural cobble storm 
beach, typically at or above 
the high tide mark. 
Dissipate wave 
energy.
Reduce rate of 
coastal erosion.
Mimics natural beach 
appearance and function.
Can improve fish habitat 
and may be combined with 
large woody debris.
Under severe storm conditions, excessive loss of 
material or failure can occur.
Periodic maintenance is likely to be required, and 
potentially addition of material over time or after 
severe storm events. Post-construction monitoring is 
recommended to guide this.
Available design guidance is currently limited.
Sediment supply to downdrift shorelines can 
be restricted.
Submerged Sills / Perched Beach
Nearshore semi-continuous 
structures usually made 
from rock to dissipate wave 
action and delay offshore 
movement of sediment, 
enhancing the beach 
behind the structure. 
Reduce beach 
erosion.
Can enhance ecological 
value of the beach by 
encouraging sediment 
deposition and vegetation 
growth.
Can improve attractiveness 
of the beach.
Not suitable for high energy coasts.
Certain perched beach material may reduce accessibility 
between the backshore and the sea.
Reduced sediment supply for longshore drift may 
increase coastal erosion down drift.
May obstruct natural inland migration of coastal 
systems in response to the sea level rise, resulting in 
“coastal squeeze” of intertidal habitats.
Dynamic revetment at Point Grey cliffs. (Photo credit: Enda Murphy)
Photos from Center for Coastal Resources Management 
(ccrm.vims.edu/livingshorelines/photo_gallery.html), 
Virginia Institute of Marine Science.
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
39
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Beach Nourishment
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
A repetitive placement 
of sediment along the 
shoreline to reduce the 
erosive power of waves. 
Reduce beach 
erosion and storm 
surge flooding.
Can provide cost-effective 
disposal option for 
sediment dredged for other 
purposes.
Provides additional 
sediment for longshore 
drift, contributing to 
maintenance of beaches 
down drift.
Can enhance ecological, 
recreational and tourism 
value of the beach and 
areas down drift.
Unpredictable lifetime.
May require continual re-nourishment, although 
“mega-nourishment” approaches with longer lifespans 
have been successful to date.
May need to be used in combination with hard-
engineered measures, such as groynes and 
breakwaters, if it is desired that the sand remains 
in place. 
Island Restoration or Enhancement
Use of sediment to 
construct or, in most cases, 
restore existing islands that 
have been degraded.
Includes barrier islands, 
deltaic islands and in-bay 
islands.
Reduce storm surge 
ﬂooding along 
nearby coastline.
Reduce wave action 
and coastal erosion 
along nearby 
coastline.
Can provide cost-effective 
disposal option for 
sediment dredged for other 
purposes.
Provides additional 
sediment supply that may 
benefit nearby beaches.
Can provide additional 
habitat and recreational 
opportunities.
Requires site characteristics and physical processes that 
support island formation. 
May require continual re-nourishment, although 
“mega-nourishment” approaches with longer lifespans 
have been successful to date.
May need to be used in combination with hard-
engineered measures if it is desired that the sediment 
remains in place.
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
Photo 81796723 © Serenethos | Dreamstime.com
Fort Lauderdale, Florida, U.S.A.
Sandy Island, British Columbia
40
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS - PREDOMINANTLY VEGETATION-BASED 
PROTECTION MEASURES
Dune Restoration or Stabilization
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
Planting of native, salt-
tolerant species and setting 
up protective systems to 
trap sand and enhance 
dune build up.
Reduce dune 
erosion and protect 
inland areas 
from storm surge 
flooding.
Provides habitat for aquatic 
species and improve water 
quality.
Protects inland areas and 
habitat from erosion and 
storm surge flooding.
Stabilization may reduce sediment supply for longshore 
drift and may increase coastal erosion down drift.
May obstruct natural inland migration of coastal 
systems in response to the sea level rise.
Cliff Stabilization / Revegetation
Managing existing 
vegetation and/or planting 
new fast-growing and 
deep-rooted vegetation 
to create protective “skin” 
that would reduce cliff 
instability and erosion. 
Limit the rate of cliff 
erosion.
Reduces risks of landslide, 
collapse, falling of rocks.
Promotes preservation of 
natural cliff habitats.
Requires detailed geotechnical studies to determine the 
causes of cliff instability.
Stabilization of naturally eroding cliffs may reduce 
sediment supply for longshore drift and increase coastal 
erosion down drift.
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
Sand dune restoration, Prince Edward Island
Cliff stabilisation, Newquay, UK
41
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Salt Marsh / Coastal Wetland Restoration
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
Reestablishment of salt 
marshes and coastal 
wetlands through 
revegetation with native, 
non-invasive plant species 
to dissipate wave energy. 
Reduce coastal 
erosion.
Protect inland areas 
from storm surge 
flooding.
Increase 
stormwater 
infiltration.
Even small, narrow 
wetlands provide wave 
attenuation.
Provides essential fish 
habitat, improved water 
quality and stores carbon.
If space allows, can 
naturally migrate 
landwards in response to 
sea level rise, avoiding 
coastal squeeze.
Can self-recover from 
moderate damage from 
storm surge events.
Requires site characteristics and physical processes that 
support vegetation growth.
May need to be used in combination with other 
solutions to create a suitable wave energy environment.
Requires space, sediment and erosion protection until 
vegetation establishes in higher energy areas.
Submerged Aquatic Vegetation
Restoration or expansion 
of seagrass beds, for 
example eelgrass beds, in 
particular those that have 
been degraded by human 
activity.
Absorb wave 
energy and slow 
water flow.
Reduce coastal 
erosion and 
stabilize sediments.
Suited to small-scale 
projects. 
Provides habitat and water 
quality improvements, and 
store “blue” carbon.
May be an important 
resource to Indigenous 
communities.
Requires site characteristics and physical processes that 
support natural vegetation growth. 
Not suitable in high wave-energy environments.
Rarely used in isolation.
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
Saltwater coastal marsh, near Waterside, New Brunswick
Eelgrass
42
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Bioengineering - Coir Rolls
Description and Function
Objective(s)
Main Advantage(s)
Main Disadvantage(s)
A combination of deep-
rooted plants and erosion 
control products made of 
natural, biodegradable 
materials, such as coir rolls 
to help stabilize soil and  
buffer the shoreline against 
waves, tides and currents.
Reduce coastal 
erosion and storm 
surge flooding.
Coir rolls absorb more wave 
energy than seawalls, rock 
revetments, or other hard 
shoreline stabilization 
structures.
Help to preserve the 
natural character and 
provide additional coastal 
habitat.
Synthetic and wire mesh that remains after the rolls are 
degraded has the potential to entangle wildlife, disrupt 
navigation and harm recreational beach users.
Reduced sediment supply for longshore drift may 
increase coastal erosion down drift.
May obstruct natural inland migration of coastal 
systems driven by sea level rise, resulting in “coastal 
squeeze” of intertidal habitats.
Bioengineering - Natural Fibre Blankets
A combination of 
deep-rooted plants and 
erosion-control products 
that are made of natural, 
biodegradable materials 
to help stabilize soil and 
buffer the shoreline against 
waves, tides and currents.
Reduce coastal 
erosion.
Natural fibre blankets 
absorb more wave energy 
than seawalls, rock 
revetments, or other hard 
shoreline stabilization 
structures.
Help preserve the natural 
character and habitat value 
of the coastal environment.
Non-suitable for high-energy coasts.
Reduced sediment supply for longshore drift may 
increase coastal erosion down drift.
May obstruct natural inland migration of coastal 
systems driven by sea level rise, resulting in “coastal 
squeeze” of intertidal habitats.
Chapter 3: Description of Coastal Protection Measures, Advantages and Disadvantages
Coir roll
Erosion control mesh, San Franciso, U.S.A.
43
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
3.3 Canadian Case Studies
3.3.1 Site-Specific Findings
Ten case studies have been prepared to illustrate the implementation and performance of 
different coastal protection measures. Table 5 introduces these case studies and Appendix 
A contains the case study details. Grey infrastructure measures are shaded in grey, nature-
based solutions that are predominantly sediment-based are shaded in gold, and nature-based 
solutions that are predominantly vegetation-based are shaded in green.
Table 5: Overview of Canadian Coastal Protection Case Studies. Click ‘case study’ link to 
see additional case study details in Appendix A.
Protection 
Measure
Case Study Overview
What’s the Risk?
Key Learning Points
Seawall
Case Study 1
Google Map
Northwest Arm Seawall Restoration at Sir Sandford 
Fleming Park. Halifax Regional Municipality, NS.
Hazard: Flooding and 
failure of seawall.
Impact on: Sir Sandford 
Fleming Park public park 
and trail, which provides 
unique natural scenery, 
heritage value and 
recreational opportunities.
Seawalls typically have 
high capital costs, and 
ongoing maintenance 
costs.
Aesthetic appeal is a key 
consideration in areas of 
high social value. 
Photo credit: M. Davies 
Nearshore 
Breakwaters 
/ Reefs
Case Study 2
Google Map
Protecting the Trans-Canada Highway (Highway 2) with 
Intertidal Reefs. Town of Souris, PEI.
Hazard: Flooding and 
coastal erosion.
Impact on: Highway 
2 at Souris Beach. The 
road is a vital link to the 
Town of Souris and the 
Inter-Provincial ferry to the 
Magdalene Islands. The 
beach is a local tourist and 
recreational attraction.
Grey infrastructure can 
be designed to work 
with natural processes 
and enhanced to mimic 
natural habitats.
Monitoring has 
demonstrated the reefs 
have performed as 
designed, enhancing the 
beach and dunes.
Photo credit: M. Davies
Chapter 3: Canadian Case Studies
44
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Protection 
Measure
Case Study Overview
What’s the Risk?
Key Learning Points
Permeable 
Revetments
Case Study 3
Google Map
Rebuilding the Armour Stone Revetment along Cow 
Bay Causeway. Cole Harbour, NS
Hazard: Flooding and 
failure of causeway.
Impact on: 350 metres 
of Cow Bay Road along 
the causeway. Frequent 
repairs were needed to 
repair damage prior to the 
works.
Grey infrastructure may be 
cost-effective in protecting 
infrastructure for a 
defined time period (30 
years in this case).
Photo credit: M. Davies
Sea Dikes
Case Study 4
Google Map
East Fraser Lands Integrated Coastal Flood 
Management. Vancouver, BC
Hazards: Flooding.
Impact on: New, 
sustainable community 
under development, 
including housing, 
services, and greenspace. 
Flood protection can 
be combined with 
redevelopment.
Includes use of 
“superdikes” –earthfill 
dikes coupled with raising 
of adjacent land.
Need for future dike 
raising is anticipated - 
development is in the 
coastal floodplain.
Photo credit: Space2place Design Inc
Beach 
Nourishment 
(Replenishment)
Case Study 5
Google Map
Protection and Rehabilitation of the Anse du Sud.
Ville de Percé, QC
Hazards: Coastal erosion 
and flooding.
Impact on: Tourism 
assets, commercial 
properties, seasonal 
residences, infrastructure 
(sewer, road, outfall, 
wharf, promenade).
Coastal protection can 
be combined urban 
rehabilitation.
Cost-benefit analysis is 
a key tool to evaluate 
alternatives against “non-
intervention”.
Tourism can be a key 
economic benefit (value 
est. at $68 million over 50 
years.)
Photo credit: AECOM
Chapter 3: Canadian Case Studies
45
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Protection 
Measure
Case Study Overview
What’s the Risk?
Key Learning Points
Beach 
Nourishment
Case Study 6
Google Map
Erosion Protection for Portage Park Midden. View Royal, 
BC
Hazards: Coastal erosion 
during storms.
Impact on: First Nations 
midden of cultural and 
archaeological interest, 
estimated to be between 
6,000 and 9,000 years 
old. 
Coastal protection may be 
required for cultural and 
archaeological sites along 
the coast.
Monitoring 2007 to 
2019 indicates beach 
nourishment has 
performed well.
Photo credit: R. Atkins
Dune 
Stabilization 
/  
Restoration
Case Study 7
Google Map
Stabilisation and Restoration of Le Goulet Dunes. Le 
Goulet, NB
Hazards: Coastal erosion 
and flooding due to dune 
overtopping or breaching.
Impact on: Beach and 
dune habitat, residences 
behind the dunes are at 
risk.
Securing an appropriate 
supply of sand is essential 
to dune restoration and 
beach nourishment.
Local communities should 
be actively involved in 
selection of protection 
measures.
Photo credit: L. Richardson
Salt 
Marshes 
/ Coastal 
Wetland 
Restoration
Case Study 8
Google Map
New Brighton Park Shoreline Habitat Restoration 
Project. Vancouver, BC
Hazards: Coastal flooding 
and stormwater/sewer 
system overflow, erosion 
due to marine traffic.
Impact on: New Brighton 
Park public greenspace - 
included degraded coastal 
wetlands.
Habitat lost during 
historic fill and 
stabilization can be 
restored.
Example of a Green 
Shores for Shoreline 
Development “Gold” 
project (see Box 4).
Until the salt marsh is 
established, monitoring 
is essential to inform 
post-construction 
management.
Vancouver Fraser Port Authority
Chapter 3: Canadian Case Studies
46
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Protection 
Measure
Case Study Overview
What’s the Risk?
Key Learning Points
Combined 
Measures
Case Study 9
Google Map
Combining Grey Infrastructure and Nature-Based 
Protection at Alma. Fundy National Park, NB
Hazards: Coastal erosion 
and flooding, in particular 
storm damage.
Impact on: Highway 114 
providing access to Fundy 
National Park from Alma. 
Parks Canada facilities.
Nature-based solutions 
can be used effectively 
alongside grey 
infrastructure.
Incorporation of beach 
nourishment and habitat 
enhancement was 
more cost effective than 
armouring the entire 
shoreline and provided 
multiple benefits.
Photo credit: CBCL Limited
Combined 
Measures
Case Study 10
Google Map
Deltaport East Causeway Third Berth Habitat 
Remediation Project. City of Delta, BC
Hazards: Storm waves 
and lack of sediment 
supply.
Impact on: Habitat 
compensation project 
(saltmarshes and beaches) 
along Deltaport East 
Causeway that was not 
performing as planned.
Nature-based solutions 
can be used to enhance 
grey infrastructure.
Habitat creation / 
restoration must work 
with natural processes.
Grey infrastructure may be 
used to artificially create 
conditions to support 
habitat creation where 
natural processes have 
been modified. 
Photo credit: T. Andrews
3.3.2 General Findings
In researching these case studies, some common findings became evident:
•	 The objectives of coastal protection vary widely between different sites and are 
specific to local settings, vulnerabilities, and community values.
•	 Implementation of projects requires several stages of assessment, design and 
construction, over multiple years, with maintenance commitments being made over 
the design-life of built infrastructure (if used).
•	 It is difficult to document the full, realized costs of a coastal protection project 
from start to finish due to the multiple stages involved. Different people and / or 
organizations (in particular, different technical consultancies) are frequently involved 
in different stages.
•	 Significant project or site-specific technical knowledge is held within private 
companies and detailed information is not always publicly accessible.
•	 Performance monitoring is lacking for many projects or is undertaken on an ad-hoc 
Chapter 3: Canadian Case Studies
47
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
basis where it is not required as part of the permitting process. It is therefore difficult 
to assess if projects have performed and delivered benefits as expected.
•	 There are few examples of nature-based solutions being used for coastal protection 
in Canada.
These findings guided further research presented in Section 4 of this report, relating to scaling-
up the use of nature-based solutions.
3.3.3 Options Appraisal and Combining Coastal Management Measures
Every coastal community has a unique set of flooding and erosion challenges. The selection of 
appropriate coastal management approaches requires an understanding of existing and future 
coastal processes, coastal ecosystems, community values, and risks. These elements inform 
identification of potential options and the process of options appraisal.
Options appraisal is the comparison of different options against set criteria to help decision-
makers select an approach that delivers the most desirable overall outcome. In the context of 
coastal management, options appraisal typically compares a suite of options against the “do 
nothing” option, which acts as a baseline for comparison. 
Option appraisal must consider natural processes along the coast. Reduction of 
flooding and erosion at one site, if not carefully designed, can cause instability further along 
the coast and degradation of coastal ecosystems on which communities depend. Canada 
does not yet have a strategic planning framework or standard classification of approaches 
for coastal risk management. However, local governments and other organizations can work 
together to ensure that influences on coastal processes beyond their individual boundaries 
are appropriately addressed, as illustrated in the City of Surrey’s Coastal Flood Adaptation 
Strategy in British Columbia (Box 2).
Options appraisal may identify that coastal protection is not the preferred strategy for some 
sections of coast. Alternative strategies to accommodate, retreat from or avoid flood or erosion 
risks, as identified in the PARA framework,77 may provide more desirable outcomes, or be 
combined with coastal protection measures.
Options appraisal often identifies that a combination of complementary 
measures is appropriate to protect coastal communities. Grey infrastructure and 
nature-based solutions are not exclusive alternatives and may be used together within the same 
community (see Box 2). 
The City of Surrey example also demonstrates how funding criteria can be instrumental 
in encouraging communities to consider innovative and collaborative solutions that deliver 
long-term benefits. The federal Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund (DMAF) was set up 
in 2018, with additional funding announced in 2021. Funding is provided for structural and 
Chapter 3: Canadian Case Studies
48
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
natural infrastructure projects to increase the resilience of communities that are impacted by 
natural disasters triggered by climate change.78
Box 2
Developing Coastal Flood 
Adaptation Strategy and 
Approaches for the City of 
Surrey, BC
The City of Surrey is part of the Metro 
Vancouver area, located between the Fraser 
River and the U.S. border. Approximately 
twenty percent of Surrey’s land is coastal 
floodplain. By 2100, projections indicate that sea level rise and more frequent and extreme rainfall 
events could affect 125,000 residents who live in areas at high risk of coastal flooding. To prepare 
for this challenge, the city developed a Coastal Flood Adaptation Strategy (CFAS) between 2016 and 
2019. The strategy identifies long-term management directions for different sections of the coast, 
together with 46 actions that can be taken over the short, medium and long-term.79 
In 2019, the city secured a $76.6 million grant under the federal Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation 
Fund (DMAF). The grant is being used by the City of Surrey, in partnership with the City of Delta and 
the Semiahmoo First Nation, to implement a combination of ecosystem-based protection measures 
alongside hard protection and engineering measures, as detailed below:80
Nature-based solutions:
•	
Establishing a riverfront park on the Nicomekl River with natural flood-attenuating features
•	
Building two new “living dikes” as foreshore enhancements along Boundary Bay
•	
Nature-based solutions to protect Mud Bay Park ecosystems from coastal squeeze
Grey infrastructure measures:
•	
Upgrading over 10 kilometres of dikes
•	
Replacing the aging Nicomekl and Serpentine sea dams
•	
Upgrading three pump stations
•	
Replacing bridges over the Nicomekl, Serpentine and Campbell Rivers
•	
Installing 1.5 new kilometres of storm sewers
City staff shared the following insights into how DMAF criteria shaped the selection of approaches:
“The $20 million qualifying minimum for projects supported through DMAF stretched us to think 
about bundled approaches and making new partnerships. For example, critical railway upgrades 
were integrated with flood control upgrades, and in the Foreshore Enhancements Project, we 
partnered with the City of Delta to evaluate alternative approaches to managing coastal flooding 
along the shared Boundary Bay. Nature-based solutions were eligible for funding and encouraged us 
to advance new initiatives. DMAF also supported “long-term thinking” considering avoided damages 
over the infrastructure lifespan, which solidified the business case for prompt action on adaptation 
and flood risk reduction.” 
Source: Tjasa Demsar and Matt Osler, City of Surrey, BC
Nicomekl River, Surrey, BC
Chapter 3: Canadian Case Studies
49
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Scaling-Up Use of 
Coastal Protection 
Measures that 
Work with Nature
Restoring beach dune vegetation in Prince Edward Island
Chapter 
4
50
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Nature-based solutions could play a greater 
role in managing coastal flood and erosion 
risk in Canada, while delivering multiple 
benefits. In this report, both sediment-based 
and vegetation-based adaptation measures 
are considered as nature-based solutions. 
These measures depend on, or mimic, 
natural system processes to manage flood 
and erosion risk, while delivering a suite of 
additional co-benefits.81
Coastal nature-based solutions can deliver flooding and erosion management benefits by:82
•	 Attenuating the energy and height of incoming waves
•	 Attenuating storm surge water levels along the shoreline
•	 Providing storage of ﬂoodwater in the upper tidal reaches of estuaries
•	 Reducing erosion of sediments and soils
•	 Attracting and stabilize sediments
•	 Attracting and sustaining ﬂora and fauna, which can stabilize structures such as dikes
In addition to these benefits, coastal nature-based solutions also provide a wide range of 
ecosystem goods and services, including:
•	 provision of food (e.g. fish and shellfish) 
•	 climate regulation (through carbon sequestration and storage) 
•	 air quality regulation 
•	 water quality regulation 
•	 provision of habitat promoting biodiversity
•	 assets for recreational activity 
•	 provision of aesthetic values 
•	 inspiration for culture, art and design 
Chapter 4: Scaling-Up Use of Coastal Protection Measures that Work with Nature
51
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Despite their multiple benefits, research completed in 2021 indicates that nature-based 
solutions remain underutilized.83 Two of the factors limiting their wider implementation are:84
•	 Undervaluation of the benefits of nature-based solutions in options appraisal and 
decision-making.
•	 A lack of  data demonstrating the performance of  nature-based solutions over time 
in Canada.
This chapter discusses how these barriers could be overcome, drawing on the findings of two 
workshops held online in June 2021. The workshops were attended by over 35 subject matter 
experts from across Canada and insights were gathered using online surveys and small group 
discussion (see Appendix B).
In addition, researchers have identified the need to build capacity to deliver nature-based 
solutions in Canada, including understanding of benefits among decision-makers, institutional 
capacity to oversee and implement nature-based solutions, and technical, multi-disciplinary 
design, construction and maintenance expertise.85,86 This chapter identifies opportunities to 
build capacity by drawing on the private sector. 
4.1 Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in 
Options Appraisal
The benefits of nature-based solutions are currently not adequately addressed in options 
appraisal approaches in Canada.
The first of the two workshops: “Upgrading Options Appraisal to include Ecosystem Good 
and Services” was held on June 17, 2021. This section summarizes workshop findings – further 
details are contained in Appendix B.
4.1.1 Options Appraisal Approaches and Tools Used in Canada
Many different tools are used to appraise coastal management options in Canada. There is 
currently no standardised approach and no strategic planning framework, similar to that used 
for Shoreline Management Planning (SMP) in England (see Chapter 2.2.2.) Commonly used 
approaches include:
•	 Multi-criteria analysis (qualitative assessment)
•	 Evaluation against performance objectives
•	 Cost-Benefit Analysis (quantitative assessment of tangible and intangible benefits/costs)
•	 Environmental Impact Assessment (consideration of alternatives)
Generic approaches are typically tailored by users to their specific project, often delivered by 
local governments. Structured decision-making is an additional identified approach that may 
be useful in integrating benefits of nature-based solutions. This method involves identifying 
Chapter 4: Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
52
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
locally relevant values, defining objectives and measures (which could include ecosystem goods 
and service levels), and comparing alternatives against these measures. The approach can also 
be used to evaluate trade-offs between options in a transparent manner, and in identifying a 
suite of complementary options to achieve the defined objectives. 
Other specific protocols used to appraise coastal management options include:
•	 Application of Infrastructure Canada’s Climate Lens (Greenhouse Gas Mitigation 
Assessment and Climate Change Resilience Assessment)87
•	 Evaluation against Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund application criteria88
•	 Legally required Environment Impact Assessment procedures (vary by province 
and territory)
4.1.2. Accounting for the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in 
Options Appraisal
Nature-based solutions can deliver multiple benefits that are not provided by hard “grey” 
protection measures.89 These benefits are commonly referred to as “ecosystem goods and 
services” that ultimately benefit people. These goods and services often do not have a direct 
market value and are therefore more challenging to integrate into options appraisal in 
financial terms.
Workshop findings indicate that ecosystem goods and services are not routinely considered 
in appraisal of coastal management options in Canada. When ecosystem goods and services 
are considered, qualitative and semi-quantitative methods, such as ranking and scoring, are 
commonly used, as well as economic valuation. One specialist commented that, in their 
experience, ecosystem goods and services were included in an “ad-hoc, non-structured way 
that would benefit from standardization.”
 
Flood and erosion control benefits of coastal protection are typically quantified by calculating 
the cost of damages avoided over time.90 91 Other goods and services, such as air and water 
quality, carbon sequestration and storage, and fishery production are also perceived to be 
readily quantifiable. Semi-quantitative or qualitative approaches may be suitable to reflect 
ecosystem services perceived to be less readily quantifiable, such as recreation or aesthetics. 
Both quantitative and qualitative approaches may be used to assess changes in biodiversity 
and habitats. Specific methods used by specialists to appraise costs and benefits associated 
with selected ecosystem goods and services, are summarized in Table 6, alongside the lessons 
learned that were shared. 
Chapter 4: Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
53
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Table 6: Methods, indicators and lessons learnt in assessing costs and benefits of nature-based solutions, in 
terms of ecosystem goods and services
Impact
Methods, indicators and values used
Lessons Learnt
Water quality
•	 Modeling using bespoke software (InVEST)
•	 Predicted change in key water quality indicators (referencing 
established standards)
•	 Predicted change in treatment costs
•	 Visual indicators of water quality (turbidity, algal blooms) may 
be obtained using airborne sensors
•	 Standard protocols are well established
•	 Difficult to address variability over time 
and space
Carbon 
sequestration
and storage
•	 Modeling using bespoke software (InVEST)
•	 Predicted change in vegetation and soils, and impact on 
carbon flux and storage
•	 Calculation of embedded carbon in hard protection measures 
•	 Social value of carbon 
•	 No standardized method
•	 Important to base calculations on local data 
•	 Need to account for time lag in carbon 
sequestration
CO2
Biodiversity 
and habitats
•	 Modeling using bespoke software (InVEST, iTree)
•	 Predicted change in land use area of different habitats (using GIS)
•	 Predicted change in species diversity / species at risk / 
invasive species
•	 Use of Traditional Ecological Knowledge / participative 
mapping to obtain baseline
•	 Drones are useful to obtain high-resolution 
mapping
•	 Difficult to adequately reflect the value of 
habitat connectivity
•	 Different tools may be appropriate to 
different habitats
Aesthetics
•	 Participatory mapping
•	 Analysis of social media activity (Instagram, Flickr)
•	 Indirect valuation (for example using the difference paid for a 
room with a seaview)
•	 Public consultation on visuals of option alternatives
•	 Difficult to quantify and avoid bias
•	 Perceptions of aesthetics vary widely 
between people based on individual 
background and circumstance
•	 Difficult to account for change over time
Recreation
•	 Change in area/length of recreational facilities
•	 Indirect measurements – number of visitors, frequency of site 
use, travel-cost, local tourism revenues
•	 Averted health care costs (including mental health) for 
recreational activities linked to improved health
•	 Opportunity to capture diverse perspectives
•	 Often considered qualitatively, which may 
undervalue benefits
Chapter 4: Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
54
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
4.1.3 Canadian Options Appraisal Case Studies
This section describes how benefits of nature-based solutions have been included in options 
appraisal for selected case studies in Canada.
Cost-benefit analysis of adaptation options for five regions in Quebec
In 2016, Ouranos undertook cost-benefit analysis of adaptation options for five regions of the 
coastline in Quebec, considering both hard and sediment-based protection measures, as well 
as options without coastal structures (for example, planned retreat and flood proofing).92 The 
positive and negative impacts included in the cost-benefit analysis are shown in Table 7, and go 
beyond flood and erosion damages avoided. However, the range of positive impacts considered 
did not reflect the full range of potential benefits that may be gained from ecosystem-based 
protection measures.
Table 7: Anticipated impacts included in cost-benefit analysis of adaptation options for 
five regions of the coastline in Quebec (source: Circé et al. 2016)93
Type of Impact
Negative Impacts
Positive Impacts
Related to erosion
•	 Loss of land
•	 Complete or partial loss of residential or 
commercial buildings
•	 Loss or damage to public infrastructure
Related to flooding
•	 Damages to land
•	 Damages to residential or commercial buildings
•	 Damages to public infrastructure
•	 Emergency evacuation
•	 Debris clean-up
•	 Traffic congestion or detour
Economic
•	 Reduced land value
•	 Loss of goods and commercial revenues
•	 Loss of tourism revenues
•	 Gain in tourism revenues
Environmental
•	 Loss of natural habitats
•	 Loss of fishing spawning grounds
•	 Improvement in fish spawning grounds
Social
•	 Loss of sea view
•	 Loss of sea access
•	 Decline in the coast’s recreational use
•	 Reduced quality of life (anxiety, insecurity, etc.)
•	 Deterioration in the landscape
•	 Deterioration in historical and cultural heritage
•	 Improvement in the coast’s recreational use
•	 Improvement in quality of life (security)
•	 Improvement in the landscape
Chapter 4: Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
55
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Platform for cost-benefit analysis of erosion and submersion (PANACÉES) 
Building on this experience, a platform for cost-benefit analysis of erosion and submersion was 
developed (named “Plateforme pour l’analyse avantages-coûts en érosion et submersion”or 
PANACÉES). 94 This platform incorporates ecosystem-based protection measures, alongside 
hard and sediment-based protection measures. However, the analysis calculates benefits in 
terms of avoided damages and does not currently account for the improved ecosystem goods 
and services that may be delivered through ecosystem-based protection measures.
Integrated Valuation of Ecosystem Services and Tradeoffs (InVEST)
Increasingly, modeling tools are being applied to evaluate changes in ecosystem goods and 
services associated with coastal management options. The “Integrated Valuation of Ecosystem 
Services and Tradeoffs” (InVEST) suite of open-source tools, developed by the Natural Capital 
Project, helps users explore how changes in ecosystems are likely to lead to changes in benefits 
that flow to people. 95. Several modules are available, including modules that address coastal 
protection, habitat quality and coastal blue carbon.96 
Coastal Protection and Benefit Tool 
In 2021, a “Coastal Protection and Benefit Tool”, was developed by a multi-disciplinary 
team led by the Municipal Natural Asset Initiative (MNAI), building on the InVEST coastal 
protection package.97 The tool was designed to be a high-level screening tool and was 
applied to two pilot case studies, the Town of Gibsons in British Columbia,98 and Pointe du 
Chene in New Brunswick.99 A shortlist of  options was identified in each case using multi-
criteria analysis based on stakeholder consultation. The options shortlisted included eelgrass 
protection, shoreline planting, beach nourishment and dune improvement.100 The Coastal 
Protection and Benefit Tool enabled the economic value of flooding and erosion control 
benefits associated with these nature-based solutions to be calculated, but their multiple co-
benefits were not quantified.101 
Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund application process (2021)
As previously mentioned, the Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund provides funding for 
structural and natural infrastructure projects to increase the resilience of communities that 
are impacted by natural disasters triggered by climate change. According to the application 
process, economic benefits are calculated as a Return on Investment (ROI), based on a 
ratio between avoided damages and the cost of the project. Anticipated project co-benefits, 
including environmental value and greenhouse gas reduction, are to be described under a 
separate merit criterion and do not currently factor into the ROI calculation.102 
Chapter 4: Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
56
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
4.1.4 Standardized Valuation of Ecosystem Goods and Services: 
Example of Partnership Funding for Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk 
Management Projects in England
The following section summarizes an example of nationally standardized options appraisal for 
coastal risk management that was presented at the workshop. Funding for Flood and Coastal 
Erosion Risk Management (FCERM) projects undertaken in England is allocated based on 
standardized protocols set out by the national government.103 Partnership funding is allocated 
to projects undertaken by risk management authorities and according to specific Outcome 
Measures (Table 8). A bespoke spreadsheet is provided for risk management authorities to 
calculate economic values under each of these Outcome Measures.104 
Table 8: Outcome Measures Used to Allocate Partnership Funding in England
Outcome Measure
Description
OM1 - Economic benefits 
OM1A
Overall economic benefits (based on the present value costs and benefits)
OM1B
People-related FCERM benefits: include risk to life, stress and health benefits, mental health 
impacts, vehicle damages avoided and residential property evacuation costs avoided
OM2 - Households at risk 
from flooding
OM2A 
Households at risk today that are better protected against flooding by this investment
OM2B
Additional households at risk up to 2040 that are better protected against flooding by 
this investment
OM3
Households better protected from coastal erosion
OM4 - Environmental 
improvements
OM4A
Habitats created or improved
OM4B
River habitats and natural processes restored and enhanced
Eligible economic benefits/costs considered within Outcome Measure OM1 specifically 
include natural capital benefits that may be derived from nature-based solutions (Box 3)
Chapter 4: Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
57
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Box 3
Eligible Flood and Coastal Erosion Management 
benefits considered in OM1
•	 Residential properties Commercial properties
•	 Agriculture
•	 Transport (road, rail, air, ports)
•	 Recreation and leisure facilities
•	 Utilities (water, gas, electricity, waste)
•	 Environment**
•	 Health*
•	 Built heritage
•	 Temporary accommodation
•	 Education
•	 Emergency services
•	 Tourism
•	 Flood risk asset repair
•	 Recovery, repair and clean-up impacts
* - including social and psychological impacts of flooding and public health - including damage to 
hospitals and health centres - and fatalities - including distress
** - all natural capital, including wildlife and heritage
Guidance in valuing environmental outcomes under Outcome Measure OM4 is provided 
in supplementary guidance.105 Under Outcome Measure OM4A, payments are available for 
either creating new habitat or for improving the condition of an existing habitat. The different 
habitats considered are:
•	 intertidal wetlands
•	 grassland
•	 woodlands
•	 heathland
•	 wet woodlands
•	 pond and lakes
•	 wetlands and wet grasslands
•	 arable land
Under Outcome Measure OM4B, payments are determined based on the length of watercourse 
created or enhanced. Payments are defined under one of the following three categories:
•	 comprehensive restoration of natural processes, habitats and removal of 
physical modifications
•	 partial restoration of natural processes, habitats and partial removal of 
physical modifications
•	 a single major physical or habitat enhancement
Valuing environmental outcomes under both measures OM4A and OM4B must be based 
on the generic transfer values that are already built into the partnership funding spreadsheet 
provided. The guidance states this is to ensure consistency across the FCERM program and to 
improve efficiency by reducing the need for bespoke studies.106 The values provided for habitats 
Chapter 4: Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
58
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
are intended to account for the following ecosystem services:
•	 provision of clean water
•	 water quality regulation
•	 provision of food (foraging only)
•	 assets for recreational activity
•	 provision of fuel/timber/resources
•	 provision of aesthetic values
•	 climate regulation (through carbon 
sequestration)
•	 inspiration for culture, art 
and design
•	 air quality regulation
•	 provision of habitat promoting biodiversity
For river enhancements, the values are taken from a previous National Water Benefits 
Survey (NWEBS) which gathered national data on people’s “Willingness-to-Pay” for river 
ecosystem services.107 
Under each Outcome Measure, the net present value of benefits is calculated (in the 
spreadsheet) by applying standardized discount rates across the appraisal period, which is 
typically 100 years.
This example illustrates how a proportionate approach can be adopted to calculate an 
economic value of ecosystem goods and services in a manner that is nationally consistent. 
While the values calculated are less representative of regional or site-specific conditions, 
the method makes it easy to include a value that is considered robust enough for funding 
allocation purposes.
4.1.5 Opportunities for Standardization
As part of the June 17, 2021 workshop, participants were asked if inclusion of ecological goods 
and services in options appraisal should be mandatory for all Canadian infrastructure projects, 
including coastal protection. Most participants replied “yes”, and no participants replied “no”. 
The point was made that, for inclusion of ecological goods and services to be taken seriously, 
standards and protocols must be universal.
It was stressed that federal and provincial governments would need to collaborate on work 
towards standardization. While it is useful to have protocols at the federal level, there is a need 
to reflect important regional differences across Canada. One suggestion was that minimum 
requirements could be set at the Federal level, under which different regions could have 
standards and criteria that are context specific.
Further opportunities for standardization that can be implemented at a local scale include 
certification schemes for coastal protection measures that work with nature. There are already 
several programs in North America that actively promote the implementation of nature-based 
solutions in developed areas. These programs include NOAA’s Living Shorelines program in 
the United States, 108 (see Section 2.2.4.) the Shore Friendly Grant Program in Puget Sound, 
Washington State,109 and, in Canada, the Stewardship Centre for British Columbia’s, Green 
Shores® program (see Box 4).110
Chapter 4: Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
59
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Box 4 
Green Shores® Standards
Green Shores is a voluntary 
incentive-based program launched 
by the Stewardship Centre for British 
Columbia, in 2010. It is similar to 
green building rating programs 
such as Built Green™ and LEED™ 
and consists of two credit and 
ratings systems: 1) Green Shores 
for Shoreline Development (for 
commercial, multi-family residential, 
subdivision, park and institutional 
waterfront development)111 and 2) Green Shores for Homes (for residential properties).112
The Green Shores program encourages methods of shoreline development (both for 
marine and lake environments) that protect the land from flooding and erosion, increase 
the ability to access shorelines for recreation, and protect and restore natural habitats. The 
program supports and provides capacity building tools, and best practice standards 
for planning professionals, design and construction professionals, local government staff, 
and property owners.
Green Shores works with multi-disciplinary teams to apply Green Shores standards to 
shoreline projects and fosters education and planning frameworks to a target audience 
of shoreline professionals, waterfront property owners/managers, governments and 
policymakers. Green Shores was initially developed in the context of British Columbia 
coastal areas, but the approach is applicable to coastal and lake systems across Canada. 
Green Shores is currently active in British Columbia and Washington State and is working 
with stakeholders to bring Green Shores to Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island. 
4.2 Improving Performance Monitoring to Demonstrate 
Benefits of Nature-based Solutions
There is currently a lack of confidence in nature-based solutions in Canada. The 
lack of data demonstrating the performance of nature-based solutions discourages 
implementation of these types of measures, which in turn means there continues to be 
a lack of data demonstrating in Canada – the problem is cyclical.
The second of the two workshops: “Performance Monitoring of Natural Infrastructure 
Solutions” was held on June 29, 2021 to discuss how performance monitoring could be 
improved in Canada. This section summarizes the workshop findings – further details 
are contained in Appendix B.
Green Shores for Shoreline Development “Gold” project: 
New Brighton Park shoreline restoration, Vancouver, BC. 
(Photo credit: Vancouver Fraser Port Authority)
Chapter 4: Improving Performance Monitoring to Demonstrate Benefits of Nature-based Solutions
60
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
4.2.1 Monitoring Approaches Used in Canada
There are currently no performance monitoring standards for nature-based solutions or 
other coastal protection measures in Canada. Approaches used in Canada, as identified by 
participants, included:
•	 Application of the Quebec government’s results-based management framework.113
•	 Measurement against climate adaptation plan success criteria.
•	 A modification of the Global Programme of Action Coalition for the Gulf of Maine 
(GPAC) protocol developed to evaluate the performance of tidal restorations at local 
and regional scales.114
•	 Standard protocols for certain technical elements, including measuring vegetation 
establishment and water quality.
•	 Repeat topographic survey (including airborne LiDAR and terrestrial LiDAR).
•	 Repeat aerial imagery or photography using established viewpoints.
•	 Internally developed and project-specific protocols.
The critical need to collect baseline data that reflects natural and seasonal variation was 
highlighted, in order to evaluate project performance within the context of natural change. 
The opportunity to work more closely with First Nation members was also identified - one 
group is developing a “shared values protocol” that can be used to subsequently monitor 
nature-based solutions. One participant noted that, since none of their projects have received 
funding for monitoring to date, monitoring has been undertaken in a reactive manner, as part 
of deficiency management and warranty review. 
There was strong support among workshop participants for an improved, more consistent 
approach to monitoring of nature-based solutions that deliver coastal protection. There is 
a perceived weakness in the current ability to monitor social outcomes in comparison with 
physical and biological outcomes.
4.2.2 Consideration of Minimum Coastal Monitoring Standards
There was overall support among workshop participants for a minimal coastal protection 
monitoring standard. However, participants indicated that additional elements could support 
improved monitoring, including:
•	 Regulatory requirements.
•	 Inclusion of long-term funding for monitoring in the project budget from the outset.
•	 Technical guidance.
There was also concern that, while setting minimum requirements can help establish 
consistency, this may discourage monitoring beyond these minimum requirements.
Chapter 4: Improving Performance Monitoring to Demonstrate Benefits of Nature-based Solutions
61
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Workshop participants were asked to work in small groups to identify elements that should 
be covered by a minimum coastal protection monitoring standard. There was no consensus 
between the groups. However, there was more support for the inclusion of monitoring of 
hydraulic and sediment regimes, biodiversity and habitats and carbon sequestration and 
storage, as part of  a minimum standard, than for inclusion of  the other outcomes 
considered (Table 9).
Table 9: Considerations for the development of a minimum standard for coastal protection 
monitoring in relation to different physical, biological and social outcomes
Outcome
Considerations in development of a minimum standard
Hydraulic regime 
(flood protection)
•	 A key principle should be to maintain or restore coastal processes.
•	 Important to flooding and biodiversity.
•	 Monitoring may be required as a trigger for parametric insurance.
•	 Variety of variables to consider – water levels, wave heights, extreme conditions during storms.
Sediment regime
(erosion protection)
•	 A key principle should be to maintain or restore coastal processes.
•	 Sediment processes underpin coastal resilience.
•	 Monitoring may be required as a trigger for parametric insurance.
•	 Could include qualitative geomorphological assessment and sediment characterization as a minimum.
Biodiversity and 
habitats
•	 Minimum requirements may depend on permitting/regulation, particularly for fish habitat 
compensation projects.
•	 Habitat function and diversity is important.
•	 Vegetation and presence of native plants could be a minimum.
Carbon sequestration 
and storage
•	 Growing importance for climate mitigation and to support carbon markets / attract private investment
•	 Not a direct benefit to the project site but some workshop participant groups considered it should be a 
minimum requirement.
•	 Measure change in vegetation cover and carbon density in soils.
•	 More guidance needed in this emerging area.
Water quality
•	 Standards are already well established.
•	 Subject to regulation.
•	 May not be within the control of the project.
•	 Variety of variables to consider – dissolved oxygen, pH, suspended solids and Biological Oxygen Demand.
Fisheries
•	 Could be covered by minimum monitoring standards relating to other variables, such as habitat, water 
quality and sediment regime.
•	 Not considered a minimum requirement for all projects.
Aesthetics
•	 Valuable from a public buy-in perspective.
•	 Not considered a minimum requirement for all projects.
Recreation
•	 Valuable from a public buy-in perspective.
•	 Not considered a minimum requirement for all projects.
Chapter 4: Improving Performance Monitoring to Demonstrate Benefits of Nature-based Solutions
62
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Workshop group discussions consistently highlighted that “one size does not fit all” in terms 
of performance monitoring. The technical requirements of performance monitoring are 
inherently tied to the setting of project objectives, which vary between projects. It was 
suggested that minimum standards could remain generic or provide an overall framework, 
with the details of required monitoring defined based on project-specific performance goals. 
A suggested alternative was to tailor standards to different magnitudes of project scope, so 
that minimum monitoring requirements remain proportional to the project implemented. 
Standards could also be developed to reflect the significant regional differences along Canada’s 
East and West coastlines.
The need to engage with Indigenous people in the development of monitoring standards, 
drawing on Traditional Ecological Knowledge and addressing shared values, was another 
common theme highlighted in discussions. Several groups suggested that engagement with 
Indigenous people in developing and/or implementing performance monitoring should be 
part of a minimum standard.
4.2.3 Innovation in Performance Monitoring 
Important opportunities for innovation were identified by workshop participants and can 
broadly be divided into technological advances and the potential to harness citizen science. 
Technological advances
Unmanned aerial vehicles (drones) with remote sensing capability offer a promising tool for 
monitoring shoreline protection measures and physical/ecological changes. The technology 
is flexible, easy to implement, and cost-effective. Repeat datasets can be collected to quantify 
performance variables at a point in time, and to show the trend in performance over time. 
Examples identified by workshop participants included:
•	 Use of terrestrial LiDAR to obtain high-resolution topography along the coastline.
•	 Use of aerial imagery and topography captured by drones to characterise variables 
including changes in coastal landforms, visible indicators of water quality, vegetation 
cover, and aesthetics.
•	 Use of Google Earth Engine and freely available satellite imagery for monitoring of 
vegetation, water cover, and land cover change.
•	 Use of higher-resolution, commercially available earth observation data for 
quantitative monitoring of change.
•	 Use of machine learning and Artificial Intelligence to analyse large datasets 
and imagery.
Harnessing Citizen Science
Several participants highlighted the opportunity to involve local community groups, 
including Indigenous people, in monitoring of coastal protection measures. Cited examples 
Chapter 4: Improving Performance Monitoring to Demonstrate Benefits of Nature-based Solutions
63
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
include enabling citizens to upload their photographs to a common database, (for example, 
Parks Canada’s “Coastie Initiative”115) and training and lending equipment to groups to 
undertake water quality monitoring. Engaging local community groups in monitoring can 
have further raise awareness of the benefits of nature-based solutions projects and create a 
sense of local ownership.
Data generated by cellular phones and social media may be used to inform coastal 
protection monitoring. This may be particularly useful for monitoring that involves people-
centred outputs. For example, it may be possible to analyse public opinions about certain 
locations based on social media posts, or to understand the use of a site, based on cellular 
phone records.116
4.3 Building Capacity to Deliver by Engaging the 
Private Sector
In an era of unprecedented public debt, engaging the private sector in financing coastal 
protection is becoming increasingly important. To this end, public-private partnerships (P3s), 
which rely on a collaboration between governments and private-sector companies to finance, 
build, and operate projects can be leveraged. The definition embraced by The Canadian 
Council for P3s is as follows:
“A cooperative venture between the public and 
private sectors, built on the expertise of each 
partner, that best meets clearly defined public needs 
through the appropriate allocation of resources, 
risks and rewards.”117
The following P3 models are common in Canada:
•	 Operation & Maintenance Contract (O&M): A private operator, under 
contract, operates a publicly-owned asset (e.g. water/wastewater treatment plant) for 
a specified term. Ownership of the asset remains with the public entity.
•	 Build-Finance: The private sector constructs an asset and finances the capital cost 
only, during the construction period.
•	 Design-Build-Finance-Maintain (DBFM): The private sector designs, builds, 
and finances an asset, and provides hard facility management or maintenance 
services under a long-term agreement.
•	 Design-Build-Finance-Maintain-Operate (DBFMO): The private sector 
designs, builds, finances and provides hard facility management or maintenance 
services under a long-term agreement. Operation of the asset is also included for 
projects such as bridges, roads and water treatment plants
Chapter 4: Building Capacity to Deliver by Engaging the Private Sector
64
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
•	 Concession: A private sector concessionaire undertakes investments and 
operates the facility for a fixed period of time, after which the ownership reverts to 
the public sector.118
The concepts of P3s necessitate the transfer of risk between partners. In the context of P3s that 
support the implementation of nature-based solutions (which are often viewed as riskier than 
traditional, grey infrastructure projects, due to construction complexities and uncertainties in 
outcomes), the ability to insure against construction risks and project outcomes is critical.
International examples, where P3s were utilized to implement nature-based solutions 
for coastal resilience may offer rich and valuable learning for Canada. Box 5 describes 
one such example: a standard indemnity insurance coverage solution used to support the 
implementation of an innovative sand dike to protect the Island of Texel in the Netherlands. 
Box 5
Prins Hendrik Sand Dike Reinforcement: Insuring a 
nature-based solution, designed to protect against 
rising sea levels (Island of Texel, Netherlands)119   
The island of Texel is situated on the western side of the Wadden Sea. The Wadden 
Sea is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and the world’s largest tidal flat system.120 
There are several towns and villages on the island of Texel, which is protected from 
the surrounding sea by a series of dunes and dikes, including the three-kilometre Prins Hendrik Sand Dike which runs 
along the Wadden Sea. The island of Texel offers significant ecological and economic value, with beaches and nature 
reserves. It is a popular tourist destination, welcoming about 1 million visitors every year. 
Project: In 2006, several sections of the Texel Wadden Sea dike required reinforcement. A dredging company presented 
an innovative nature-based solution to reinforce the Prins Hendrik Sand Dike. This involved placing 5 million cubic metres 
of sand and planting 2 million marram grasses in front of the existing traditional rock/concrete dike, protecting the dike 
from erosion and supporting natural habitat. Constructed in 2019, the Prins Hendrik Sand Dike reinforcement project was 
one of the biggest dike reinforcement operations in the Netherlands.
Project Proponents: Water Board Hollands Noorderkwartier (principal), Jan De Nul NV (contractor) and Swiss Re 
(insurer). Swiss Re supported the construction of the sand dike by providing a ‘Construction All Risks’ policy that protected 
against risks incurred during project construction.
Benefits of Insurance: Due to the sensitivities of the project, completion protections were required in order to obtain 
funding and secure project go ahead. A standard ‘Construction All Risks’ (CAR) policy was provided, which covered: 
•	 material damages to the project, due to weather events, design and execution errors 
•	 liability for damage to third parties, due to project works during and after construction 
•	 property and assets of the principal - damages to the existing dike during the construction 
The policy buyer was the dredging company who led the solution design and execution. However a CAR policy also insures 
all involved parties, which in this case included the municipality, water management agency, engineers, and contractors.
Source: Cherie Gray, Swiss Re, Public Sector Solutions
Germany
Belgium
Netherlands
Chapter 4: Building Capacity to Deliver by Engaging the Private Sector
65
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Another international example, where an insurance product enabled a public sector entity 
(Mexico’s Quintana Roo state) to utilize a nature-based solution (coral reef) to enhance coastal 
resilience, is provided below (Box 6).
Specifically, parametric insurance, which was at the core of this solution, is an agreement 
under which an entity assuming risk (the “insurer”) agrees to pay the indemnitee (the 
“insured”) an agreed amount upon the occurrence of a specified event, such as an earthquake 
or hurricane of specified intensity. The event, or “parameter,” is often indicated by an 
established and authoritative index for that type of event, such as the Richter scale for 
earthquake intensity or the Saffir-Simpson scale for hurricanes. For that reason, parametric 
coverage is also referred to as “index-based insurance.” Parameters can be defined by other 
objective factors, such as the extent of physical damage, and are typically limited to certain 
time periods and geographic areas.121
Once the specified parameter is reached, or “triggered”, a payment for a pre-determined claim 
amount is processed. Because this solution does not rely on any loss assessment of physical 
damages, the claim processing time for parametric insurance is significantly reduced.
Box 6
Parametric Insurance Solution Protects 
Mexico’s Quintana Roo Coral Reef
The first parametric insurance to protect Mexico’s Quintana Roo coral reef, the 
longest barrier reef in the western hemisphere, was introduced in 2017. The coral 
reef provides a protective function to the local communities, helping reduce the 
destructive impacts of storm surges and beach erosion. If the reef is damaged, it 
can no longer provide this function, which would threaten the region’s key source of 
income - tourism.
To respond to this challenge, Swiss Re collaborated with The Nature Conservancy and 
Mexican regional governments to protect the local tourism industry, dependent on a 
healthy coral reef, with a parametric insurance cover. The claim payment was triggered if a Category 4 hurricane affected 
the area (this level of hurricane was assumed to be damaging to the coral reef). The payment enabled trained community 
members to launch restoration actions quickly and minimize coral damage following a severe storm.
When Hurricane Delta hit Quintana Roo in October 2020, it triggered a payout that enabled the stabilization 
of uprooted coral colonies, and the collection and replanting of broken coral fragments – all in the eight days 
immediately following the hurricane.
The high market interest in this insurance product has seen additional projects develop and more re/insurers enter 
this space.
Source: Cherie Gray, Swiss Re, Public Sector Solutions
  
Chapter 4: Building Capacity to Deliver by Engaging the Private Sector
66
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Conclusions and 
Next Steps
Huge waves break against the shoreline in Victoria, British Columbia
Chapter 
5
67
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Canada’s Eastern and Western coastal 
communities are exposed to flooding and 
erosion, that will become more frequent 
and intense as a result of climate change. 
Canada can use nature-based solutions, 
alongside grey infrastructure, to protect 
coastal communities along the East and 
West coastlines in a changing climate. 
Multiple coastal protection measures can be used to protect Canadian communities (Table 10). 
Each of the measures has associated advantages and disadvantages, and different measures can 
be combined to fulfill multiple objectives within coastal communities.
 
Table 10: Overview of coastal protection measures utilized in Canada
Grey Infrastructure
Underutilized Nature-Based Solutions
Predominantly 
sediment-based
Predominantly 
vegetation-based
•	 Seawalls
•	 Detached / Nearshore Breakwaters
•	 Attached Breakwaters / Headlands
•	 Submerged Breakwaters / Reefs
•	 Permeable Revetments*
•	 Impermeable Revetments* / 
Retaining Walls
•	 Groynes
•	 Storm Surge Barriers / Tidal Sluices
•	 Sea Dikes / Embankments / Levees  
•	 Dynamic Revetment* / Cobble Berm
•	 Submerged Sills / Perched Beach
•	 Beach Nourishment
•	 Island Restoration or Enhancement
•	 Dune Restoration or Stabilization
•	 Cliff Stabilization / Revegetation
•	 Salt Marsh and Coastal Wetland 
Restoration
•	 Submerged Aquatic Vegetation
•	 Bioengineering - Coir Rolls
•	 Bioengineering - Natural Fibre Blankets
* Revetments are sloped coastal treatments used to protect the coastline.
Chapter 5: Conclusions and Next Steps
68
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Nature-based solutions are currently an 
underutilized option. These measures can 
provide multiple co-benefits in addition to 
reducing coastal flooding and erosion risk, 
including:
•	 provision of food (e.g. fish and shellfish) 
•	 climate regulation (through carbon 
sequestration and storage) 
•	 air quality regulation 
•	 water quality regulation 
•	 provision of habitat promoting 
biodiversity
•	 assets for recreational activity 
•	 provision of aesthetic values 
•	 inspiration for culture, art and design 
Three courses of action are recommended to scale-up the use of nature-based solutions for 
coastal protection in Canada:
1.	 Develop national standards to support consistent evaluation of the 
benefits of nature-based solutions when comparing infrastructure 
options, including for coastal protection. This should include minimum 
requirements, regional-specific standards, engagement with Indigenous people and 
recommended methodologies for reflecting the financial value of benefits provided 
by nature-based solutions.
2.	 Develop national monitoring standards for coastal protection 
measures, focused on nature-based solutions. This should include 
consideration of minimum monitoring requirements, as well as how monitoring 
should be tailored to document performance against project-specific objectives. 
Funding for long-term monitoring and engagement with Indigenous people could 
be considered as minimum monitoring requirements.
3.	 Build capacity to finance and deliver nature-based solutions by 
engaging the private sector. Public-private partnerships can potentially assist 
in financing, delivering, monitoring, and maintaining nature-based solutions. The 
insurance industry can also assist in managing construction risks and offering 
innovative insurance products that provide funds to restore natural features 
protecting the coastline, should they be damaged during extreme events.
The outcomes of these actions will help governments and other organizations make better 
management decisions regarding coastal flooding and erosion along Canada’s East and West 
coastlines. They will also help position Canada as a global leader in the implementation of 
nature-based solutions, delivering multiple benefits to coastal communities and far beyond.
Chapter 5: Conclusions and Next Steps
69
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Appendix A: Practical 
Examples of Coastal 
Protection Measures 
Utilized in Canada 
This appendix provides additional details in relation to the 10 case studies presented in Table 5 of the report 
(section 3.3). The location of the case studies is illustrated below: 
Prince Edward 
Island
Nova Scotia
New
Brunswick
Quebec
Maine
Washington
Vancouver
Island
British Columbia
1.  West Coast Region
2.  East Coast Region
10
8
4
5
7
6
2
3
1
9
USA
CANADA
1.
2.
70
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
We offer thanks to all the stakeholders who provided support during the development of the case studies presented.
Case 
Study
Title
Acknowledgements
1
Northwest Arm Seawall Restoration 
at Sir Sandford Fleming Park.
Halifax Regional Municipality, NS
Shannon Miedema, Halifax Regional Municipality
Shilo Gempton, Halifax Regional Municipality
Michael Davies, Coldwater Consulting Ltd.
2
Protecting the Trans-Canada Highway 
(Highway 2) with Intertidal Reefs. 
Town of Souris, PEI.
Michael Davies, Coldwater Consulting Ltd.
3
Rebuilding the Armour Stone 
Revetment along Cow Bay Causeway.
Cole Harbour, NS
Shannon Miedema, Halifax Regional Municipality
Shilo Gempton, Halifax Regional Municipality
Michael Davies, Coldwater Consulting Ltd.
4
East Fraser Lands Integrated Coastal 
Flood Management. 
Vancouver, BC
Angela Danyluk, City of Vancouver
Jeannie Lee, City of Vancouver
Amir Taleghani, City of Vancouver (formerly Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd)
Robin Hawker, Integral Group (formerly Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd)
Eric Morris, Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd
5
Protection and Rehabilitation of the 
Anse du Sud.
Ville de Percé, QC
Lisa-Marie Gagnon, Ville de Percé
Ursule Boyer-Villemaire, Ouranos
Régis Xhardé, Tetra Tech
Jean-François Rolland, AECOM
6
Erosion Protection for Portage Park 
Midden.
View Royal, BC
Rowland Atkins, Self-employed (formerly Golder)
Phil Osborne, Golder
7
Stabilisation and Restoration of Le 
Goulet Dunes.
Le Goulet, NB
Robert Capozi, Government of New Brunswick
Reid McLean, Government of New Brunswick
Lewnanny Richardson, Nature NB
Cindie Hebert, University of Moncton
8
New Brighton Park Shoreline Habitat 
Restoration Project.
Vancouver, BC
Charlotte Olson, Vancouver Fraser Port Authority
DG Blair, Stewardship Centre of British Columbia
Kelly Loch, Stewardship Centre of British Columbia
9
Combining Grey Infrastructure and 
Nature-Based Protection at Alma. 
Fundy National Park, NB
Debra Hickey, Parks Canada
Danker Kolijn, DHI (formerly CBCL Limited).
Jason Bernier, CBCL Limited.
10
Deltaport East Causeway Habitat 
Remediation Project. 
City of Delta, BC
Trevor Andrews, Vancouver Fraser Port Authority
Phil Osborne, Golder
Appendix A
71
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 1: Seawall 
Northwest Arm Seawall Restoration at Sir Sandford Fleming Park
Halifax Regional Municipality, NS
Prince Edward
Island
Nova Scotia
New
Brunswick
East Coast
Google Map Link
Overtopping of the seawall at The Dingle in 2010, prior to 
restoration works. (Photo credit: M. Davies)
Timeline:
Investigation and Design: 2010-2011
Implementation: Completed in four phases 2011 to 2017 at a cost of $2,523,000.
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Flooding and wave action degrading existing coastal protection. In 2010, the 800m drystone seawall was in 
a poor state of repair, due to wave overtopping, poor drainage and inappropriate backfill. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
Sir Sandford Fleming Park, known as The Dingle, is located along the western shore of the Northwest Arm, 
part of the wider Halifax waterfront. The walking paths and parkland are very popular. The existing seawalls 
were drystone walls made of quarried stone and a defining aesthetic component of the area. 
Project objectives:
Main goals of the restoration works were to:
•	 Minimize the frequency and severity of overtopping events; 
•	 Preserve and enhance access and usage of the seawall paths and surrounding lands, and;
•	 Preserve and enhance the aesthetic appeal of the shoreline.
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
•	 Three alternatives were considered: 1) Dry stone masonry seawall, 2) Precast concrete block seawall, 3) 
Seawall with sand beach. 
•	 Evaluation of alternatives involved scoring options according to five weighted criteria: Aesthetics (30%), 
Durability (20%), Engineering performance (20%), Constructability (20%) and Cost (10%). 
•	 Computer modelling was used to compare the performance of alternatives over time, considering sea 
level rise. Estimations of life-cycle costs over the 50-year design life of the structure (including repair 
works to the path) were used to optimize the design.
•	 Selected design was a quarried granite block wall, 665m long and raised to account for sea level rise, 
together with an asphalt trail. 
Performance:
The project was delivered under budget. No post-construction monitoring information was available. 
Further information:
Halifax Regional Council. 2016. “Tender No. 16-253 Northwest Arm Seawall Phase 4, Sir Sandford Fleming 
Park – West Region.” Accessed at: 
https://www.halifax.ca/sites/default/files/documents/city-hall/regional-council/161213rc1411.pdf 
Appendix A
72
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 2: 
Detached / Nearshore 
Breakwater 
Protecting the Trans-Canada Highway (Highway 2) with Intertidal Reefs 
Town of Souris, PEI
Prince Edward
Island
Nova Scotia
New
Brunswick
East Coast
Google Map Link
Inter-tidal reefs at low tide, August 2018 showing sediment 
accumulation in lee.  (Photo credit: M. Davies)
Timeline:
Investigation and Design: 2011-2012
Implementation: 2012-2018, including construction of the intertidal reefs in early 2018 at a cost of $115,000.
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Rising relative sea-level, reduced ice cover and changing storm patterns were increasing the potential for 
flooding and erosion along Highway 2. A combination of storm surge, tides and wind waves from storms 
in 2016 eroded much of the small dune system along the beach, bringing flood waters to the edge of the 
highway. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
Highway 2 at Souris Beach. The road is a vital link to the Town of Souris and the Inter-Provincial ferry to the 
Magdalene Islands. The beach is also a local tourist and recreational attraction.
Project objectives:
Key objectives of the inter-tidal reefs were to:
•	 Reduce wave action and the effects of storm waves on the beach area and highway infrastructure; 
•	 Encourage growth of Souris Beach by creating an area of calmer water to encourage sand moving 
naturally along the shore to be deposited.
Use of locally-sourced PEI sandstone for the reefs aimed to provide natural substrate for coastal flora and 
inter-tidal pool habitat. The project served as a demonstration project of the use of intertidal reefs - a 
example of ‘building with nature’. 
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
The US Army Corps of Engineers “GENESIS” model (GENEralized Model for SImulating Shoreline Change) 
was used to predict the impact of the intertidal reef design. Modelling indicated the design would result 
in minimal downdrift erosion while offering coastal protection at the site. The reefs were combined with 
construction of a timber seawall parallel to Highway 2 and dune restoration work. 
Performance:
Post-construction monitoring is being conducted, including drone surveys. There has been an increase in the 
dry beach area that has, in turn, led to growth and vegetation of the landward dunes. It would be possible 
to adapt the reefs on-site, but no adjustments have been necessary to date. From a tourism/recreation 
perspective, the changes to the beach have met with positive feedback from beachgoers and the Souris 
community. 
Further information:
Davies, M.H. and B.F. Thompson. 2019. “Protecting the Trans-Canada Highway at Souris with Inter-tidal 
Reefs.” Paper prepared for Transport Association of Canada Joint Conference, Halifax, NS. Accessed at: 
https://www.tac-atc.ca/sites/default/files/conf_papers/daviesm_-_protecting_the_trans-canada_highway_
at_souris_with_inter-tidal_reefs_-_v1.pdf
Appendix A
73
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 3: 
Permanent 
Revetment 
Rebuilding the Armour Stone Revetment along Cow Bay Causeway
Cole Harbour, NS
Prince Edward
Island
Nova Scotia
New
Brunswick
East Coast
Google Map Link
Cow Bay Causeway experiencing a storm in 2010. 
(Photo credit: M. Davies)
Timeline:
Investigations and Design: 2009-2010
Implementation: Phase 1 in 2012 and Phase 2 in 2013, at a cost of $1,209,500.
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Rising relative sea-level and increased storm intensity, causing overtopping and wave damage to the 
causeway – for example during Hurricane Juan in 2003, post-tropical storm Noel in 2007, and a storm in 
January 2010. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
The Cow Bay Causeway is a 350 m stretch of Cow Bay Road, built over a beach of cobbles and boulders. 
The causeway was not high enough in some areas to prevent waves from overtopping. Most of the existing 
armour stone was not sized to resist the force of waves during a major storm and voids between the stones 
allowed small stones and seaweed to wash through onto the road. The causeway required repairs every three 
to five years. 
Project objectives:
The key objective was to repair and upgrade the causeway, to withstand higher water levels and greater wave 
action during storms. Measures were identified to minimize the impact of the works on the environment, in 
particular fish and fish habitat.
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
•	 Four alternatives were considered: 1.) Erosion-proofing the causeway; 2) Erosion-proofing, plus elevating 
the roadway to reduce risk of overtopping; 3) Rebuilding the revetment in its entirety (including 
impermeable technologies); or 4) Rebuilding the revetment as (3) in prioritized phases.
•	 Analysis of life-cycle costs and risk assessment indicated that re-building the revetment, in two phases, 
to withstand higher water levels and bigger waves was the most cost-effective approach for the next 30 
years. 
•	 In the longer-term, the causeway may need to be abandoned and the road routed further inland. 
Performance:
No post-construction monitoring information was available. HRM staff have reported that the causeway is 
holding well with some erosion on the eastern edge. The causeway requires less maintenance in comparison 
to the past. 
Further information:
Rapaport, E. and D. Hubley. 2017. “Case Study 2: Defensive adaptation in Cow Bay (Halifax, Nova Scotia)”. 
In: Climate risks and adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation sector: Chapter 8 Atlantic Canada. 
Government of Canada pp.234-235. Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Chapter-8e.pdf
Appendix A
74
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 4: 
Sea Dikes 
East Fraser Lands Integrated Coastal Flood Management
Vancouver, BC
Washington
Vancouver
Island
British Columbia
West Coast
Google Map Link
Visualization of forthcoming development and waterfront park 
with integration of flood protection measures (solid red line 
represents dikes, dotted red line represents flood wall). 
(Graphic credit: Space2place Design Inc.) 
Timeline:
Investigations and Design: Climate change adaptation strategy (2011), Coastal Flood Risk Assessment Phase 
1 (2012-2014). Area 2 Planning and Design (2016-2020). Implementation: Area 2 ground improvement 
works, earthfill dike, and flood wall  construction 2019-2020 at a cost of about $7 Million.
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Rising sea levels and flooding in the coastal floodplain along the estuary. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
Formerly a sawmill, the area is being developed into a new, sustainable community, including housing, 
services, and greenspace. Four existing buildings and 30+ proposed buildings are exposed to current and 
future flood hazards. Two of the existing buildings constructed pre-2014 have an older and lower flood 
construction level and are exposed to first floor property damage. 
Project objectives:
Main objectives for flood protection were to:
•	 Provide flood protection for a 500-year return period event allowing for 1 m of sea level rise (projected for 
Year 2100) and associated land subsidence (0.2 m).
•	 Integrate flood protection into a pre-existing mixed-use community development plan including a major 
waterfront park.
•	 Avoid impacts to Fraser River fish habitat, including a portion of the shoreline (mudflat/salt marsh with 
adjacent riparian trees) categorized as high quality habitat.
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
•	 Alternatives considered were: 1) Reliance on new building floodproofing (construction above flood level), 
2) Conventional shoreline diking and 3) Structural flood protection incorporated into development and 
waterfront park plans using a variety of techniques.
•	 Alternative 3 was selected. Design includes use of “superdikes” –earthfill dikes coupled with raising of 
adjacent land to the dike crest height.
•	 Future need for further dike raising is already anticipated within the design.
•	 Setting back of flood protection left space for mudflat/salt marsh habitat.
•	 Waterfront park offers multiple community benefits.
Performance:
No post-construction monitoring information was available. 
Further information:
City of Vancouver. 2021. “East Fraser Lands (River District).” Accessed at: 
https://vancouver.ca/home-property-development/east-fraser-lands-river-district.aspx 
City of Vancouver. 2021. “East Fraser Lands (River District) Shoreline Resilience Upgrades” Accessed at: 
https://vancouver.ca/streets-transportation/east-fraser-lands-shoreline-resilience-upgrades.aspx
Appendix A
75
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 5: 
Beach Nourishment 
(replenishment) 
Protection and Rehabilitation of the Anse de Sud
Ville de Percé, QC
Prince Edward
Island
New
Brunswick
Quebec
East Coast
Google Map Link
View of completed works along Promenade e la Grave towards 
Roche Percé.  (Photo credit: AECOM)
Timeline:
Investigations and Design: 2008 – 2018. Implementation: 2017 – 2019 at a cost of about $17.6 Million.
Monitoring: To be carried out 2019  -2024.
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Loss of ice cover on the Gulf of St. Lawrence and changing storm patterns increasing ongoing coastal erosion 
and flooding. As a significant portion of storms occur during the winter, changes in shorefast ice and sea ice 
conditions impact the risk of storm-surge flooding and exacerbate coastal erosion. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
Industrial, commercial and business properties, including commercial properties, seasonal residences, 
buildings of high heritage value and a yacht club. Municipal infrastructure, including sewer, roads, outfalls, 
pumping station and a federal wharf.
Overall, the total estimated value of economic losses, including damages to assets and a decline in tourist 
revenues, was estimated at $705 million over a 50-year timeframe under the non-intervention option. 
Project objectives:
Key project objectives were to:
•	 Stabilize the shoreline and reduce flood risk to a minimum.
•	 Create a continuous waterfront trail system along the shoreline. 
•	 Provide opportunities for public/private investment, tourism and recreation.
•	 Retain and enhance characteristics of the waterfront.
An environmental impact assessment was conducted to identify measure to minimise impacts on the 
existing environment. Artificial reefs were constructed to compensate for the loss of existing lobster habitat.
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
•	 Five alternatives were assessed using cost-benefit analysis: 1) Beach replenishment, 2) Beach replenishment 
with groynes, 3) Concrete seawall with deflector, 4) Rubblemound revetment, 5) Riprap protection.
•	 Cost-benefit analysis identified that beach nourishment was the most beneficial option over the 50-year 
period considered.
•	 The design included rehabilitation of the waterfront and boardwalk – benefit from tourism was estimated 
at $79.4 million over 50 years.
•	 Partial replenishment is anticipated to be required every 10 years and monitoring will be carried out to 
assess maintenance needs.
Performance:
No post-construction monitoring information was available. 
Further information:
Circé, M., et al. 2016. Cost-Benefit Analysis of Coastal Adaptation Options in Percé. Accessed at: 
https://www.ouranos.ca/wp-content/uploads/Report-CBA-Perce.pdf  
Tetra-Tech. 2019. “Protection et réhabilitation de l’Anse du Sud.” Accessed at: 
https://afg.quebec/uploads/grandsprix2019/laureats/PrixVisionnaire_TetraTech_Perce.pdf
Appendix A
76
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 6: 
Beach Nourishment 
Erosion Protection for Portage Park Midden
View Royal, BC
Washington
Vancouver
Island
British Columbia
West Coast
Google Map Link
Site of First Nations middle at Portage Park 12 years after 
beach nourishment.  (Photo credit: R. Atkins)
Timeline:
Investigations and Design: 2004 – 2006.
Implementation: Works completed in 2006 and 2007 at a cost of about $96,000.
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Coastal erosion occurring during storms, due to wave action and elevated water levels. Hazard likely to 
increase with sea-level rise. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
A First Nations midden of cultural and archaeological interest is located in Portage Park. The midden was 
damaged during the winter storms of 2006/2007. The midden is estimated to be between 6,000 and 9,000 
years old. The site includes both shell and skeletal remains. 
Project objectives:
Key project objectives were to:
•	 Provide protection against a 100-year combined probability storm wave and water level event, with a 
25-year design life.
•	 Maintain public access to the foreshore and beach.
•	 Maintain beach habitat and cross-shore sediment processes.
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
•	 Four alternatives were considered: 1) Log crib wall, 2) Seawall, 3) Riprap, and 4) Beach nourishment.
•	 The alternatives were evaluated using a ranked analysis based on desirable outcomes (minimal 
disturbance of midden, maintain access and use of beach, maintain supply of material to beach, 
aesthetics and maintenance needs). 
•	 Estimates costs varied between $80,000 and $120,000, excluding archaeological works.
•	 The beach nourishment option was the cheapest solution and highest ranked.
•	 A temporary berm of material the same as proposed for the beach nourishment was placed over half the site 
in winter 2006 – the berm responded well to winter storms, whereas the unprotected area was eroded.
•	 Beach nourishment was implemented in 2007 was designed to offer protection while improving fish habitat.
Performance:
Monitoring between 2007 and 2013 and ad-hoc review in 2019 indicates that the protection is performing 
well. The cultural site has been protected and no further erosion has been observed over the 12 years since 
placement.  Access to the beach, and the beach habitat, has been maintained. 
Further information:
Government of British Columbia. “Province funds protection for Portage Park midden.” News 
Release. March 1, 2007. Accessed at:  https://archive.news.gov.bc.ca/releases/news_releases_2005-
2009/2007tsa0014-000193.htm
Appendix A
77
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 7: 
Dune Stabilization / 
Restoration 
Stabilisation and Restoration of Le Goulet Dunes
Le Goulet, NB
Prince Edward
Island
New
Brunswick
Quebec
East Coast
Google Map Link
Lobster traps used as part of dune stabilisation efforts in 2013.  
(Photo credit: L. Richardson)
Timeline:
Investigations and Design: Coastal Erosion and Flood Risk Assessment (2009-2011), Climate adaptation 
zoning recommendations (2012). Cost-Benefit Analysis (2016)
Implementation: Yearly dune restoration efforts (2013-2019).  Annual Monitoring: 2014-2020.
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Sea level rise, flooding during storms and ongoing erosion of the dunes and the beach in front of Le Goulet 
village. It has been supposed that sediment transport along the coast is likely modified by the quai at 
Shippagan Gully, updrift of the Le Goulet, causing sediment to be transported away from the shore and 
reducing supply to the eroding section of the dunes. Use of the dune by All Terrain Vehicles is making dune 
erosion worse. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
Beach and dune habitat are actively eroding in front Le Goulet village. Residences behind the dunes are at 
risk of flooding in case of dune overtopping or breaching. 
Project objectives:
The key objective of the project is to protect and slow the ongoing erosion of the beach-dune system, which 
provides natural protection to the village of Le Goulet.
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
•	 Dune protection is one of several adaptation measures that have been identified by working closely with 
representatives of the local community.
•	 Sand retention structures comprised of lobster traps and recycled Christmas trees were placed on the 
dunes in 2013 and monitoring has been undertaken since to assess their performance. Attempts have 
also been made to plant Marram grass to stabilize the dunes.
•	 Cost-benefit analysis considered two alternatives - 1) Dikes and 2) Beach nourishment. Beach 
nourishment was identified as the most beneficial alternative, even if a breach in the system occurred. 
•	 Beach nourishment requires an appropriate supply of sand. Dredged sediments from nearby small craft 
harbours were reportedly too silty to be appropriate for restoring dune habitat, where piping plover (a 
bird listed as Endangered in Canada) are present.
•	 The climate adaptation plan for Le Goulet also includes several measures to accommodate flood risk 
within the village.
Performance:
Significant information is publicly available regarding the performance of the restoration measures. 
Although many of the sand retention structures and areas of dune nourishment were severely damaged by 
Hurricane Dorian in September 2019, they may be contributing to sediment accumulation and vegetation 
colonisation in certain areas. 
Further information:
VALORĒS Coastal Zones Research Institute. 2021. “Centre Péninsule and Shippagan – Le Goulet.” Project 
Adaptation PA (Péninsule acadien). Accessed at : https://adaptationpa.ca/en/secteur-centre-peninsule-et-
shippagan/le-goulet
Appendix A
78
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 8: 
Salt Marsh / Coastal 
Wetland Restoration
New Brighton Park Shoreline Habitat Restoration Project
Vancouver, BC
Washington
Vancouver
Island
British Columbia
West Coast
Google Map Link
New Brighton Park Tidal Wetland.  
(Photo credit: Vancouver Fraser Port Authority)
Timeline:
Investigations and Design: 2015 – 2016
Implementation: 2016-2017 at a construction cost of around $2 Million.
Annual monitoring (2018 onwards)
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Coastal flooding and flooding caused by stormwater/sewer system overflow. Much of New Brighton Park was 
built on construction fill that was created in the 1960s. Historic loss of natural features along the shoreline 
(such as mud flats and saltmarsh) led to increased impacts of wave-related erosion (due to increased marine 
traffic as well as natural erosion) along the eastern portion of the park. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
This prompted the initiation of shoreline stabilization works in 2006 and 2007 by the City of Vancouver. 
Project objectives:
The project was selected to address the loss of valuable habitat in the Burrard Inlet and developed as 
part of the Vancouver Fraser Port Authority’s Habitat Enhancement Program. Key project goals were to:
•	 Enhance fish and wildlife habitat and 
•	 Increase public access to nature
The project also aims to help to reduce coastal erosion and flooding and protect water quality by 
filtering runoff. 
The project was also designed and implemented in collaboration with Musqueam, Squamish, and Tseil-
Waututh Nations
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
•	 Measures were mainly designed to increase fish and wildlife habitat and public amenity value rather than 
for coastal protection.
•	 Costs-benefit analysis of the project evaluated the net annualized benefits as about $0.7 million, and the 
corresponding benefit-cost ratio as about 2.5. 
•	 Estimated equivalent annualized benefits were evaluated at around $1,198,000 annually. This estimate 
includes benefits provided by habitat and cultural services, climate regulation and waste treatment 
services, nutrient cycling and disturbance regulation services.
Performance:
An annual monitoring protocol was established at the design stage. Monitoring to date indicates that 
the project is performing as anticipated, with some adaptive management required post-construction 
(fencing to exclude Canada geese and the public from establishing saltmarsh, supplemental vegetation 
planting, irrigation). 
Further information:
Vancouver Fraser Port Authority. 2021. “ New Brighton Park Shoreline Habitat Restoration Project.” Accessed 
at:  https://www.portvancouver.com/new-brighton-park-shoreline-habitat-restoration-project/
Appendix A
79
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 9:
Combined Measures 
Combining Grey Infrastructure and Nature-Based Protection at Alma
Fundy National Park, NB
Prince Edward
Island
Nova Scotia
New
Brunswick
East Coast
Google Map Link
View across the boardwalk and tidal wetlands to the east 
of the revetment.  (Photo credit: CBCL Limited)
Timeline:
Investigations and Design: 2017
Implementation: Works undertaken 2017 - 2018 at a cost of around $3.5million.
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Coastal erosion and flooding, in particular storm damage, when high tide coincides with heavy wave and 
wind activity. A winter storm of December 30, 2016, and a second on January 11, 2017, in particular caused 
damage to the existing coastal protection. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
Federally-owned Highway 114, providing access to Fundy National Park from Alma. Parks Canada facilities 
and supporting infrastructure. 
Project objectives:
Key project objectives were to:
•	 Protect the road linkage and Parks Canada infrastructure. 
•	 Minimize cumulative storm damage mitigation costs.
•	 Maintain the natural beauty of the site for continued visitor enjoyment at the Park entrance.
•	 Maintain easy beach access.
•	 Maintain or enhance habitats – including provincially-significant wetlands.
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
•	 Three alternatives were considered: 1) Conventional protection using armour stone over the 1km of 
coastline, removing the beach and salt marsh. 2) Relocate the road and let nature reclaim the shoreline 3) 
Use of nature-based features and less grey infrastructure.
•	 The third alternative incorporating nature-based features was found to be more cost effective than 
armouring the entire shoreline.
•	 Design included; construction of a revetment along the highway embankment, beach nourishment and 
planting of grasses to the north-east of the revetment, and protection and enhancement of the existing 
salt marsh to the south-west of the revetment.
•	 Beach access was improved by extending the existing boardwalk.
Performance:
Formal monitoring has not been undertaken after construction. However, in summer 2020, the revetment 
and saltmarsh appeared to be stable, and sediment has accumulated in the pocket beach formation to the 
east of the revetment. 
Further information:
Parks Canada. 2017. “Alma Shoreline Protection-Fundy National Park: Parks Canada Basic Impact Analysis.” 
Accessed at: https://buyandsell.gc.ca/cds/public/2017/11/15/45b96dfb90a055888fbeb476b7164fab/
appendix_a_-_bia.pdf
Appendix A
80
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Case Study 10:
Combined Measures 
Deltaport Third Birth - East Causeway Habitat Remediation Project
City of Delta, BC
Washington
Vancouver
Island
British Columbia
West Coast
Google Map Link
March Lagoon 9 and adjacent barrier beach August 2019.  
(Photo credit: T. Andrews)
Timeline:
Investigations and Design: 2016
Implementation: 2017, at a cost of around $2.4 Million. Operations and maintenance is undertaken on an 
ongoing basis.
Monitoring: 2017 – 2021.
Coastal flooding and 
erosion:
Wave and wind exposure were limiting establishment of habitats along the causeway. The presence of the 
causeway itself has also modified natural sediment processes, meaning there is a lack of sediment supply to 
maintain the beaches along the causeway. 
Coastal vulnerabilities:
The original habitat compensation project, implemented in 2010, included enhancement of the causeway 
with salt marsh lagoons, pocket marshes, and forage fish beach spawning habitat. Monitoring revealed the 
project was not performing as planned. 
Project objectives:
•	 The primary goal of the remediation project was to modify the original measures to deliver coastal habitat 
benefits. This means maximizing the ecological function of the barrier beaches and pocket marshes along 
the causeway. 
•	 The habitat measures also reduce the exposure of the vertical sheet-pile walls protecting the Roberts Bank 
causeway to direct wave action.
Selection of coastal 
protection measure(s):
•	 Remedial measures were designed to work with modified natural processes.
•	 Grey infrastructure was used to artificially create conditions to support habitat creation, using artificial 
headlands. 
•	 Artificial headlands provide sheltered conditions for barrier beach and salt marsh habitats and prevent 
beach added by beach nourishment being transported away (since no sand is being supplied to the site).
•	 Beach design drew on “natural analogs” - local beaches subject to the same wave conditions.
Performance:
Monitoring indicates the barrier beaches have generally maintained their sediment and form. Salt marshes 
are still establishing. Drought and the presence of invasive species have impacted vegetation growth. Some 
erosion has occurred at the marsh toe. 
Further information:
Black, S. 2018. “Deltaport East Causeway Intertidal Habitat Enhancement - Saltmarshes, 
Mother Nature and Coastal Engineering.” SER-Western Canada 2018 Conference. Accessed at: 
https://6zvjw1i9d632in9ii1izgap9-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/westerncanada/files/2018/03/BlackScott_
SERWC2018_ConferenceProceedings.pdf
Appendix A
81
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Appendix B: Online 
Workshops – 
Overview and Outputs
This appendix provides an overview of the two workshops held in June 2021. Each of the workshops was attended 
by over 35 subject matter experts from across Canada. Attendees are recognized in the acknowledgements list at 
the beginning of this report. 
Online Workshop #1: Upgrading Options Appraisal to include Ecosystem Good and Services
Date:
Thursday, June 17, 2021, 1-4pm EST
Goals:
•	 Identify options appraisal tools currently applied across Canada to plan and design coastal flood and erosion management 
infrastructure.
•	 Capture subject matter expertise regarding how costs and benefits relating to Ecosystem Goods and Services are being / 
can be better addressed in options appraisal.
•	 Inform guidance for options appraisal that specifically includes the co-benefits of nature-based solutions.
Content:
Pre-workshop questionnaire 
Polling activities
Presentations: 
•	 Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal Flood and Erosion Risk Management (Enda Murphy, National Research Council of Canada).
•	 Coastal Resilience: Natural Infrastructure and DMAF (Tjaša Demšar, City of Surrey).
•	 Avoiding White Elephants - Making Good Decisions for Coastal Adaptation (inc. Case Study of Structured Decision Making 
in the City of Vancouver (Tamsin Lyle, Ebbwater Consulting Inc).
•	 Addressing Ecosystem Goods and Services through UK Outcome Measures (Joanna Eyquem, Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation).
Small-group, virtual whiteboard sessions:
•	 Natural Infrastructure and Mainstream Options Appraisal Tools
•	 Methods of incorporating Ecosystem Goods and Services in Canada
Review and Structured Plenary Discussion
•	 Technological developments
•	 Economic context, roles and responsibilities
82
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Outputs:
Key points raised in workshop discussions are summarized in Section 4.1 of the report. 
Pre-workshop online survey responses (25 respondents)
Responses to the pre-workshop online survey are summarized below:
Question: What mainstream approaches and tools have you / do you apply during options appraisal to compare different 
coastal resilience options?
Multi-Criteria Analysis (qualitative)
Evaluation against Performance Objectives
Return on Investment (quantitative - focused on tangible 
ﬁnancial gains/costs)
Cost/Beneﬁt Analysis (quantitative - tangible and intangible 
beneﬁts/costs)
Climate Lens GHG and Resilience Assessment
Environmental Impact Assessment (Consideration of alternatives)
Evaluation against Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund 
application criteria
Evaluation against other funding application criteria
Internal organization-speciﬁc options appraisal procedure 
(please specify in the “other” box)
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
18
h
g
f
e
d
c
b
a
i
a)
b)
c)
 
d)
 
e)
f)
g)
 
h)
i)
Question: Do you typically take into account, in some 
form, costs/benefits specific to natural infrastructure (i.e. 
ecosystem goods and services that are not delivered by 
“grey” infrastructure solutions), during options appraisal of 
coastal resilience measures?
Yes, sometimes
No
Yes, always
14
6
5
Question: How do you most commonly take into account 
the costs/benefits of impacts on natural assets (ecosystem 
goods and services) as part of options appraisal relating to 
coastal resilience projects?
Semi-quantitatively
Economic valuation ($)
Quantitatively
Other
11
8
5
1
Appendix B: Online Workshop #1
83
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Outputs:
Online polling responses
Responses to online polls undertaken within the workshop are summarized below:
Question: Which are the most important ecosystem goods and services to consider for coastal resilience projects? 
(respondents were asked to rank the identified ecosystem goods and services). 17 responses.
Question: How do you think each good/service is best reflected in option appraisal? (1 = completely qualitatively, 5 = 
completely quantitatively). 19 responses.
Appendix B: Online Workshop #1
84
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Online Workshop #2: Performance Monitoring of Natural Infrastructure Solutions
Date:
Tuesday, June 29, 2021, 1-4pm EST
Goals:
•	 Identify monitoring approaches that are currently applied across Canada to assess the performance of coastal resilience 
measures against their objectives.
•	 Capture subject matter expertise regarding how monitoring protocols are being / can be improved, particularly in relation 
to performance of nature-based solutions.
•	 Inform guidance for performance monitoring for coastal resilience projects that specifically addresses the co-benefits of 
natural infrastructure and nature-based solutions.
Content:
Pre-workshop questionnaire 
Polling activities
Presentations: 
•	 Key Challenges to Monitoring of Coastal NbS Projects in Canada (Phil Osbourne, Golder, and Danika van Proosdij, Saint 
Mary’s University).
•	 Habitat Enhancement Program –New Brighton Park Shoreline Habitat Restoration Project (Charlotte Olson, Vancouver 
Fraser Port Authority).
•	 Performance Monitoring of Natural Infrastructure Solutions at Baird (Matthew Armstrong, Baird).
Small-group, virtual whiteboard sessions:
1.	Priorities for Coastal NbS Project Monitoring (Monitoring Design)
2.	Priorities for Coastal NbS Project Monitoring (Monitoring Methods)
Review and Structured Plenary Discussion
•	 Towards a minimum standard for monitoring coastal infrastructure projects?
•	 Immediate Recommendations and Long-Term Goals
Appendix B: Online Workshop #2
85
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Outputs:
Key points raised in workshop discussions are summarized in Section 4.2 of the report. 
Pre-workshop online survey responses (15 respondents)
Responses to the pre-workshop online survey are summarized below:
Question: What do you feel is required to improve monitoring of coastal NbS projects in Canada? (please tick all that apply)?
Regulatory requirements
Technical guidance
Centralized repository for monitoring results 
Longer-term funding “baked in” from project outset
National monitoring protocols
Provincial monitoring protocols
Minimum monitoring protocols
National monitoring programme
Other
a)
b)
c)
 
d)
 
e)
f)
g)
 
h)
i)
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
h
g
f
e
d
c
b
a
i
“Other” identified requirements included: 
•	 A credit (like a scoring card) provided to reward good monitoring practices, which could be used in many ways (securing 
more funded projects, tax benefits,..).
•	 Protocol or standard approach to include Indigenous groups in monitoring.
•	 Support for municipalities and communities with trailing costs.
•	 Monitoring of NbS projects post-storm events.
Online polling responses
Responses to online polls undertaken within the workshop are summarized below:
Question: How do you feel about coastal monitoring in Canada today? 17 responses.
Appendix B: Online Workshop #2
86
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Outputs:
Question: Would you be supportive of a minimum coastal monitoring standard? 20 responses.
Question: How strong do you think we are at monitoring physical, biological and social outcomes. (respondents were asked 
to indicate their perception of strength in monitoring from 1 (weak) to 5 (strong) for each type of outcomes)
Appendix B: Online Workshop #2
87
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
References
Executive Summary
1	 Greenan, B.J.W., et al. 2019. “Chapter 7: Changes in oceans surrounding Canada.” In Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report, Government of Canada, Ottawa. Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/
chapter/7-0/
2	  Oppenheimer, M., et al. 2019. “Chapter 4: Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and 
Communities.” In Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC). Accessed at: https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/chapter/chapter-4-sea-level-rise-and-implications-for-
low-lying-islands-coasts-and-communities/
3	  Vouk, I. et al. 2021. “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk Management.” 
Canadian Standards Association. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/CSA-Group-
Research-Nature-Based-Solutions-for-Coastal-and-Riverine-Flood-and-Erosion-Risk-Management.pdf 
4	  Englander, J. 2014. High Tide On Main Street: Rising Sea Level and the Coming Coastal Crisis. (Boca Raton, Florida: 
The Science Bookshelf).
Chapter 1: Introduction: Canada’s Coastline in a Changing Climate
5	  Bush, E. and D.S. Lemmen, editors. 2019. “Canada’s Changing Climate Report.” Government of Canada. 
Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/
6	  Lemmen, D.S., et al. editors. 2016. “Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate.” Government of 
Canada, Ottawa. Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/files/pdf/
NRCAN_fullBook%20%20accessible.pdf
7	  Council of Canadian Academies. 2019. “Canada’s Top Climate Change Risks.” The Expert Panel on Climate 
Change Risks and Adaptation Potential. Accessed at : https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/
Report-Canada-top-climate-change-risks.pdf 
8	  Statistics Canada. 2021. “Canada’s oceans and the economic contribution of marine sectors.” Accessed at: 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/16-002-x/2021001/article/00001-eng.htm 
9	  Lemmen, D.S., et al. editors. 2016. “Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate.” Government of 
Canada, Ottawa. Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/files/pdf/
NRCAN_fullBook%20%20accessible.pdf  
10	 Vouk, I., et al. 2021. “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk 
Management.” Canadian Standards Association. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/
CSA-Group-Research-Nature-Based-Solutions-for-Coastal-and-Riverine-Flood-and-Erosion-Risk-Management.pdf
11	 Lemmen, D.S., et al. editors. 2016. “Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate.” Government of 
Canada, Ottawa. Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/files/pdf/
NRCAN_fullBook%20%20accessible.pdf
88
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
1.1. Canada’s Coastal Population
12	 Statistics Canada. 2021. “Canada’s oceans and the economic contribution of marine sectors.” Accessed at: 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/16-002-x/2021001/article/00001-eng.htm
13	 Ibid
14	 Statistics Canada. 2021. “Canada’s oceans and the economic contribution of marine sectors.” Accessed at: 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/16-002-x/2021001/article/00001-eng.htm
1.2. Coastal Hazards in a Changing Climate
15	 IPCC. 2021. “Annex VII: Glossary.” In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of  Working 
Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of  the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. In press. Accessed at: 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Annex_VII.pdf 
16	 Bedford Institute of Oceanography. 2021. “Canadian Extreme Water Level Adaptation Tool (CAN-
EWLAT).” Accessed at: https://www.bio.gc.ca/science/data-donnees/can-ewlat/index-en.php 
17	 Greenan, B.J.W., et al. 2019. “Chapter 7: Changes in oceans surrounding Canada.” In Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report, Government of Canada, Ottawa. Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/chapter/7-0/
18	 James, T.S. et al. 2014. Relative sea level rise projections for Canada and the adjacent mainland United 
States; Geological Survey of Canada, Open File 7737, 67 p. Accessed at: https://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2016/rncan-nrcan/M183-2-7737-eng.pdf
19	 James, T.S. et al. 2015. Tabulated values of relative sea-level projections in Canada and the adjacent mainland 
United States. Geological Survey of Canada. Open File 7942, 81 p. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4095/297048 
20	 Lemmen, D.S., et al. editors. 2016. Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate. Government of Canada, 
Ottawa. Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/files/pdf/NRCAN_
fullBook%20%20accessible.pdf
21	 Ibid
22	 Ibid
23	 Ibid
24	 Bedford Institute of Oceanography. 2021. “Canadian Extreme Water Level Adaptation Tool (CAN-
EWLAT).” Accessed at: https://www.bio.gc.ca/science/data-donnees/can-ewlat/index-en.php
25	 Government of Canada. 2019. “Get prepared: Storm surges.” Accessed at: https://www.getprepared.gc.ca/
cnt/hzd/strmsrgs-en.aspx#a1 
26  Greenan, B.J.W., et al. 2019. “Chapter 7: Changes in oceans surrounding Canada.” In Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report, Government of Canada, Ottawa. Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/chapter/7-0/	
27	 Lemmen, D.S., et al. editors. 2016. “Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate.” Government of 
Canada, Ottawa. Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/files/pdf/
NRCAN_fullBook%20%20accessible.pdf
28	 Greenan, B.J.W., et al. 2019. “Chapter 7: Changes in oceans surrounding Canada.” In Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report, Government of Canada, Ottawa. Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/chapter/7-0/
1.3. Coastal Ecosystems
29	 Pontee, N. “Defining coastal squeeze: A discussion.” Ocean & Coastal Management. vol. 84, 2013, pp. 204-207. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2013.07.010
30	 Leys, V. and D. Bryce. 2016. “Adapting to Climate Change in Coastal Communities of the Atlantic Provinces, 
89
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
Canada: Land Use Planning and Engineering and Natural Approaches - Part 3 Engineering Tools Adaptation 
Options.” Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association. Accessed at: https://atlanticadaptation.ca/en/
islandora/object/acasa%3A789 
31	 National Geographic. 2021. “Encyclopedic Entry: Estuary.” Accessed at: https://www.nationalgeographic.
org/encyclopedia/estuary/
32	 South Coast Conservation Program. 2017. “Coastal Sand Ecosystems.” Accessed at: http://www.sccp.ca/
species-habitat/coastal-sand-ecosystems
33	 Copernicus Land Monitoring Service. 2021. “4.2.3 Intertidal flats.” Accessed at: https://land.copernicus.eu/
user-corner/technical-library/corine-land-cover-nomenclature-guidelines/html/index-clc-423.html
34	 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 2021. “What is a salt marsh?” Accessed at: 
https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/saltmarsh.html
35	 National Geographic. 2021. “Encyclopedic Entry: Bluff.” Accessed at: https://www.nationalgeographic.org/
encyclopedia/bluff/
Chapter 2: Coastal Risk Management Around the World
2.1. International Coastal Adaptation Responses and Trends
36	Oppenheimer, M., et al. 2019. “Chapter 4: Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and 
Communities.” In Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, IPCC. Accessed at: https://www.
ipcc.ch/srocc/chapter/chapter-4-sea-level-rise-and-implications-for-low-lying-islands-coasts-and-communities/
37	Ibid
38 Ibid
39	Ibid
40 Lincke, D. and J. Hinkel. “Economically robust protection against 21st century sea level rise.” Global 
Environmental Change, vol. 51, 2018, pp.67–73. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.05.003	
41	Bridges, T. S., et al. editors. 2021. “Overview: International Guidelines on Natural and Nature-Based Features 
for Flood Risk Management.” U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center. Accessed at: 
https://ewn.erdc.dren.mil/?page_id=4351
2.2. Country-Based Case Studies 
2.2.1. The Netherlands –Working with Natural Sediment Processes
42	Government of the Netherlands. 2020. “Delta Programme.” URL: https://www.government.nl/topics/delta-
programme
43	Deltacommissie. 2008. “Working together with water: A living land builds for its future.” Accessed at: 
http://www.deltacommissie.com/doc/deltareport_full.pdf
44	Ibid.
45	Climate-ADAPT. 2020. “Sand Motor – building with nature solution to improve coastal protection along 
Delfland coast (the Netherlands).” Accessed at: https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/metadata/case-studies/
sand-motor-2013-building-with-nature-solution-to-improve-coastal-protection-along-delfland-coast-the-
netherlands/#websites
90
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
46	De Zandmotor. 2021. “The Sand Motor –  Driver of innovative coastal maintenance.” Accessed at: 
https://www.dezandmotor.nl/en/home/
47	Rijkswaterstaat. 2021. “The Sand Motor – 10 years of Building with Nature.” Accessed at: https://
dezandmotor.nl/app/uploads/2021/06/Publiekssamenvatting-Zandmotor_ENG_digi.pdf
2.2.2. England – Shoreline Management Planning
48	Environment Agency. 2019. “Policy paper: Shoreline management plans (SMPs).” UK Government. Accessed at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/shoreline-management-plans-smps/shoreline-management-plans-smps
49	Environment Agency. 2019. “Policy paper: Shoreline management plans (SMPs).” UK Government. Accessed 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/shoreline-management-plans-smps
50	Environment Agency. 2019. “National Coastal Erosion Risk Mapping.” UK Government. Accessed at: https://
environment.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=9cef4a084bbb4954b970cd35b099d94c
51	The Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology. 2009. “Coastal Management.” Postnote, no. 342. 
Accessed at: https://www.parliament.uk/documents/post/postpn342.pdf
52	English Nature. 1994. “Northey Island managed retreat. Report 4. Overview to February 1994.” ENRR103. 
Accessed at: http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/publication/62067
53	AMP Mer. 2021. “Welcome to OMREG: A database of completed coastal habitat creation schemes and other 
adaptation projects.” Accessed at: https://www.omreg.net/
54	North Norfolk District Council. 2021. “Bacton to Walcott Coastal Management.” Accessed at: 
https://www.north-norfolk.gov.uk/tasks/coastal-management/bacton-to-walcott-coastal-management/
2.2.3 Japan – The Challenge of Tackling Catastrophic and Ongoing Coastal Risks
55	Masahiko, I. 1998. “Toward Integrated Coastal Management in Japan.” ESENA Workshop, July 11, 1998. 
Accessed at: https://nautilus.org/esena/toward-integrated-coastal-management-in-japan/
56	Toyko Metropolitan Government. 2018. “Protecting Tokyo from Storm Surges and Tsunamis —Port of Tokyo 
Coastal Protection Facilities.” Accessed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MiwSQah546c
57	Uda, T. 2010. “Japan’s Beach Erosion: Reality and Future Measures.” Advanced Series on Ocean Engineering, vol. 
31, 2010, World Scientific. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1142/7332
58	Figal, G. “Life with Tetrapods: The Nature of Concrete in Okinawa.” Cross-Currents: East Asian History and Culture 
Review, vol, 30, 2019, pp. 150–170. Accessed at: https://cross-currents.berkeley.edu/e-journal/issue-30/figal
59	Udo, K. and Y. Takeda. 2017. “Projections of Future Beach Loss in Japan Due to Sea-Level Rise and 
Uncertainties in Projected Beach Loss.” Coastal Engineering Journal, vol. 59:2, pp. 1740006-1-1740006-16. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1142/S057856341740006X
2.2.4. United States of America – Towards Living Shorelines
60	NOAA Climate Program Office. 2021. “U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit: Coasts.” Accessed at: https://toolkit.
climate.gov/topics/coastal-flood-risk
61	NOAA Office for Coastal Management. 2021. “The National Coastal Zone Management Program.” Accessed 
at: https://coast.noaa.gov/czm/
62	NOAA Climate Program Office. 2021. “U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit: Coasts.” Accessed at: https://toolkit.
climate.gov/topics/coastal-flood-risk
91
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
63	Moorman, E., et al. “INSIGHT: States Shift From Seawalls to Living Shorelines.” Bloomberg Law. July 10, 2019. 
Accessed at: https://news.bloomberglaw.com/environment-and-energy/insight-states-shift-from-seawalls-to-
living-shorelines
64	NOAA Living Shorelines Workgroup. 2015. “Guidance for Considering the Use of Living Shorelines.” 
Accessed at: https://www.habitatblueprint.noaa.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/NOAA-Guidance-for-
Considering-the-Use-of-Living-Shorelines_2015.pdf
65	NOAA National Ocean Service. 2021. “What is a living shoreline?” Accessed at: https://oceanservice.noaa.
gov/facts/living-shoreline.html
2.2.5. Australia – Emergence of Nature-Based Approaches to Coastal Protection
66	Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment. 2021. “Coastal compartments for Australia or 
Improving coastal erosion assessments.” Australian Government. Accessed at: https://www.environment.gov.au/
climate-change/adaptation/australias-coasts/coastal-compartments
67	Thom, B. 2014. “Coastal Compartments Project: Summary for Policy Makers.” Accessed at: https://www.awe.
gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/coastal-compartments-project.pdf
68	National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility (NCCARF). 2021. “CoastAdapt: A changing climate in 
coastal Australia: Build knowledge, take action.” Accessed at: https://coastadapt.com.au/
69	National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility (NCCARF). 2021. “CoastAdapt Shoreline Explorer.” 
Accessed at: https://coastadapt.com.au/coastadapt-interactive-map
70	Engineers Australia. 2012. “Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines in Coastal Management and Planning.” 
National Committee on Coastal and Ocean Engineering, Engineers Australia. Accessed at: https://www.
engineersaustralia.org.au/sites/default/files/content-files/2016-12/climate_change_adaptation_guidelines.pdf
71	Morris, R. L., et al. “Developing a nature-based coastal defence strategy for Australia.” Australian Journal of  Civil 
Engineering. vol 17, no. 2, 2019, pp. 167-176. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/14488353.2019.1661062
Chapter 3: Coastal Protection in Canada
72	Doberstein, B., et al. “Protect, accommodate, retreat or avoid (PARA): Canadian community options for 
flood disaster risk reduction and flood resilience.” Natural Hazards, vol, 98, 2019, pp. 31–50. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11069-018-3529-z
73	 Bridges, T. S., et al. editors. 2021. “Overview: International Guidelines on Natural and Nature-Based Features 
for Flood Risk Management.” U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center. Accessed at: https://ewn.
erdc.dren.mil/?page_id=4351
74	 Vouk, I. et al. 2021. “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk Management.” 
Canadian Standards Association. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/CSA-Group-
Research-Nature-Based-Solutions-for-Coastal-and-Riverine-Flood-and-Erosion-Risk-Management.pdf
75	 Ibid
76	 Wilson, J. 2020. “The Efficacy and Design of Coastal Protection Using Large Woody Debris.” Master’s Thesis. 
University of Ottawa. Accessed at: https://ruor.uottawa.ca/bitstream/10393/41573/3/Wilson_Jessica_2020_thesis.pdf
77	 Doberstein, B., et al. “Protect, accommodate, retreat or avoid (PARA): Canadian community options for 
flood disaster risk reduction and flood resilience.” Natural Hazards, vol, 98, 2019, pp. 31–50. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11069-018-3529-z
92
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
78	 Government of Canada. 2021. “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund: Overview.” Accessed at: 
https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/dmaf-faac/index-eng.html 
79	 Federation of Canadian Municipalities. 2021. “Improving coastal flood adaptation approaches: Surrey, BC.” 
Accessed at: https://fcm.ca/en/case-study/mcip/improving-coastal-flood-adaptation-approaches 
80	 Infrastructure Canada. “Canada helps protect Surrey from disastrous impacts of flooding.” Cision News Release. 
May 24, 2019. Accessed at: https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/canada-helps-protect-surrey-from-disastrous-
impacts-of-flooding-854800918.html
Chapter 4: Scaling-Up Use of Coastal Protection Measures that Work with Nature
81	 Vouk, I. et al. 2021. “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk Management.” 
Canadian Standards Association. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/CSA-Group-
Research-Nature-Based-Solutions-for-Coastal-and-Riverine-Flood-and-Erosion-Risk-Management.pdf
82	 Bridges, T. S., et al. editors. 2021. “Overview: International Guidelines on Natural and Nature-Based Features 
for Flood Risk Management.” U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center. Accessed at: 
https://ewn.erdc.dren.mil/?page_id=4351
83	 Vouk, I. et al. 2021. “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk Management.” 
Canadian Standards Association. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/CSA-Group-
Research-Nature-Based-Solutions-for-Coastal-and-Riverine-Flood-and-Erosion-Risk-Management.pdf
84	 Ibid
85	 Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME). 2018. “Best Practices and Resources on Climate 
Resilient Natural Infrastructure.” Accessed at: https://ccme.ca/en/res/natural_infrastructure_report_en.pdf 
86	 Vouk, I. et al. 2021. “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk Management.” 
Canadian Standards Association. Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/CSA-Group-
Research-Nature-Based-Solutions-for-Coastal-and-Riverine-Flood-and-Erosion-Risk-Management.pdf
4.1. Including the Benefits of Nature-Based Solutions in Options Appraisal
87	 Infrastructure Canada. 2021. “Climate Lens - General Guidance.” Government of Canada. Accessed at: 
https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/pub/other-autre/cl-occ-eng.html 
88	 Infrastructure Canada. 2021. “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund: Applicants Guide.” Accessed at: 
https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/alt-format/pdf/dmaf-faac/dmaf-faac-applicant-guide-demandeur-en.pdf 
89	 Moudrak, N., et al. 2018. “Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural infrastructure is an underutilized 
option.” University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/09/IBC_Wetlands-Report-2018_FINAL.pdf 
90	 Infrastructure Canada. 2021. “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund: Applicants Guide.” Accessed at: 
https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/alt-format/pdf/dmaf-faac/dmaf-faac-applicant-guide-demandeur-en.pdf
91	 Parnham, H., et al. editors. 2016. “Using Cost-Benefit Analysis to Evaluate Climate Change Adaptation 
Options in Atlantic Canada.” Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association. Accessed at: 
https://atlanticadaptation.ca/en/islandora/object/acasa%253A779 
92	 Circé, M., et al. 2016. “Cost-Benefit Analysis for Adaptation Option in Quebec’s Coastal Areas – Synthesis Report.” 
Ouranos. Accessed at: https://www.ouranos.ca/wp-content/uploads/Synthesis-report-ACA-Quebec-final.pdf
93	 Ibid
93
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
94	 Ouranos. 2018. “Platform for cost-benefit analysis of erosion and submersion (PANACÉES).” Accessed at: 
https://www.ouranos.ca/en/program/built-environment/ 
95	 Sharp, R., et al. editors. 2020. “InVEST 3.9.2 User’s Guide.” The Natural Capital Project, Stanford 
University, University of Minnesota, The Nature Conservancy, and World Wildlife Fund Accessed at: 
http://releases.naturalcapitalproject.org/invest-userguide/latest/index.html 
96	 Stanford University. 2021. “InVEST.” Accessed at: https://naturalcapitalproject.stanford.edu/software/invest 
97	 Municipal Natural Asset Initiative. 2021. “The Municipal Natural Asset Initiative Coastal Protection and 
Benefit Tool.” Accessed at: https://github.com/essatech/MNAI.CPBT#readme 
98	 Municipal Natural Asset Initiative. 2021. “Managing Natural Assets to Increase Coastal Resilience, Gibsons 
Pilot Study, British Columbia.” Accessed at: https://davidsuzuki.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/MNAI-Pilot-
Coastal-Resilience-Gibsons-2021.pdf 
99	 Municipal Natural Asset Initiative. 2021. “Managing Natural Assets to Increase Coastal Resilience, Pointe-
du-Chêne Pilot Study, New Brunswick, Pilot Study.” Accessed at: https://davidsuzuki.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/09/MNAI-Pilot-Coastal-Resilience-Pointe-du-Chene-2021.pdf
100	
 Ibid
101	
 Ibid
102	
 Infrastructure Canada. 2021. “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund: Applicants Guide.” Accessed 
at: https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/alt-format/pdf/dmaf-faac/dmaf-faac-applicant-guide-demandeur-en.pdf
103	
 Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs. 2021. “Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk 
Management appraisal guidance manual.” UK Government. https://www.gov.uk/guidance/flood-and-coastal-
erosion-risk-management-appraisal-guidance 
104	
 Environment Agency. 2021. “Operational principles to follow when setting up funding partnerships to 
tackle flood and coastal erosion.” Version 1.1. UK Government. Accessed at:  https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1021917/02_-_Operational_principles_for_
FCERM_funding_partnerships_v1.1.pdf 
105	
 Environment Agency. 2020. “Partnership funding: Supporting guidance for Outcome Measure 4.” 
Version 2.0. UK Government. Accessed at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/1026844/Partnership_funding_supporting_guidance_for_OM4.pdf 
106	
 Ibid
107	
 Environment Agency. 2013. “Valuing Environmental Benefits.” External Briefing Note. Accessed at: 
http://www.thames21.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/NWEB-Briefing-Notes.pdf 
108	
 NOAA Restoration Center. 2019. “Building Coastal Resilience through Living Shorelines.” Accessed at: 
https://www.habitatblueprint.noaa.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Fact-Sheet-2019-Living-Shorelines.pdf 
109	
 Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. 2021. “Shore Friendly Grant Program.” Accessed at: 
https://wdfw.wa.gov/species-habitats/habitat-recovery/nearshore/conservation/programs/shore-friendly 
110	
 Stewardship Centre for British Columbia. 2021. “Green Shores - About the Program.” Accessed at: 
https://stewardshipcentrebc.ca/green-shores-home/gs-about/ 
111	
Stewardship Centre for British Columbia. 2021. “Green Shores Shoreline Development Program.” 
Accessed at: https://stewardshipcentrebc.ca/green-shores-home/gs-programs/gssd/
112	
Stewardship Centre for British Columbia. 2021. “Green Shores for Homes.” Accessed at: 
https://stewardshipcentrebc.ca/green-shores-home/gs-programs/green-shores-for-homes/
94
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s Coastal Communities
4.2. Improving Performance Monitoring to Demonstrate Benefits of 
Nature-based Solutions
113	
 Gouvernement du Québec. 2014. “Guide sur la gestion axée sur les résultats.” Secrétariat du Conseil du 
trésor. Accessed at: https://www.tresor.gouv.qc.ca/fileadmin/PDF/publications/GuideGestionAxeeResultat.pdf 
114	
 Dionne, M. et al. “A Monitoring Protocol to Assess Tidal Restoration of Salt Marshes on Local and 
Regional Scales.” Restoration Ecology, vol. 10, no. 3, 2002, pp. 556-563. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1526-
100X.2002.02033.x 
115	
 Parks Canada. “Parks Canada’s new Coastie Initiative gets you in the picture with science.” Cision News 
Release, Oct 15, 2021. Accessed at: https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/parks-canada-s-new-coastie-initiative-
gets-you-in-the-picture-with-science-811370460.html
116	
 Nantucket Data Platform. 2019. “Visualizations - A Saturday in July.” Accessed at: 
https://nantucketdataplatform.com/visualizations/ 
4.3. Building Capacity to Deliver by Engaging the Private Sector
117	
 The Canadian Council for Public-Private Partnerships. 2016. “Definitions and Models.” Accessed at: 
https://www.pppcouncil.ca/web/P3_Knowledge_Centre/About_P3s/Definitions_Models.aspx 
118	
 Ibid
119	
 Swiss Re Group. 2021. “World Heritage Site nature-based solution leads the way in reducing the risk 
of rising sea levels.” Accessed at: https://www.swissre.com/our-business/public-sector-solutions/our-solutions/
nature-based-solutions/world-heritage-site-nature-based-solution-leads-way-reducing-risk-rising-sea-levels.html 
120	
 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Centre. 
2021. “Wadden Sea.” Accessed at: https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1314/ 
121	
 International Risk Management Institute Inc (IRMI). 2021. “Parametric Insurance.” Accessed at: 
https://www.irmi.com/term/insurance-definitions/parametric-insurance 
To find out more:
Joanna Eyquem PGeo. ENV SP. CWEM. CEnv.
Managing Director, Climate-Resilient Infrastructure
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
514-268-0873 | joanna.eyquem@uwaterloo.ca
www.intactcentre.ca | Twitter @ICCA_Canada
