Supported by:
April 2022
Joanna Eyquem P.Geo.
ENV SP. CWEM. CEnv.
Blair Feltmate PhD.
IRREVERSIBLE 
EXTREME HEAT: 
PROTECTING 
CANADIANS AND 
COMMUNITIES FROM 
A LETHAL FUTURE
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
2
About the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is an applied research centre at the University of 
Waterloo. The Intact Centre was founded in 2015 with a gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s 
largest property and casualty insurer. The Intact Centre helps homeowners, communities and businesses to 
reduce risks associated with climate change and extreme weather events. For additional information, visit: www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca
About the University of Waterloo
The University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation university. With more than 41,000 full and part-time 
students (Fall 2019), the university is home to the world’s largest co-operative education system of its kind. The 
university’s unmatched entrepreneurial culture, combined with an intensive focus on research, powers one of the 
top innovation hubs in the world. For additional information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca
About the Intact Financial Corporation
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX: IFC) is the largest provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in 
Canada and a leading provider of specialty insurance in North America, with over CAD$11 billion in total 
annual premiums. The Company has approximately 16,000 employees who serve more than five million personal, 
business and public sector clients through offices in Canada and the U.S. In Canada, Intact distributes insurance 
under the Intact Insurance brand through a wide network of brokers, including its wholly owned subsidiary 
BrokerLink, and directly to consumers through belairdirect. Intact Public Entites, a leading MGA, distributes 
public entity insurance programs including risk and claims management services in Canada. In the U.S., Intact 
Insurance Specialty Solutions provides a range of specialty insurance products and services through independent 
agencies, regional and national brokers, and wholesalers and managing general agencies. Products are 
underwritten by the insurance company subsidiaries of Intact Insurance Group USA, LLC. For more information, 
visit: https://intactfc.com/ 
All findings and recommendations of this study are those of the Intact Centre. 
Citation
Eyquem, J. L, and B. Feltmate. 2022. Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a 
Lethal Future. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo.
For information about this report, contact Joanna Eyquem: joanna.eyquem@uwaterloo.ca
Disclaimer
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible. The Intact Centre 
cannot make any guarantees of any kind, as to the completeness, accuracy, suitability or reliability of the data provided in the report. This 
report has been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only and does not constitute professional advice. You should not act 
upon the information contained in this publication without obtaining specific professional advice. No representation or warranty (express 
or implied) is given as to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this publication, and Intact Centre employees and 
affiliates do not accept or assume any liability, responsibility, or duty of care for any consequences to you or anyone else acting, or refraining 
to act, in reliance on the information contained in this report or for any decision based upon it. All dollar figures are Canadian dollars.
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
3
Table of Contents
Acknowledgments
4
Executive Summary
6
1.	 Urgent Need for Action to Combat Extreme Heat in Canada
12
1.1 Urban Heat Islands: A Key Challenge for Canada’s Cities and Towns15
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat 
18
1.2.1 Health
19
1.2.2 Infrastructure and Services
23
1.2.3 Natural Systems
26
1.2.4 Economy
26
	 1.3 Related Impacts
27
2.	 Hotting Up: An Overview of Extreme Heat Projections for 	
	
	
	
Canadian Communities
30
2.1 National Trends
31
2.2 Exposed Communities
33
3.	 Resilience to Extreme Heat: 35 Practical Actions
37
3.1 Non-Structural 
43
3.1.1 Individuals (IND)
43
3.1.2 Property Owners and Managers (PROP)
48
3.1.3 Communities (COM)
53
3.2 Green Infrastructure (GI)
61
3.2.1 Using Nature
61
3.2.2 Green Buildings
64
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure (BI)
67
3.3.1 Passive Cooling for Buildings
67
3.3.2 Active Cooling for Buildings
70
3.3.3 Emergency Preparedness of Buildings
73
3.3.4 Community Infrastructure
75
4.	 Achieving Multiple Benefits
79
5.	 Conclusion and Next Steps
83
Appendix A: Assessment of Extreme Heat Projections 
86
Appendix B: Heat Warning Criteria in Canada
90
References
94
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
4
Acknowledgments
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation thanks stakeholders across Canada for their contributions and 
advice, including:
Marianne Armstrong, Initiative Leader, Climate Resilient Built Environment Initiative, National Research 
Council of Canada
Kathryn Bakos, Director, Climate Finance and Science, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Chris Ballard, Chief Executive Officer, Passive House Canada 
Peter Berry, PhD.; Adjunct Assistant Professor, Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo and Adjunct 
Research Professor, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Carleton University
Thomas Bowers, Director of Research and Policy, Greenbelt Foundation
Nathalie Bleau, Coordinator–Adaptation of living environments, Coordination of adaptation science, Ouranos
Marjorie Brans, Director of Ecosystem Impact, School for Social Entrepreneurs Canada
Céline Campagna, Ph.D.; Researcher, Climate and Health, Institut national de santé publique du Québec
Laurie Cantin-Towner, Advisor, Built Environment, Société d’habitation du Québec
Remi Charron, Ph.D.; P.Eng.; Technical Research and Education Consultant, BC Housing 
Chris Chen, CPA; Executive Director, Asset Management Ontario
Raouf Chehaiber, P.Eng.; CEM; CRE; Senior Technical Researcher, Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation 
Irene Cloutier, Planning Advisor, Bureau de la transition écologique et de la résilience, City of Montreal
Romain Coste, Project Manager, Mobility and Urban Resilience, Conseil régional de l’environnement de Montréal
Jennifer Court, Executive Director, Green Infrastructure Ontario Coalition
Diego Creimer, Director, Natural Climate Solutions and Government Relations, Canadian Parks and 
Wilderness Society–Quebec
Jillian Curley, P.Biol.; Climate Adaptation Specialist, City of Calgary
Marla Desat, Sector Specialist, Standards Council of Canada
Helen Doyle, Chair, Environmental Health Work Group, Ontario Public Health Association
Nathalie Doyon, Architect, Société d’habitation du Québec
Laurie-Maude Drapeau, Scientific Advisor, Institut national de santé publique du Québec
Cheryl Evans, Director, Flood and Wildfire Resilience, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Lynda Gagné, Ph.D.; Researcher, Université du Québec en Outaouais–Institut des Sciences de la Forêt Tempérée
Derek Gray, Climate Change Specialist, AECOM Canada Ltd.
Alexander Hayes, LEED AP; Research Officer, National Research Council of Canada
Jane Hilderman, Executive Director, ClimateWest
Infrastructure Canada officials
Zahra Jandaghian, Ph.D.; Research Associate, National Research Council of Canada
Ilana Judah, architecte, Int’l Associate AIA, LEED AP BD+C, CPHC; Principal, ACORN Resilience & 
Sustainability
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
5
Ted Kesik, Ph.D.; P.Eng.; Professor of Building Science, Daniels Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and 
Design, University of Toronto
Kris Kolenc, Manager, Research & Sustainability, REALPAC
Tom Kosatsky, MD; MPH; Scientific Director, National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health
Scott Krayenhoff, Ph.D.; Assistant Professor, School of Environmental Sciences, University of Guelph
Amalia Kyriacou, Social Impact Specialist, Intact Financial Corporation
Natalie Lagassé, MCP; Regional Planner, Winnipeg Metropolitan Region
Vincent Lambert-Song, Project Coordinator, New Brunswick Environmental Network
Abdelaziz Laouadi, Senior Research Officer, National Research Council of Canada
Felissa Lareau-Carpentier, Planning Advisor, Bureau de la transition écologique et de la résilience, City of Montreal
Élène Levasseur, Ph.D.; Research Coordinator, Architecture Without Borders Quebec 
Jinliang Liu, Senior Science Advisor, Climate Change, Ontario Ministry of the Environment, Conservation and Parks
Lydia Ma, Ph.D.; Manager, National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health
David MacLeod, Senior Environmental Specialist, City of Toronto
Rachel Mallet, Researcher, Bureau de la transition écologique et de la résilience, City of Montreal
Babak Mahmoudi Ayough, Ph.D.; Senior Specialist, Housing Research, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation
Tamsin Mills, Senior Sustainability Specialist, City of Vancouver
Michelle Molnar, Technical Director, Municipal Natural Assets Initiative
Natalia Moudrak, Managing Director, Climate Resiliency Leader, Public Sector Partnership, Aon
Sheila Murray, Co-founder, CREW (Community Resilience to Extreme Weather)
Shereen Panesar, Senior Policy Advisor, Ontario Ministry of the Environment, Conservation and Parks
Victoria Papp, Director, Strategy and Innovation, BOMA Canada
Hope Parnham, CSLA; MCIP; Committee on Climate Adaptation, Canadian Society of Landscape Architects.
Jo-Ellen Parry, Director, Adaptation, International Institute for Sustainable Development	
François Prévost, Project Leader, Environmental Modelling, Analysis & Science Facilitation, Ontario Ministry 
of the Environment
Harshan Radhakrishnan, P.Eng.; Manager, Climate Change and Sustainability Initiatives, Engineers and 
Geoscientists BC 
Heather Richards, Senior Consultant, Ontario Ministry of Health
Chris Rol, Manager, Policy, Insurance Bureau of Canada
Emmanuel Rondia, Executive Director, Conseil régional de l’environnement de Montréal
Didier Serre Ruah, FSA; Head of Climate Risk Modeling and Research, Clearsum
Jeanette Southwood, FCAE, FEC, LL.D. (h.c.), P.Eng.; Vice-president, Corporate Affairs and Strategic 
Partnerships, Engineers Canada
Alejandro Terrones, Director, Disaster Risk Reduction, Canadian Red Cross
Dwayne Torrey, P.Eng.; Director, Construction and Infrastructure Standards, CSA Group
Conservation and Parks
Sarah Warren, Member, Environmental Health Work Group, Ontario Public Health Association
Ralph Wells, Community Energy Manager, University of British Columbia
Heather Wheeliker, Program Manager, Community Involvement, City of Edmonton
T. Luke Young, Practice Lead, Resilience and Climate Change, Americas, AECOM
6
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
Executive Summary
Urban areas are the hot spots 
of global warming. Extreme heat, 
alongside flooding and wildfire, is a 
key risk to the health and well-being of 
Canadians. The situation is growing more 
dangerous, driven by irreversible climate 
change—Canada is warming, on average, 
at twice the global rate.1 Urgent action 
is required NOW to manage risk 
and avoid worsening impacts – and 
ultimately FATALITIES – resulting 
from rising heat.
Extremely hot temperatures and heat 
waves can be deadly and have a severe 
impact on health, infrastructure and 
services, the natural world, and ultimately, 
the economy. Not all Canadians will 
be affected in the same way, and 
those most vulnerable will require 
additional support.
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
7
Urban centres face the greatest risk because of the urban-heat-island effect. Surface 
daytime temperatures can be 10 – 15°C hotter in urban heat islands, while nighttime 
temperatures can be up to 12°C hotter than in surrounding rural areas. Large 
geographical areas of Canada that are also particularly at risk include: low-lying areas 
from the West Coast to the Rocky Mountains (British Columbia), the Prairies bordering 
the United States (southern Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba) and north of Lake 
Erie through the St. Lawrence River Valley (southern Ontario and Quebec).
During episodes of extreme heat, everyone is at risk from heat illnesses. But the danger is 
greatest for those who are already more vulnerable or less able to protect themselves. This 
includes people who are more exposed to extreme heat (including people experiencing 
homelessness or those living or working outside), those who are more sensitive to 
extreme heat (such as the elderly or chronically ill) and those with fewer resources to 
adapt (for instance, people on lower incomes who cannot afford actions to retrofit their 
homes). Extreme heat frequently adds to existing inequality; marginalized or racialized 
communities often live with combined risk factors, making them even more vulnerable.
The good news is that heat-related illness 
and death are largely preventable with 
knowledge, education, and adaptive 
action. However, resilience to extreme 
heat cannot be achieved by relying on air 
conditioning alone.2
This guide presents a compendium of practical actions that Canadians can undertake to 
reduce risks in relation to extreme heat (Table 1) that fall into three categories:
•	 changing behaviour (non-structural)
•	 working with nature (green infrastructure)
•	 improving buildings and public infrastructure (grey infrastructure) 
Individuals, property owners and managers, and communities all have a role to play, by 
acting on their own and encouraging others to act; this will build resilience to extreme 
heat at the local and community scale.
Ideally, actions to reduce risks from extreme heat should be designed to deliver additional 
Executive Summary
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
8
benefits. Solutions that work with nature can improve biodiversity, help to reduce 
flooding, and help to increase carbon storage—while also keeping people cooler. In other 
settings, energy efficiency and resilience to extreme heat can be improved at the same 
time, reducing energy consumption and greenhouse-gas emissions. Public or private 
organizations considering strategic investments or incentives to increase Canadians’ 
resilience to extreme heat should consider these “win-win” opportunities to maximize 
return on investment, in terms of the social, environmental and financial benefits for the 
country and the economy. 
Facing the heat is a growing challenge in Canada. The practical actions described in this 
guide will enable numerous Canadians to adapt to rising temperatures while helping to 
reduce greenhouse gases and build more resilient, sustainable communities. However, 
several actions can only be implemented by those who own property. Tenants and others 
with fewer resources to adapt to heat will have more limited options and are often most 
at-risk; these vulnerable groups require targeted support.
Canadian alarm bells should be ringing loud and clear in relation to extreme heat. 
While flood and fire may be Canada’s most costly natural disasters, extreme heat is the 
“silent killer”. If an extreme heat event coincided with an extended power outage – with 
no electricity supply to air conditioners and fans – lack of preparedness could result in 
widespread fatalities. Everyone has a responsibility to reduce their own risks from extreme 
heat, and an opportunity to help protect others more vulnerable than themselves.
Executive Summary
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
9
Table 1: Practical adaptation strategies to reduce risks from extreme heat
Actions by Individuals
Non-structural
(planning and 
behavioural changes)
Green Infrastructure*
(working with nature)
Grey Infrastructure
(improving buildings and 
public infrastructure)
IND-1 
Work with neighbours, friends 
and family to prepare**
IND-2 
Arrange to receive public heat 
warnings**
IND-3 
Learn how to use natural 
ventilation**
IND-4 
Minimize “waste” indoor 
heat production, for example 
by switching off unused 
appliances**
IND-5 
Plan for modified working, living 
and sleeping arrangements**
GI-1
Plant and maintain trees 
GI-2
Expand vegetation cover and 
absorb water to keep gardens 
and balconies cooler**
GI-3
Install a green (vegetated) roof 
GI-4
Grow a green (vegetated) 
façade**
BI-1
Enhance insulation and 
airtightness
BI-2
Install cool (reflective) roof / wall 
/ paving surfaces 
BI-3
Use concrete, brick, stone and 
tile finishes that absorb heat
BI-4
Install windows that reduce heat 
gain from the sun
BI-5
Install shading devices (shutters, 
awnings, overhangs, blinds, 
heat-resistant curtains) **
BI-6
Install temperature and humidity 
monitors or controls**
BI-7
Use ceiling / portable fan(s)**
BI-8
Install and maintain air 
conditioning / heat pump
* In places at risk of wildfire, particularly at the wildland-urban interface, the use of green infrastructure 
must be considered alongside FireSmart guidance.3
** Denotes actions that may be most achievable by tenants and those with fewer resources
Executive Summary
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
10
Actions by Property Owners and Managers
(multi-unit residential and commercial buildings)
Non-structural
(planning and 
behavioural changes)
Green Infrastructure*
(working with nature)
Grey Infrastructure
(improving buildings and 
public infrastructure)
PROP-1
Understand building-scale 
vulnerabilities to extreme heat
PROP-2
Provide information and help 
occupants adapt 
PROP-3
Identify and support vulnerable 
occupants (e.g. the elderly or 
those living alone)
PROP-4
Use natural ventilation in 
common areas
PROP-5
Develop extreme-heat 
emergency plan with occupants
GI-1
Plant and maintain trees in 
grounds and parking lots
GI-2
Expand vegetated areas and 
absorb water around buildings, 
on balconies and in parking lots
GI-3
Install a green (vegetated) roof
GI-4
Grow a green (vegetated) 
façade or wall
See individuals BI-1 to BI-8, 
plus: 
BI-9
Install and maintain backup 
power generation (e.g. to 
maintain air conditioning in 
designated “cool” rooms)
BI-10
Arrange for backup water 
supply during power outages 
(pumped water supply cannot 
function properly without 
power)
* In places at risk of wildfire, particularly at the wildland-urban interface, the use of green infrastructure 
must be considered alongside FireSmart guidance.3
Executive Summary
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
11
Actions by Communities
Non-structural
(planning and 
behavioural changes)
Green Infrastructure*
(working with nature)
Grey Infrastructure
(improving buildings and 
public infrastructure)
COM-1
Assess and map vulnerability to 
extreme heat 
COM-2
Use education and outreach 
campaigns to encourage 
preventive action 
COM-3
Set up community support 
programs for vulnerable 
populations (e.g. underserved 
communities)
COM-4
Require heat-sensitive urban 
planning, infrastructure design, 
and operation
COM-5
Provide incentives to increase 
passive cooling and reduce 
“waste” heat (e.g. by subsidising 
tree planting or home retrofits)
COM-6
Develop extreme-heat 
emergency plan
GI-1
Plant and maintain trees 
(including in urban forests, 
green corridors, and urban 
parks)
GI-2
Expand vegetated areas and 
water bodies and absorb more 
water (forming a blue-green 
infrastructure network)
BI-11
Adapt community infrastructure 
to extreme heat (e.g. transport, 
utilities, water supply)
BI-12
Reduce vehicular traffic
BI-13
Install “cool” reflective or 
permeable pavements 
BI-14
Expand artificial shade (e.g. 
using canopies or shelters) 
BI-15
Install water-based cooling 
systems (e.g. ponds and 
sprinklers) and drinking 
fountains
* In places at risk of wildfire, particularly at the wildland-urban interface, the use of green infrastructure 
must be considered alongside FireSmart guidance.3
Executive Summary
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
12
Urgent Need for Action 
to Combat Extreme 
Heat in Canada
Chapter 
1
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
13
Extreme heat is a serious and growing 
risk to Canadians. Extreme-heat events 
have already caused premature deaths 
and disrupted natural systems and the 
economy. We cannot prevent extreme 
weather caused by climate change in 
the short term, but we can—indeed 
must—adapt to it. To reduce negative 
impacts on health and the economy 
from extreme-heat events, Canadians 
must act swiftly. People who are already 
marginalized or underserved are among 
those who are most at risk from extreme 
heat; they will require additional support 
to counter these existing inequalities.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the United Nations body 
responsible for assessing climate science, states that there will be an increase in the 
frequency, intensity and duration of extreme-weather events, including floods, droughts 
and heat waves, throughout the 21st century. It says many changes caused by past and 
future greenhouse-gas emissions will be irreversible for centuries to millennia.4 Canada 
is warming, on average, at twice the global rate; annual mean temperatures increased by 
1.7°C between 1948 and 2016.5
  
While floods are recognized as the most costly natural disasters in Canada, in terms of 
insured property damage by water,6 extreme heat is a leading cause of death among 
climate change-related weather events.7 The severe implications for health were 
underscored by the impact of the heat wave in western Canada in the summer of 2021. 
Preliminary findings indicate that 526 people died as a result of extreme heat in British 
526
Deaths as a result 
of extreme heat in 
British Columbia, 
June 25 to July 1, 
2021. 
!
Chapter 1: Urgent Need For Action
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
14
Columbia between June 25 and July 1, and that most of these deaths (69 per cent) were of 
people aged 70 and over.8 
In addition to the dangers to human health, extreme-heat events pose risks to infrastructure 
such as train tracks, roads and electricity grids, and can harm plants and animals 
(including those supporting food production). All can adversely affect the economy. 
As “record-breaking” temperatures and heat waves will become even more frequent and 
intense in the future, communities need to prepare. This report sets out the adaptive 
actions that individuals, property owners and managers, and communities can take to 
reduce these risks. These actions are presented in three categories: 
•	 Non-structural —planning and behavioural changes 
•	 Green Infrastructure—using nature to help us stay cool 
•	 Grey or “Built” Infrastructure —new designs and retrofits that cool buildings 
and keep infrastructure functioning 
The actions are particularly relevant for urban areas, which are the hot spots of global 
warming, as identified by the IPCC (Fig. 1).
Figure 1. Why cities are the hot spots of global warming (adapted from IPCC, 2021)9
Chapter 1 identifies the impacts of extreme heat; Chapter 2 illustrates the areas of 
Canada likely to be the most exposed to extreme heat from 2051 through 2080; Chapter 
3 presents the 35 practical actions to reduce the risks, and Chapter 4 demonstrates the 
multiple benefits of specific actions.
 
Chapter 1: Urgent Need For Action
CITY 
GEOMETRY
Building density, 
city layout, height 
and size
HEAT FROM 
HUMAN 
ACTIVITY
Domestic and
industrial heating
HEAT-RETAINING
PROPERTIES
Buildings and
road materials
WATER
Sea, river,
lakes, irrigation
VEGETATION
Parks, forests,
gardens
Local effect
on
temperature
(°C)
COOLING
WARMING
Variations across different climates
Cities often lack water and vegetation
0
+1
+2
-2
-1
-3
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
15
The information about practical ways to tackle extreme heat is founded on a review of 
research and best practices, as well as advice from subject-matter experts. While the 35 
actions are oriented to urban settings, many of them can also be used in rural areas.
  
This report does not address risks associated with drought, wildfire, thunderstorms 
or reduced air quality, which may be connected to extreme heat. Nor does it address 
the additional challenges that warming temperatures are bringing to communities 
in Canada’s North. Several of the practical actions may be appropriate for use by 
Indigenous communities in southern Canada, but we do not explicitly address the risks to 
Indigenous communities, or opportunities to learn from and use traditional Indigenous 
knowledge. Further research is recommended to address this gap.
At the end of the report, references are presented in an accessible format, to encourage 
further reading.
1.1 
Urban Heat Islands: A Key Challenge for 
Canada’s Cities and Towns
Extreme heat is a specific challenge for Canada’s cities and towns, one that the federal 
government has highlighted as a key national issue in its series of reports “Canada in a 
Changing Climate.10
During heat events, conditions are worse in urban areas, because of the urban-heat-
island effect. An urban heat island is an urban area that is significantly warmer than 
surrounding areas. The air, or surfaces, or both, may exhibit these warmer temperatures. 
The layer of air where people live—from the ground to below the tops of trees and 
roofs—is the air where the urban-heat-island effect is most pronounced. In a city of one 
million people or more, the annual mean air temperature can be one to three degrees 
Celsius warmer than surrounding rural or suburban areas. On a clear, calm night, this 
temperature difference can be as much as 12°C,11 effectively extending the daytime heat 
into the evening hours, and making it more difficult to cool and ventilate buildings at night. 
Hard surfaces can show bigger differences in temperature. On average, the difference 
between surface temperatures in urban heat islands and surrounding rural areas is 
between 10°C and 15°C during the day.12 The hot surfaces in urban areas increase the 
experience of heat outdoors, particular where shade is limited.
 
10-15°C
How much higher 
the daytime surface 
temperatures in 
urban heat islands 
can be compared to 
rural areas. 
!
1.1 Urban Heat Islands
Surface temperature
Air temperature
DAY
(4 pm)
NIGHT
(2am)
Temperature
Rural
Suburban
Pond
Warehouse
or industrial
Urban
residential
Urban
residential
Park
Suburban
Rural
Downtown
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
16
Figure 2 shows how air and surface temperatures vary with different land uses and times 
of day; both tend to be warmest in core urban areas.13 In almost all locations, surfaces 
are warmer than the air during the day, but at night, their temperatures become similar. 
A significant exception is water—the pond in Figure 2 maintains a fairly constant surface 
temperature day and night, because of its capacity to store and emit heat.
Figure 2. A schematic representation of the urban heat island effect and the variation 
of surface and air temperatures over different land uses (adapted from EPA, 2008)
Most Canadians live in urban areas. On July 1, 2020, 27.3 million people, or just over 
seven in 10 people (71.8 per cent), were living in one of Canada’s 35 census metropolitan 
areas (CMAs)—defined as areas with a total population of at least 100,000, of which 
50,000 live in the core.14 In these areas, it is urgent to adapt to extreme heat in order to 
limit the potential health impacts on millions of people. Table 2 outlines four key factors 
that contribute to the formation of urban heat islands in these areas.
1.1 Urban Heat Islands
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
17
Table 2. Factors contributing to the urban-heat-island effect (adapted from various sources 15,16,17,18)
Factor
Description
Replacement of 
natural “green” 
infrastructure with 
man-made “grey” 
infrastructure.
Trees, vegetation and water bodies 
(rivers, lakes and ponds) tend to cool 
the surrounding air and surfaces by 
providing shade, transpiring water from 
their leaves, and by evaporation. Man-
made surfaces—such as roofs, sidewalks, 
roads, buildings, and parking lots—
provide less shade and evaporate less 
moisture than natural landscapes. Man-
made materials also tend to absorb, and 
later emit, more of the sun’s heat than 
natural surfaces. 
Urban geometry
The sizes and spacing of buildings in 
a city influence the flow of wind, and 
its ability to absorb and release solar 
energy. In heavily developed areas, the 
surfaces and structures of buildings 
that are near each other become large 
thermal masses that cannot readily 
release their heat. Cities with many 
narrow streets and tall buildings also 
create urban canyons, which can block 
the natural flow of wind that would cool 
the area.
Heat generated from 
human activities
Vehicles, air-conditioning units, 
buildings, and industrial facilities all emit 
heat. These sources of human-generated 
“waste” heat can contribute to heat-
island effects.
Geographical setting
In some cities, local or regional 
geographic features can help to form 
urban heat islands. For example, nearby 
mountains can block wind from reaching 
a city, or create wind patterns that pass 
over rather than through a city. 
1.1 Urban Heat Islands
Photo 84516282 © Andres Garcia Martin | Dreamstime.com
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
18
1.2 
Impacts of Extreme Heat 
The risks of extreme heat are commonly considered in terms of health impacts, with the 
media focusing largely on heat-related deaths. However, extreme heat also has adverse 
effects on infrastructure and services, natural systems and ultimately, the economy, as 
exemplified by the range of impacts identified by the City of Montreal (Fig. 3). The 
following sections describe these impacts.
Figure 3. Examples of potential impacts of heat waves on cities (extract from the City 
of Montreal’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Agglomeration of Montreal 
2015-2020.19)
SOCIOECONOMIC ISSUES
Health
•	 Health problems caused by air pollution (smog, fine 
particles, pollen)
•	 Illnesses caused by contaminated swimming water
•	 Health problems linked to body temperature imbalances 
(hyperthermia)
•	 Health problems caused by limitations to mobility
•	 Increased premature death rate
Expenses for individuals
•	 Economic losses caused by absenteeism and temporary job 
cessation
Inconveniences and accidents
•	 Inconveniences related to road mobility (discomfort in 
metros and buses)
•	 Food poisoning
BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Public infrastructures
•	 Damage to the road network
•	 Premature damage to the expansion 
joints on civil engineering works
•	 Loss of adhesion between asphalt and 
bridge decks - “slippage cracks” in the 
asphalt when pulled by vehicles
•	 Ruts formed on driving surfaces
•	 Damage to the sewer system caused by the 
increased generation of H2S, harmful to 
concrete infrastructures
•	 Thermal expansion of rails
Residential and ICI 
infrastructures
•	 No significant impacts identified
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
Photo 84516282 © Andres Garcia Martin | Dreamstime.com
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
19
MUNICIPAL OPERATIONS
Increased demand for cooling-off areas
•	 Demand to extend the opening hours of air-conditioned 
public spaces (libraries, community centres, etc.)
•	 Increased demand for pools, wading pools and splash pads
•	 Curtailed outdoor works
Increased demand for drinking water
•	 Shorter system idle time will weaken the system in case of 
problems
•	 Higher costs for chemical products and electricity
•	 Increased presence of cyanobacteria in the water requiring 
ozone treatment (not available in all plants)
•	 Faster degradation of chlorine in the system, which will 
increase rechlorination needs and associated operating costs 
Increased complaints
•	 Problems with bad smells from manholes during heat waves 
and drought periods
•	 Problems with residual material management (bad smells, 
proliferation of flies, etc.)
1.2.1 Health
Extreme heat directly affects physical health, as well as mental health and general well-
being, for example, by limiting outdoor work and recreation. A person’s experience of 
heat is affected by four physical factors: the air temperature; the transfer of heat from 
the sun (solar radiation); the humidity level, and air velocity or speed. Increases in three 
of these factors—temperature, solar radiation and humidity—generally contribute to 
a feeling of greater heat. An increase in air speed, however, has a cooling effect, as it 
encourages the evaporation of sweat from the skin.20
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Plants
•	 Increased water stress
•	 Management of undesirable plant species: 
loss of effectiveness of some herbicides
Insects
•	 Reduced insect populations (pests and 
auxiliaries) as they reach their thermal 
development limit
•	 Management of pest insects: loss of 
effectiveness of many pesticides
Fauna
•	 Changes to bird communities
Water bodies
•	 Proliferation of cyanobacteria
•	 Change to the structure of communities of 
aquatic organisms
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
Photo 224256676 © Wojciech Wrzesień | Dreamstime.com
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
20
Physical Health 
When indoor or outdoor temperatures are very hot, people are more likely to suffer 
from heat exhaustion and heat stroke, which may be fatal. Symptoms of heat exhaustion 
include sweating, fatigue, weakness, dizziness, headache, general malaise, and nausea or 
vomiting after intense exposure to heat.
 
Heat stroke is a medical emergency. It is a severe form of heat illness that needs to 
be treated immediately on-site, by cooling and hydrating the sufferer while awaiting 
emergency assistance.21 Extreme heat may also cause non-fatal illnesses, including heat 
edema (swelling of hands, feet and ankles), heat rash and heat cramps, and it may 
contribute to fainting, as well as aggravating existing health conditions.22,23 
As well, people can be burned by extremely hot surfaces, especially those in direct sunlight 
such as metal surfaces in children’s playgrounds.24
The effects of high temperatures on physical health are already being felt across Canada. 
The previously mentioned heat wave in western and central Canada in 2021 was 
prefaced by the summer of 2018 in southern Quebec, the hottest summer on record there 
in 146 years of meteorological observations; across the nine regions affected, 86 excess 
deaths were reported, possibly heat-related.25 Similar events also occurred in Quebec in 
July 2010 (280 excess deaths) and in British Columbia in July 2009 (156 excess deaths).
 
Around the world, climate change is contributing to the number of deaths caused by 
extreme heat. One study of 43 countries concluded that, on average, climate change was 
responsible for 37 per cent of warm-weather, heat-related deaths in the 27 years from 
1991 to 2018, and that increased mortality as a result of climate change is evident on 
every continent.26 
 
Heat-related deaths are largely preventable with knowledge, education and adaptive 
action.27 Figure 4 clearly highlights the serious consequences of failing to adapt. 
86
Number of excess 
heat-related deaths 
in Quebec during 
the summer of 2018 
- the hottest on 
record.
!
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
RCP
2.6
RCP
4.5
RCP
6.0
RCP
8.5
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
500
747,000
14,700
44,700
Percent
increase in 
mortality
(estimated)
Excessive 
deaths 
associated 
with heat
(estimated)
Expected mortality for 2031-2080 compared to 1971-2020 baseline
Population scenario:
 
high population scenario
 
low population scenario
Adaptation scenarios and representative concentration pathways (RCPs)
Adaptation scenario:
 
full adaptation
 
non-adaptation
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
21
Figure 4. Excess mortality associated with heat waves in Canada under various 
scenarios, 2031-2080, compared with baseline for 1971-2020 (Reproduced from 
Health Canada, 2020,28 based on data from Guo et al, 201829)
Mental Health and Well-being
A growing volume of evidence indicates that extreme heat adversely affects mental health 
and well-being.30 Heat stress directly caused by heat waves has been associated with mood 
disorders and anxiety. Hotter cities may also experience more violence than cooler cities, 
as an increase in discomfort leads to increased feelings of hostility, aggressive thoughts 
and possibly violent actions. Exposure to extreme heat can also lead to psychological 
fatigue, and high temperatures have been associated with increased suicide rates.31 
Well-being may also be affected by the need to stay indoors, which would limit outdoor 
recreational and social activities. 
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
22
Populations at Risk
While extreme heat can put everyone at risk from heat illnesses, the health risks are 
greatest for people with particular risk factors (Table 3). This includes those who may be 
more exposed to extreme heat, those who are more sensitive to extreme heat and those 
with less access to information or resources to adapt. Social isolation and compromised 
mental health (in particular schizophrenia) were underlined as specific factors contributing 
to the vulnerability of those who died in the 2018 heat wave in Montreal.32
Several risk factors may contribute to high-risk individual circumstances. For example 
an elderly, chronically ill person may also be socially isolated and live in housing that 
is poorly adapted to extreme heat in an urban-heat-island area. Extreme heat can also 
exacerbate existing inequalities, affecting underserved or marginalized neighbourhoods 
more severely, where several of the risk factors identified in Table 3 are present.
 
Table 3. Risk factors increasing vulnerability to extreme heat (compiled using various 
sources) close this space33 
Risk Factors
Populations at Risk
Increased 
exposure to 
extreme heat
•	 People living in urban-heat-island areas with limited vegetation and natural habitat
•	 People living outdoors
•	 People living in housing that is poorly adapted to extreme heat (higher floors of 
apartment buildings; prisons; housing without access to air conditioning or without 
ventilation) 
•	 People with mobility issues
•	 People who are socially isolated (living alone, do not leave home)
•	 People who work in the heat (outdoors and indoors)
•	 People who exercise in the heat
Increased 
sensitivity to 
extreme heat
•	 Older adults
•	 Infants and young children
•	 Pregnant women
•	 People with chronic illnesses such as breathing difficulties, heart conditions, obesity 
or diabetes 
•	 People living with mental illness
•	 People who are malnourished or dehydrated
•	 People taking certain medications
•	 People taking certain drugs or alcohol
Limited access 
to resources 
and/or 
information
•	 People with low incomes
•	 People experiencing homelessness
•	 People living in underserved communities
•	 People who neither speak nor understand English or French
Photo 21292882 © Photawa | Dreamstime.com
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
23
People who have been less exposed to heat are less acclimatized and may be more 
vulnerable.34 As a result, health risks from extreme heat may be greater when heat waves 
occur outside the typically hottest times of year (for example, in the spring) when people 
are not acclimatized to heat.35 Similarly, in locations where people are accustomed to lower 
temperatures, impacts on death rates may be seen at daily average temperatures as low as 
20°C. The opposite is true in places where average temperatures have been historically 
higher: in these cases, adverse health problems typically occur at higher temperatures.36
1.2.2 Infrastructure and Services
Extreme heat represents a significant risk to the infrastructure and services that Canadians 
rely on. The hazards of heat should be factored into the design, operation, and 
maintenance of infrastructure and systems, as well as associated emergency-management 
plans. Specific examples of heat’s effect on various systems are highlighted below. Many 
are interdependent and can lead to cascading impacts:
Electrical Power Infrastructure
As Toronto Hydro has noted, extreme heat may cause problems for electrical distribution 
systems when peak demand for electricity (for instance, to operate air conditioning) occurs 
at the same time as high temperatures are limiting the efficiency of electricity transmission 
and equipment-cooling. Transmission equipment, such as power transformers, may be 
forced to operate beyond its design specifications, increasing the likelihood of failure.37 
Power outages during heat events could have severe consequences, particularly in multi-
unit residential buildings, where:
•	 Residents may rely on electrical cooling systems (fans and air conditioning) 
•	 Water pumps require electricity to move water throughout the building, in 
particular to higher floors
•	 Residents rely on elevators to enter and leave the building, or to get to spaces that 
can be cooled 
In these situations, power outages may put vulnerable populations at even greater risk of 
heat exhaustion or heat stroke.
Digital Infrastructure and Telecommunications
Extreme temperatures place additional burdens on cooling equipment used in data 
centres, telecommunication exchanges and base stations.38 If appropriate temperatures 
cannot be maintained, equipment may fail and Internet and other telecom services may 
be disrupted more often.39 Broad power outages may severely disrupt telecommunications.
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
24
Transportation Infrastructure 
Rail: As identified by Metrolinx, a major southern Ontario transit provider, 
temperatures above 32°C can warp rail tracks and cause “sun kinks” (imperfections 
in steel caused by heating and expansion). Longer periods of high heat (such as three 
days or more) increase these risks.40 During extreme-heat events, it is normal practice 
for railways to operate trains at slower speeds to reduce the risk of damage to tracks 
that can cause derailments.
Roads: While most asphalt and concrete used in Canada is designed to withstand 
temperatures between -20˚C and 30˚C, projected temperatures for many Canadian 
cities in the 21st century exceed this range. In extreme heat, roads may soften and 
become rutted when vehicles depress the hot surfaces. Damage may also be caused 
by “bleeding” in hot weather when asphalt moves upwards and above a pavement’s 
surface treatment (the waterproof layer upon which vehicles drive).41
Bridges: Bridges are designed to withstand some expansion and contraction 
through the use of flexible materials embedded between fixed points. However, as 
temperatures increase, the limits of these expansion joints can be exceeded, displacing 
or cracking deck materials.42
Photo 116912090 © ArchonCodex | 
Dreamstime.com
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
25
Water and Wastewater Infrastructure
Extreme temperatures may increase community demand for water and wastewater 
treatment services at times when water levels are low. Higher water temperatures and 
lower water levels may adversely affect the quality of water at its source, and algal blooms 
may cause particular problems.43 Less available water can affect communities’ firefighting 
abilities, and this in turn could increase the risks posed by wildfires (see Section 1.3). 
Buildings
Extreme heat places additional demands on heating, ventilation and air conditioning 
(HVAC) systems, which may not be designed with sufficient capacity to meet these 
demands.44 Some building components, such as roofs, caulking and glazing, can also be 
affected by direct heating and expansion.
Health and Social Services
Extreme heat increases the demand for health-care, emergency, and social services. In 
British Columbia, for example, Vancouver Fire Rescue Services reported a threefold 
increase in call volume, and waits of up to 11 hours for ambulances, during the 2021 heat 
wave.45 The 2010 heat wave in Quebec led to approximately 3,400 more admissions to 
emergency departments than would otherwise have occurred.46 
Health-care and social-services facilities (including long-term care homes) need to 
maintain appropriate temperatures to protect patients—many of whom are likely to be 
more vulnerable to heat illnesses—and employees. They also need to be able to continue 
to deliver emergency and non-emergency health and social services, including surgery 
and storing medications at the correct temperatures.47
Food Systems
Extreme temperatures and heat waves can have a severe negative effect on Canadian 
crops (including cereals, vegetables and fruit), particularly when coupled with drought 
and wildfires. Extreme heat also causes more deaths of farm animals48 and reduces cattle 
reproduction and the quantity of milk produced.49 On the Prairies, in the summer of 
2021, heat waves coupled with drought led to the emergency culling and auctioning of 
cattle, as farmers and ranchers could not feed their livestock.50 
The distribution of food also depends on infrastructure and electricity, including for 
refrigeration. As highways, roads and electrical power supplies are vulnerable to extreme 
heat, it may be challenging during future heat waves to distribute food and keep it fresh 
3,400
Number of 
additional 
emergency 
department 
admissions in 
2010 heat wave 
in Quebec
!
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
Human Capital
Produced Capital
Natural Capital
Goods and services, income
Innovation
and labour
Pollution
and waste
Food, health
and coastal
protection
Natural resources and
regulating services such
as water quality
Land-use pollution
and waste
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
26
and safe.51 Extreme temperatures may also be dangerous for agricultural workers 
working outdoors.
1.2.3 Natural Systems
Extreme heat affects the movement, behaviour, health and mortality of animals,52 and 
certain populations are particularly vulnerable. For example, high temperatures may 
result in mass deaths of ocean animals at low tide.53 High water temperatures and poor 
water quality can also kill fish, particularly cold-water species such as salmon and trout,54 
and may cause excessive algal blooms in rivers and lakes.55 Extreme heat, coupled with 
drought and fire, can also result in catastrophic losses of vegetation.
1.2.4 Economy
The economic impacts of extreme-heat events have historically been less well 
documented than those for flooding. Because the costs of extreme heat are not dominated 
by damage to property or other insurable goods, they are not reflected in the catastrophic 
losses reported each year by the property and casualty insurance industry.56
 
Figure 5. Interaction 
between different 
types of capital 
(adapted from 
Dasgupta, 202157)
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
27
Traditionally, definitions of the economy have focused on produced capital (financial 
and manufactured outputs). Increasingly, however, human capital and natural capital 
— reflecting the value of people and society and services provided by nature — are 
considered an integral part of the economy (Fig. 5). Since extreme heat is a major risk to 
both human and natural capital, on which produced capital depends, it is also a risk to 
the economy as a whole, as well as posing direct physical risks for several specific industry 
sectors, such as agriculture. 
In 2021, the Canadian Institute for Climate Choices estimated the potential costs of more 
frequent heat waves caused by climate change, with modeling that considered a variety of 
greenhouse-gas emission scenarios.58 Among its key findings: 
1.	 Rising temperatures are likely to have a large negative impact on economic 
productivity, especially in sectors where work takes place outdoors or in poorly 
cooled spaces (manufacturing; quarrying; oil and gas extraction; utilities; 
transportation; agriculture; forestry; fisheries, and construction). Estimates 
indicated that under a high-emissions scenario, climate change could lead to 
a loss of 128 million work hours annually by the end of the century, the hours 
worked by 62,000 full-time employees, at a cost of almost $15-billion. 
2.	 The costs of lost life and reduced quality of life from heat-related deaths 
are substantial. By the middle of the century (2050), the annual costs would 
be similar under the low- and high-emissions scenarios—$3-billion and 
$3.9-billion respectively. However, by the end of the century, the cost of failure 
to reduce emissions becomes much more apparent. In the high-emissions 
scenario, heat-related deaths would cost $8.5-billion annually, compared with 
$5.2-billion if global emissions are substantially reduced.
It is not possible, and may be considered inappropriate, to assign to every loss a dollar 
value, considering that people’s lives are being lost. However, it is clear that the potential 
economic costs of extreme heat in the absence of adaptation are significant, particularly 
in terms of human capital.
1.3
Related Impacts
Extreme heat is commonly related to other climate risks, as outlined below. After extreme 
temperatures or heat waves, many communities may suffer cascading or combined 
impacts, which result in a bigger overall impact.59 
!
$23.5-billion
Estimated annual 
cost of work hours 
lost due to climate 
change and heat-
related deaths 
by the end of the 
century
1.3 Related Impacts
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
28
When taking action to address extreme heat, it is important to consider other climate-
related risks, in order to avoid what is known as “maladaptation”—adaptation that could 
end up increasing the overall climate-related risks. For example, in places where wildfire is 
a risk, particularly within the wildland-urban interface (WUI), it would be inappropriate 
to plant shade trees too close to buildings, because they are combustible and would 
increase the risks to the building from wildfires.
Air Quality
Warmer temperatures contribute to the production of air pollution, causing an increase 
in ground-level ozone, smog, and other pollutants.60 Poor air quality increases airborne 
allergens, worsens pre-existing cardiovascular and respiratory conditions, and in some 
circumstances can cause long-term health issues.61 62 As air pollution increases, so do 
associated health-care costs and deaths. Given the temperatures projected for the end 
of this century, average summer ozone concentrations could increase by 22 per cent, 
according to modeling by the Canadian Institute for Climate Choices using different 
scenarios. It projects that the associated deaths and lost quality of life in Canada could 
cost $87-billion per year by mid-century, and $245-billion by the end of the century.63 
Drought and Wildfires 
Extreme-heat events are frequently related to dry, drought conditions and subsequent 
wildfires, as experienced in the summer of 2021 across western and central Canada. 
Droughts affect both rural and urban communities, and can place severe pressure on 
water infrastructure and resources.
1.3 Related Impacts
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
29
Wildfire smoke reduces air quality; it contains toxins and fine particles, making it harmful 
to breathe, which makes people sick and leads to higher health-care costs. Because these 
impacts may be felt across large areas, daily air-quality forecasts are used to anticipate the 
impacts of wildfire smoke across the country.64
 
Thunderstorms and Flash Floods
Where moisture is available, such as near large bodies of water, extreme heat may 
contribute to the formation of thunderstorms.65 In Canada, thunderstorms are most 
prevalent from late May to early September, peaking in July, and usually occur on 
summer afternoons.66 They may cause intense rainfall and flash floods, particularly in 
urban areas, damaging property and endangering lives. Flooding may also be caused by 
extreme heat that results in rapid snowmelt in mountainous areas upstream.
1.3 Related Impacts
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
30
Hotting Up: An 
Overview of Extreme 
Heat Projections for 
Canadian Communities
Chapter 
2
Very hot 
days over 
30°C
Warmest 
maximum 
temperature
Average 
heat-wave 
length
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
31
Extreme temperatures and heat waves 
already occur across Canada and will 
become more extreme in the future. 
This chapter provides an overview of 
projections for extreme temperatures and 
heat waves for Canadian communities 
from 2051 through 2080. Children born 
in 2021 will be in the prime of their 
lives—age 30 to 59—at this time. 
Details about how the projections were obtained and used are in Appendix A. Readers 
can explore the projections first-hand and obtain additional data for their communities 
using Canada’s Climate Atlas, https://climateatlas.ca. It should be noted that climate 
projections are subject to significant uncertainty, and future conditions will depend on the 
actions taken to reduce greenhouse gases and slow climate change.
2.1
National Trends
Much of Canada will experience extreme temperatures in the years 2051–2080, 
according to projections. Three indicators of heat are presented here: 
All are based on a high-carbon scenario (see Appendix A for details). Based on these 
indicators, exposure to extreme heat will be most pronounced in three areas of Canada 
(Fig. 6): low-lying areas from the West Coast to the Rocky Mountains (British Columbia), 
the Prairies bordering the United States (southern Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba) and 
north of Lake Erie through the St. Lawrence River Valley (southern Ontario and Quebec). 
2.1 National Trends
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
32
Figure 6. Indicators 
of extreme heat 
projected for 
Canada, 2051-2080. 
Maps from Prairie 
Climate Centre. 
The Climate Atlas 
of Canada (version 
2, July 10, 2019). 
https://climateatlas.ca 
2051-2080 Projected Average 
Annual Number of +30°C Days
Under the RCP8.5 scenario
2051-2080 Projected Average 
Annual Warmest Maximum Temperature
Under the RCP8.5 scenario
2051-2080 Projected Average 
Annual Length of Heat Waves
Under the RCP8.5 scenario
2.1 National Trends
50
40
30
20
10
90
Number of days
80
70
60
1
Windsor
78.8
2
Hamilton
63.3
9
Regina
54
9
Lethbridge
54
8
Belleville
54.5
7
Toronto
55
6
Ottawa
57
5
London
61
4
Kelowna
62
3
Brantford
63
3
Niagara
Falls - St.
Catharines
63
9
Montreal
54
10
Kitchener-
Cambridge-
Waterloo
53.7
Number of very hot days +30°C
Recent history (1976-2005)
2051-2080 Low Carbon
2051-2080 High Carbon
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
33
2.2
Exposed Communities
This section describes the top 10 “hottest” metropolitan areas in Canada in the period 
2051–2080, based on projections for the three previously described indicators of extreme 
heat (Fig. 7; see Appendix A for details). Where projected conditions were the same, the 
same ranking was applied, meaning more than 10 metropolitan areas were identified. 
The projections only reflect exposure to the selected climate conditions. They do not 
consider the urban-heat-island effect within cities, or the vulnerability or preparedness of 
their populations. Nor do they include other factors that contribute to the experience of 
heat, such as humidity and air circulation. 
A number of metropolitan areas feature in all three “top 10” lists, and all are in the 
geographical areas of Canada identified in Section 2.1 as most at risk. Notably, the large 
cities of Toronto, Montreal, and Ottawa are each included in at least one “top 10” list. 
Figure 7. “Top 10” metropolitan areas based on projections for three indicators of 
extreme heat.
2.2 Exposed Communities
40
38
36
34
32
42
Maximum Temperatrure (°C)
1
Kelowna
40.2
2
Regina
40.1
10
Toronto
38.4
9
Brantford
38.5
9
Niagara
Falls - St.
Catharines
38.5
8
Ottawa
38.6
7
Hamilton
38.9
6
Lethbridge
39.3
5
Saskatoon
39.4
4
Winnipeg
39.5
3
Windsor
39.6
Warmest Maximum Temperature
Recent history (1976-2005)
2051-2080 Low Carbon
2051-2080 High Carbon
10
8
6
4
2
12
Days
1
Kelowna
11.2
2
Windsor
9.8
10
Montreal
7.8
9
Ottawa
7.9
8
London
8
8
Toronto
8
7
Regina
8.1
6
Kingston
8.2
5
Hamilton
8.4
4
Belleville
8.5
4
Brantford
8.5
4
Niagara
Falls-
St. Catharines
8.5
3
Lethbridge
8.8
Average length of heat wave
Recent history (1976-2005)
2051-2080 Low Carbon
2051-2080 High Carbon
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
34
2.2 Exposed Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
35
Table 4 and Figure 8 show the metropolitan areas and selected smaller communities 
across Canada that will be the most exposed to extreme heat, according to the projections 
and indicators examined for 2051-2080. Communities neighbouring these locations will 
likely be similarly exposed. And communities outside the areas identified may also be at 
risk from extreme-heat events because of other factors that influence their vulnerability 
—particularly if they do not adapt to reduce that vulnerability.
Table 4. Metropolitan areas and smaller communities projected to be most exposed to 
extreme heat, 2051–2080
Geographic 
Area
Provinces
Metropolitan 
Areas identified in 
the Top 10 lists
Smaller 
Communities 
(examples)
Low-lying areas 
from the West 
Coast to the 
Rocky Mountains
British 
Columbia
Kelowna
Kamloops
Penticton
Vernon
Creston
Prairies of 
southern 
Canada along 
the U.S. border
Alberta
Lethbridge
Medicine Hat
Taber
Drumheller
Brooks
Saskatchewan
Regina
Saskatoon
Estevan
Maple Creek
Weyburn
Leader
Manitoba
Winnipeg
Emerson
Morden
Souris
Steinbach
North of Lake 
Erie through the 
St. Lawrence 
River Valley
Ontario
Windsor
Hamilton
Niagara Falls-St. 
Catharines
Brantford
London
Ottawa
Toronto
Belleville
Kingston
Chatham
Sarnia
Leamington
Kitchener-
Waterloo
Quebec
Montreal 
Saint-Jean-sur-
Richelieu
Salaberry-de-
Valleyfield
Photo 60911310 © Chengusf | Dreamstime.com
2.2 Exposed Communities
CANADA
Size of circle represents population
Census metropolitan areas (CMAs) most exposed to extreme heat
> 17 million
Population of metropolitan areas 
most exposed to extreme heat 
(Statistics Canada, 2020 estimate)
Brooks
Drumheller
Lethbridge
Penticton
Creston
Maple Creek
Medicine Hat
Taber
Steinbach
Emerson
Morden
Chatham
Leamington
Niagara Falls - St. Catharines
Hamilton
Brantford
Leader
Saskatoon
Regina
Weyburn
Estevan
Souris
Belleville
Kingston
Ottawa
Montreal
St Jean-sur-RIchelieu
Salaberry de Valleyﬁeld
Toronto
Kitchener-Waterloo-
Cambridge
London
Sarnia
Windsor
Winnipeg
Kelowna
Kamloops
Vernon
Examples of smaller communities exposed to extreme heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
36
Figure 8. Map 
of Metropolitan 
Areas and smaller 
communities where 
projected extreme 
heat indicators 
are most severe in 
2051-2080
2.2 Exposed Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
37
Resilience to 
Extreme Heat: 35 
Practical Actions
Chapter 
3
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
38
This chapter focuses on practical 
actions that can be carried out by 
individuals, property owners and 
managers and communities to lessen 
the urban-heat-island effect and reduce 
human vulnerability to heat-related 
illnesses. People can act to reduce 
the risks from extreme heat before 
a heat wave occurs (often termed 
“prevention”) as well as during a heat 
wave (termed “protection”). 
The emphasis here is on prevention, to 
prepare for extreme heat and adapt to it, 
outdoors and indoors.
While air conditioning is an effective public-health strategy for reducing heat-related 
illness and death, reliance on air conditioning alone will not make our communities 
resilient to heat. Air conditioning contributes to the urban-heat-island effect by generating 
“waste” heat outdoors, and it uses more electricity at peak times, potentially contributing 
to power outages (see Section 1.2.2.). This can also contribute to increased greenhouse-
gas production where electricity is produced using fossil fuels. There are many ways to 
encourage “passive” cooling (cooling that does not use energy). 
Chapter 3: Resilience to Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
39
Table 5 outlines 35 practical actions to reduce risks from extreme heat. These actions can 
be broadly categorized into three types: 
•	 Non-structural —planning and behavioural changes 
•	 Green Infrastructure—using nature to help us stay cool 
•	 Grey (Built) Infrastructure —new designs and retrofits that cool buildings and 
keep infrastructure functioning 
Many communities have started adapting to extreme heat conditions,67,68,69 but urgent 
action is still required. Health professionals have a central role to play, and a wealth of 
resources is provided by Health Canada and provincial health organizations. Several 
actions can only be implemented by those who own property. Tenants and others with 
fewer resources available to adapt to heat will have fewer options and are often most at 
risk; these vulnerable groups require specific support.
The balance of this chapter describes each action in more detail. The 
information provided is founded on a review of  research and best 
practices, as well as advice from subject-matter experts. At the end of the 
report, references are presented in an accessible format, to encourage 
further reading.
Chapter 3: Resilience to Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
40
Table 5: Practical adaptation strategies to reduce risks from extreme heat. This table is interactive. Click on 
an action reference (e.g. IND-1) to move to the description in the report. Click on any “Actions” icon  (e.g. 
individuals, property owners and managers, or communities) in the report to return to this table.
Actions by Individuals
Non-structural
(planning and 
behavioural changes)
Green Infrastructure*
(working with nature)
Grey Infrastructure
(improving buildings and 
public infrastructure)
IND-1 
Work with neighbours, friends 
and family to prepare**
IND-2 
Arrange to receive public heat 
warnings**
IND-3 
Learn how to use natural 
ventilation**
IND-4 
Minimize “waste” indoor 
heat production, for example 
by switching off unused 
appliances**
IND-5 
Plan for modified working, living 
and sleeping arrangements**
GI-1
Plant and maintain trees 
GI-2
Expand vegetation cover and 
absorb water to keep gardens 
and balconies cooler**
GI-3
Install a green (vegetated) roof 
GI-4
Grow a green (vegetated) 
façade**
BI-1
Enhance insulation and 
airtightness
BI-2
Install cool (reflective) roof / wall 
/ paving surfaces 
BI-3
Use concrete, brick, stone and 
tile finishes that absorb heat
BI-4
Install windows that reduce heat 
gain from the sun
BI-5
Install shading devices (shutters, 
awnings, overhangs, blinds, 
heat-resistant curtains) **
BI-6
Install temperature and humidity 
monitors or controls**
BI-7
Use ceiling / portable fan(s)**
BI-8
Install and maintain air 
conditioning / heat pump
* In places at risk of wildfire, particularly at the wildland-urban interface, the use of green infrastructure 
must be considered alongside FireSmart guidance.70
** Denotes actions that may be most achievable by tenants and those with fewer resources
Chapter 3: Resilience to Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
41
Actions by Property Owners and Managers
(multi-unit residential and commercial buildings)
Non-structural
(planning and 
behavioural changes)
Green Infrastructure*
(working with nature)
Grey Infrastructure
(improving buildings and 
public infrastructure)
PROP-1
Understand building-scale 
vulnerabilities to extreme heat
PROP-2
Provide information and help 
occupants adapt 
PROP-3
Identify and support vulnerable 
occupants (e.g. the elderly or 
those living alone)
PROP-4
Use natural ventilation in 
common areas
PROP-5
Develop extreme-heat 
emergency plan with occupants
GI-1
Plant and maintain trees in 
grounds and parking lots
GI-2
Expand vegetated areas and 
absorb water around buildings, 
on balconies and in parking lots
GI-3
Install a green (vegetated) roof
GI-4
Grow a green (vegetated) 
façade or wall
See individuals BI-1 to BI-8, 
plus: 
BI-9
Install and maintain backup 
power generation (e.g. to 
maintain air conditioning in 
designated “cool” rooms)
BI-10
Arrange for backup water 
supply during power outages 
(pumped water supply cannot 
function properly without 
power)
* In places at risk of wildfire, particularly at the wildland-urban interface, the use of green infrastructure 
must be considered alongside FireSmart guidance.70
Chapter 3: Resilience to Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
42
Actions by Communities
Non-structural
(planning and 
behavioural changes)
Green Infrastructure*
(working with nature)
Grey Infrastructure
(improving buildings and 
public infrastructure)
COM-1
Assess and map vulnerability to 
extreme heat 
COM-2
Use education and outreach 
campaigns to encourage 
preventive action 
COM-3
Set up community support 
programs for vulnerable 
populations (e.g. underserved 
communities)
COM-4
Require heat-sensitive urban 
planning, infrastructure design, 
and operation
COM-5
Provide incentives to increase 
passive cooling and reduce 
“waste” heat (e.g. by subsidising 
tree planting or home retrofits)
COM-6
Develop extreme-heat 
emergency plan
GI-1
Plant and maintain trees 
(including in urban forests, 
green corridors, and urban 
parks)
GI-2
Expand vegetated areas and 
water bodies and absorb more 
water (forming a blue-green 
infrastructure network)
BI-11
Adapt community infrastructure 
to extreme heat (e.g. transport, 
utilities, water supply)
BI-12
Reduce vehicular traffic
BI-13
Install “cool” reflective or 
permeable pavements 
BI-14
Expand artificial shade (e.g. 
using canopies or shelters) 
BI-15
Install water-based cooling 
systems (e.g. ponds and 
sprinklers) and drinking 
fountains
* In places at risk of wildfire, particularly at the wildland-urban interface, the use of green 
infrastructure must be considered alongside FireSmart guidance.70
** Denotes actions that may be most achievable by tenants and those with fewer resources
Chapter 3: Resilience to Extreme Heat
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
43
3.1 
Non-Structural 
3.1.1 Individuals (IND)
IND-1: Work with neighbours, friends and family to prepare
Although the risk of heat-related illness, including heat exhaustion and heat stroke, is 
greater for vulnerable populations (see Section 1.2, Table 3), anyone can be affected. 
Heat-related deaths are largely preventable through knowledge, education, and adaptive 
action.71 By talking to neighbours, friends and family about the risks of extreme heat, and 
helping them to prepare in advance, everyone can help to avoid heat-related illnesses 
and deaths. 
It is important to communicate with the elderly, people who may be socially isolated, and 
those who are less able to prepare themselves and their homes (see Table 3). If possible, 
it is most effective to visit people in person, before a heat event occurs, to discuss their 
unique circumstances and risks, and then help them take precautions to reduce those 
risks. Lastly, it is important to help vulnerable people formulate a specific plan about 
what to do during an extreme-heat event, based on public-health directives. Ideally, the 
plan should provide for someone to check on the isolated or elderly person regularly, and 
in-person.
Key additional benefits: Preparing plans with neighbours, friends and family can 
strengthen community ties and help reduce social isolation.
Potential limitations: Working with others takes time and it may be difficult to get 
results if people do not appreciate the risks. Many Canadians may be more worried about 
cold weather than extreme heat.  (However, many strategies to increase heat-resilience 
around the home may also contribute to better overall energy efficiency, ensuring that the 
house is more comfortable in every season.)
3.1 Non-Structural: Individuals
WeatherCAN
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
44
IND-2: Arrange to receive public heat warnings 
Environment and Climate Change Canada issues periodic heat warnings across Canada. 
In collaboration with public-health messaging from Health Canada, these warnings notify 
the public of extreme-heat conditions, their likely duration, and recommend precautions 
to protect people against heat-related illnesses during such events.72 These alerts are 
broadcast by a variety of media including television, radio, Internet, social media and 
digital weather applications available for smart phones. 
Heat warnings are issued in provinces and territories according to criteria outlined by the 
federal government, in co-ordination with provincial and territorial health authorities. 
These criteria are based on regional relationships between climate and health effects, and 
differ between provinces and territories (Appendix B).73
Individuals can receive heat warnings and other weather alerts in English or French 
directly on their smart phones, by downloading and using Environment and Climate 
Change Canada’s free “WeatherCAN” application, available from Google Play and 
Apple’s App Store.74 The application sends notifications about weather alerts for your 
current location, as well as for saved locations anywhere in Canada. 
The WeatherCAN app also provides access to MetNotes—short notes written by 
meteorologists with additional information about weather forecasts. These brief messages 
may cover the potential impact of the weather, an early heads-up about severe weather, or 
information for people attending outdoor events affected by weather.75
3.1 Non-Structural: Individuals
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
45
Heat warnings are also reported by other commonly used weather services, but some of 
these alternatives may rely on the user opening the application, rather than providing 
alerts. People without smart phones or the Internet can use alternative sources, such as 
the Weather Network television channel or Environment Canada’s Weatheradio network, 
which broadcasts on the VHF public radio band around the clock.
Key additional benefits: The WeatherCAN application also provides current 
conditions, hourly and seven-day forecasts for more than 10,000 locations in Canada, a 
message centre with information relevant to the current weather, and can be displayed in 
English and French.
Potential limitations: Some at-risk populations, such as the elderly, may not use 
smart phones. Government heat warnings do not prevent extreme-heat events; they raise 
awareness about the situation and the need for generic protective measures to reduce 
the risk of illness. People who do not speak English or French may not understand heat 
warnings.
Heat warnings provided by WeatherCAN lack community-level information that could 
support residents, and should ideally be supplemented by more local emergency-response 
plans. (See Action COM-6). 
In Canada, heat events are not named in the same way as hurricanes. The Extreme Heat 
Resilience Alliance, an international organization, is working to build and activate the 
international co-operation needed to make it standard practice for countries to name and 
rank heat waves.76
IND-3: Learn how to use natural ventilation
Natural ventilation is a passive measure that encourages air circulation in buildings 
and can be highly effective in reducing overheating.77 There are two types of natural 
ventilation: natural-draft ventilation and cross-ventilation.
 
Natural-draft ventilation can be created by allowing cooler air to enter a building at 
its base, or north side, and letting hotter air exit through an opening at the top of the 
building. This is often very effective at night, when outside air is cooler than indoor air. 
Cross-ventilation is achieved by opening doors or windows on opposite walls to encourage 
air currents, and is more effective than single-sided ventilation.
3.1 Non-Structural: Individuals
Night time
natural
ventilation
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
46
People can learn the best ways to optimize natural ventilation in their buildings or 
apartments. Where nights are cooler, this may involve opening windows or doors to 
create natural ventilation at night and early in the morning, and closing them to shut out 
very hot or humid air—preserving the cooler air inside—during the day. If it is windy, 
increased ventilation may help people feel more comfortable by circulating air more 
quickly and cooling the skin through evaporation.78
Ventilation at night may be especially important in buildings that make use of thermal 
mass to passively control heat. Exposed hard surfaces—such as concrete floors, brick, 
natural stone and tile—can act as a thermal mass that absorbs heat during the day and 
releases it at night (see Section 3.2). Nighttime ventilation helps to cool these surfaces so 
that they can absorb heat again the next day.79
Key additional benefits: Natural ventilation helps provide fresh oxygen, and can 
improve air quality, reduce pathogens and alleviate odours.
Potential limitations: For natural ventilation to work, residents may need to make 
constant adjustments to openings to make the best use of natural ventilation. During 
heat waves in urban heat islands, if outdoor temperatures and humidity remain high 
overnight, it may reduce the potential for cooling by natural overnight ventilation. Rising 
temperatures due to climate change will similarly decrease the potential to use natural 
ventilation to cool buildings over time.80 Poor air quality, wildfire smoke or high pollen 
counts may make it inadvisable to open windows.
The use of natural ventilation is also highly dependent on building design, and is not 
possible in all buildings. In particular, ventilation designs in multi-unit residential buildings 
may involve the creation of air pressure in hallways. As a result of the hallway air 
pressure, when windows are opened in suites, air will tend to exit rather than enter the 
building. This makes it impossible to create drafts within individual suites. 
Even without air pressure in hallways, it is not possible to create cross-ventilation or natural-
draft ventilation in suites that have windows only on one side, and at one elevation. In multi-
unit buildings, windows may also be inoperable on higher floors for safety reasons. 
3.1 Non-Structural: Individuals
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
47
IND-4: Minimize “waste” indoor heat production
Heat produced by electrical devices increases heat in the home as well as wasting energy. 
“Waste” heat can be reduced with energy-efficient LED light bulbs that produce almost 
no heat,81 and by choosing energy-efficient appliances.82 
During heat events, appliances and office equipment should be used as little as possible, 
and all devices not in use should be turned off and not left on standby.83 “Waste” heat can 
be minimized by changing some behaviours to avoid generating extra heat. In the home, 
for example, residents can cook food in a microwave rather than an oven; have cold meals 
and drinks, instead of heating them; and air-dry clothes and dishes instead of using a 
dryer or dishwasher.
 
Key additional benefits: Minimizing “waste” heat will reduce energy consumption 
and can result in lower energy bills.
 
Potential limitations: It may be difficult to avoid using some electrical appliances, 
such as computers.
 
IND-5: Plan for modified working, living and sleeping arrangements
Extreme heat can make it more difficult to work and sleep. In homes with different rooms 
and floors, it may be possible to arrange working, living and sleeping areas differently 
during extreme-heat events so that people can benefit from cooler areas of the house, 
such as basements, lower floors, and rooms that receive less sunlight (for instance, north-
facing rooms). People may also be able to arrange with their employers to work at cooler 
times of the day.
Key additional benefits: The modification of working or sleeping arrangements may 
reduce the energy required to cool the home, especially overnight. 
Potential limitations: Individual circumstances, including the size of a home, its 
layout, and the number of residents, may limit people’s ability to modify their working 
and sleeping arrangements.
3.1 Non-Structural: Individuals
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
48
3.1.2 Property Owners and Managers (PROP)
PROP-1: Understand building-scale vulnerabilities to extreme heat
Property owners and managers should assess their buildings to determine specific 
vulnerabilities to extreme heat, examining their infrastructure, operations, employees 
and tenants. They can undertake a climate-vulnerability assessment and then develop 
a climate-adaptation plan; this approach would look at extreme heat alongside other 
climate-related risks such as floods, wildfire and hail.
Multi-unit residential buildings may have specific vulnerabilities that include:
•	 Older building infrastructure that was not designed to be resilient to extreme heat
•	 Higher temperatures on higher floors from solar radiation 
•	 Limited opportunity for natural ventilation, as a result of building design, 
particularly in buildings with pressurized hallways or where windows do not open 
wide for safety reasons
•	 A reliance on a power supply to operate elevators, provide air conditioning, and 
pump water to higher floors
•	 Vulnerable residents
Commercial buildings may have additional vulnerabilities , including: 
•	 Specific heat-sensitive equipment such as freezers, data servers and laboratory 
equipment
•	 A reliance on a power supply to run the heating, ventilation and air-conditioning 
(HVAC) system
•	 Large, sun-exposed parking lots that contribute to locally high outdoor 
temperatures and the wider urban-heat-island effect 
Key additional benefits: Climate-adaptation planning can help property owners and 
managers adapt to different climate risks and save money in the long term by avoiding 
damages, business disruption and adverse impacts on tenants.
Potential limitations: If a large building is in an urban heat island, an effective 
climate-adaptation plan can contribute to reducing the heat-island effect, but wider 
action within the community will be required to make a significant difference (see 
Action COM-4).
3.1 Non-Structural: Propery Owners and Managers
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
49
PROP-2: Provide information and help occupants adapt 
Owners and managers of residential buildings can offer information and educational 
materials to help their tenants act in their own homes and social networks to reduce the 
risks of extreme heat. (see Section 3.1.1). Information and training may be provided 
through face-to-face discussions, tenant meetings, newsletters, social media, and posters in 
common areas and elevators. Property owners and managers can consult with local public 
health agencies for advice and heat-health educational materials to share. 
Commercial tenants will play a significant role in managing indoor temperatures and the 
heat produced in their spaces. By engaging tenants to carry out best practices, managers 
can decrease the likelihood of business disruptions. “Green leases” can be useful for 
building owners and tenants to agree on operations to reduce climate-related impacts, 
including how to manage heat.
Best practices that tenants may be able to control include:
•	 Minimizing the production of “waste” indoor heat 
•	 Using natural ventilation (where possible)
•	 Installing surfaces that may provide a thermal mass to absorb and reduce heat in 
the daytime (such as concrete, brick, stone and tile surfaces)
•	 Installing and using indoor shading devices
•	 Installing and using fans and air conditioning systems/heat pumps
Key additional benefits: Taking the initiative to support occupants can increase their 
satisfaction with building services and enhance relationships, while also reducing energy 
consumption in the building.
Potential limitations: Building occupant relationships takes time, and co-operation is 
required between different parties. 
3.1 Non-Structural: Propery Owners and Managers
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
50
PROP-3: Identify and support vulnerable occupants
Many multi-unit residential buildings are poorly adapted to extreme heat, while also 
housing vulnerable populations (Table 2). The vulnerability of residents can be reduced 
by identifying those particularly at risk (including the elderly, people living alone and 
people with reduced mobility) and offering them specific support. Building managers 
and/or a “neighbours-helping-neighbours” support network can provide this assistance. 
For example, Community Resilience to Extreme Weather (CREW) has developed tools 
and strategies for people to help each other, training extreme-weather volunteers84 
and strengthening social networks.85 Its “Extreme Weather Volunteer” program in 
Toronto includes:
•	 Information sessions about future extreme weather in Toronto, and what it means 
for human health
•	 Workshops to train designated volunteers in neighbourhoods or multi-unit buildings 
in procedures for weather emergencies such as extreme heat or cold, floods and 
power outages, and more
•	 Scenario role-playing
•	 Roundtable discussions and brainstorming
•	 Mapping of community-specific risks and assets
•	 The development of a neighbours-helping-neighbours protocol
3.1 Non-Structural: Propery Owners and Managers
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
51
Commercial buildings can also help to support vulnerable people in the surrounding 
community by providing publicly accessible, air-conditioned spaces for temporary relief. 
Key additional benefits: Building stronger social networks within buildings can 
increase resilience to factors far beyond extreme heat. It can also improve the quality of 
life for residents by creating “virtual villages” in which they are supported.
Potential limitations: Community programs often rely on volunteers. The creation of 
jobs for “resilience wardens” may better ensure that residents continue to participate.
PROP-4: Use natural ventilation in common areas
As in individual homes, natural ventilation, where possible, can help larger buildings cool 
down while reducing energy consumption. This is particularly important for buildings 
where thermal mass (exposed concrete floors, exposed brick, natural stone and tiling) is 
being used to absorb heat during the day. Property owners and managers should ensure 
that natural ventilation is used in communal areas to facilitate cooling, where possible. 
This may be achieved by opening and closing windows at different times of the day, either 
in person or through automation.
Key additional benefits: Natural ventilation helps provide fresh oxygen, can 
improve air quality, reduce pathogens and alleviate odours. This may increase the well-
being of occupants.
Potential limitations: During heat waves in urban heat islands, if outdoor air 
temperatures and humidity remain high overnight, the potential for cooling by natural 
ventilation may be reduced. Rising temperatures due to climate change will similarly 
decrease the potential to use natural ventilation to cool buildings over time.86 Poor air 
quality, wildfire smoke or high pollen counts may also make it inadvisable to open windows.
The use of natural ventilation is also highly dependent on building design, and is not 
possible in all buildings. In particular, ventilation designs in multi-unit residential buildings 
may involve the creation of air pressure in hallways. As a result of the hallway air 
pressure, when windows are opened in suites, air will tend to exit rather than enter the 
building. This makes it impossible to create drafts within individual suites. 
Even without this air pressure in hallways, it is not possible to create cross-ventilation 
or natural-draft ventilation in suites that have windows only on one side, and at one 
3.1 Non-Structural: Propery Owners and Managers
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
52
elevation. In multi-unit buildings, windows may also be inoperable on higher floors for 
safety reasons.
PROP-5: Develop extreme-heat emergency plan with occupants
An emergency plan for extreme-heat events should be developed with tenants alongside 
the adaptation plan for the building. Emergency planning should consider:
•	 Cooling rooms or mobile cooling systems, particularly for vulnerable residents in 
multi-unit residential buildings
•	 Arrangements to provide drinking water 
•	 How to ensure the uninterrupted operation of critical building infrastructure
•	 How to operate during power outages
•	 A communications plan that includes reaching out to vulnerable residents
New tenants must be made aware of the plan regularly. Simulation exercises may help to 
ensure that everyone is prepared.
In some municipalities, landlords are required by law or policy to offer cooling rooms and 
to inform tenants of their location. For example, Toronto’s “RentSafeTO: Apartment 
Building Standards Program” requires landlords to tell their tenants how to find their 
cooling room as well as the closest publicly accessible air-conditioned space.87
Key additional benefits: Emergency planning for heat can be part of existing 
emergency plans and can help build positive tenant relationships.
Potential limitations: Building tenant relationships takes time, and co-operation is 
required between many different parties to define appropriate roles and responsibilities. 
3.1 Non-Structural: Communities
Review 2016
Lac Saint-Louis
Lac des Deux Montagnes
Rivi
ère
 d
es
 P
rairi
es
Bassin de La Prairie
St. Lawrenc
e R
iver 
6km
4.5
3
0.5
0
Vulnerability
Not signiﬁcant
Low
Moderate
High
Major
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
53
3.1.3 Communities (COM)
COM-1: Assess and map vulnerability to extreme heat 
Communities can understand their risks from extreme heat by examining the extent of 
urban heat islands together with the location of vulnerable populations (Table 2, page 
17), infrastructure and natural systems. Several communities in Canada have already 
developed tools to map heat vulnerability.
Montreal assessed heat risk as part of its Climate Change Adaptation Plan for 2015-
2020. The location of intra-urban heat islands was mapped using an analysis of surface 
temperatures calculated from satellite imagery. Montreal has defined an intra-urban 
heat island as “a place in an urban environment where the air temperature is higher 
than elsewhere, with the effect of increasing the heat felt locally.” Additional maps were 
developed to show social, territorial (infrastructural) and environmental sensitivity to heat. 
The indicators were then combined to show the overall vulnerability to heat waves across 
the metropolitan area (Fig. 9).88 
Figure 9. Vulnerability to heat waves in the Montreal metropolitan area (Source: Ville 
de Montréal, 2017.)89 
The City of Toronto has also developed an interactive map for the public that can be 
3.1 Non-Structural: Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
54
used to explore areas of vulnerability to heat, the locations of public cooling spaces and 
services, and statistics relating to populations at risk (for example, seniors, seniors living 
alone, low-income residents, and those in rental buildings of more than five storeys).90 
In British Columbia, Vancouver Coastal Health has developed seven regional maps 
illustrating vulnerability to higher summer temperatures.91 In Quebec, Laval University 
has produced an atlas of climate vulnerability for municipal areas of the province that 
includes vulnerability to heat waves.92 
Key additional benefits: Assessing the heat-sensitivity of different geographical areas 
can help to identify where different adaptive actions should be prioritized. Making such 
information publicly accessible can raise awareness and help people understand the 
specific risks in their areas.
Potential limitations: Assessments need to be updated regularly to demonstrate how 
vulnerability to urban overheating evolves over time. This is required to reflect changes in 
climatic conditions as well as changes in the community’s capacity to adapt.
COM-2: Use education and outreach campaigns to encourage 
preventive action 
Communities can provide information for different stakeholders about the risks of 
extreme heat, and preventive measures that can reduce these risks before an extreme-heat 
event occurs. Often, public-service messages focus on ways to protect people in a heat 
wave (such as staying hydrated, seeking shade and checking on neighbours). There is often 
less information about how to reduce risks ahead of time, by adapting and planning. 
Outreach may target specific areas identified as highly vulnerable to heat (Action COM-
1), as well as people involved in urban planning and building design.
This report identifies specific actions for individuals and building owners or managers 
(Table 1) that could form the basis of education and outreach campaigns designed to 
encourage preventive action.
Additional sources of information include:
•	 The website Climate Resilient Home (www.climateresilienthome.ca)
•	 BC Housing’s “Design Discussion Primer – Heat Waves”93 
photo: preventioncdnndg.org
3.1 Non-Structural: Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
55
•	 The booklet “Protect your home from: Extreme heat” by the Institute of 
Catastrophic Loss Reduction94
•	 The Canadian Red Cross’s website “Heat Waves: Before, During & After”95
•	 The Vivre en Ville website feature “Construire avec le Climat” (Build with the 
Climate) designed to inform real-estate developers96
A wealth of other resources is identified in the References section.
Key additional benefits: Outreach about reducing risks from extreme heat can be 
combined effectively with existing campaigns focused on energy efficiency, as several 
of the actions for buildings are the same. Information about extreme heat may also be 
combined with that for other climate-related risks, such as flooding and wildfire.
There are also opportunities to engage young people in campaigns to raise awareness 
about extreme heat. In Montreal for example, the “Green Patrol” is a group of about 50 
students that engages with the public about issues including climate change, heat-wave 
impacts, and community resilience.97 The city has made a commitment to continue the 
initiative as part of its 2020–2030 climate plan.98
Potential limitations: Information does not necessarily lead to action. Follow-up 
surveys are needed to monitor and improve the effectiveness of outreach campaigns in 
producing the actions desired.
COM-3: Set up community support programs for 
vulnerable populations
Many cities leverage their emergency services to assist vulnerable populations during 
heat events. For example, the public health authority in Montreal maintains a list 
of the addresses and telephone numbers of vulnerable people and places, including 
private residences, seniors’ homes and shelters for the homeless. Door-to-door visits and 
automated calls are made by public security staff during heat events.99 
In addition, municipalities may support community-led initiatives that strengthen social 
networks and encourage help among neighbours. For example, the Quebec Network 
of Healthy Cities and Towns developed the “Voisins solidaires” program, which 
recommends ways to connect, and strengthen relationships, with people in the same 
community, focusing on seniors. 100
3.1 Non-Structural: Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
56
Key additional benefits: Building stronger social networks within communities can 
increase resilience to factors far beyond extreme heat, and improve the quality of  life 
for residents.
Potential limitations: Many “checking-in” programs for vulnerable populations 
focus on what to do during an extreme-heat event; they could be expanded to develop 
adaptation strategies in advance. Community relationships take time to build, and co-
operation is required between many different parties. In-person check-in programs also 
require available staff or volunteers to deliver them.
COM-4: Require heat-sensitive urban planning, infrastructure 
design, and operation
Reducing the urban-heat-island effect requires the combination of several measures 
deployed on a large scale. Strategic urban planning is therefore vital, in relation to both 
the natural and built environment. For example, strategic planning is required to create 
publicly accessible “green” urban corridors or to make the most of the cooling benefits 
of wind, by planning developments to promote air circulation. Strategic approaches 
can be supported by guidelines and protocols for urban development and long-term 
infrastructure management plans.
Municipalities may choose to make heat-resilient development a legal requirement. Green 
roofs are a leading example:
1.	 In 2006, Port Coquitlam, BC was the first Canadian municipality to require green 
roofs for commercial or industrial buildings of 5,000 square metres or more. 
2.	 In 2009, the City of Toronto, ON adopted a bylaw requiring new buildings or 
additions to have green roofs on 20 to 60 per cent of the available roof space; 
it applies to commercial, institutional and residential buildings with a minimum 
gross floor area of 2,000 square metres.101 
3.	 In Montreal, QC the borough of Rosemont–La-Petite-Patrie requires either a 
green roof, or a cool roof, when a flat or shallow-sloped roof is newly built or 
renovated.102
4.	 The City of Gatineau, QC passed a similar bylaw in 2020. Gatineau also requires 
islands of greenery in parking lots, and trees and permeable ground in school 
playgrounds.103
3.1 Non-Structural: Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
57
In addition to legal approaches, communities may use a variety of official standards, 
guidelines and certification programs in their efforts to reduce urban heat. Canadian 
heat-related standards, and guidelines for reducing heat, include:
•	 BNQ 3019-190 Guidelines – Reducing the Urban Heat Island Effect – Parking Lot 
Development – Design Guidance (Bureau de normalisation du Québec)107 
•	 Thermally Comfortable Playgrounds: A review of literature and survey of experts 
(Standards Council of Canada)108
•	 CSA Z1010-18: Management of work in extreme conditions (Canadian 
Standards Association)109
Certification programs that are associated with particular standards or guidelines may 
encourage stakeholders to act. For example, “Eco-Responsible Parking (Stationnement 
écoresponsable),” based on Quebec’s BNQ 3019-190, gives businesses the opportunity to 
promote their efforts to their customers.
International certification schemes that may be useful in urban planning for heat-
resilience include the LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) rating 
system for buildings110 and the Envision framework from the Institute for Sustainable 
The way that buildings are operated can also affect the safety of their occupants. Some 
jurisdictions may require building owners or managers to keep indoor temperatures 
within a certain range, or provide cooling rooms. There is currently no consistent national 
standard for maximum indoor temperature in Canada. However, the Canadian Centre 
for Occupational Health and Safety maintains fact sheets about legislation in different 
jurisdictions,104 guidelines for workers105 and guidelines for office work.106
3.1 Non-Structural: Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
58
Infrastructure, which specifically assesses the climate-resilience of various types of 
infrastructure—including water, energy, waste, transportation, information and 
natural infrastructure.111
Key additional benefits: Strategic urban planning to tackle urban heat can form part 
of a municipal climate-adaptation plan or sustainability plan, and typically delivers several 
social, environmental, and financial co-benefits. Several non-government organizations 
(NGOs) and consultancies can offer specialist expertise to support communities. 
Potential limitations: Strategic urban planning for heat resilience requires co-
operation between several different municipal departments and stakeholders. Strategic 
planning is also challenging to implement in existing urban areas that are already highly 
developed. The necessary specialists may be unavailable in some municipalities. There 
are few design standards relating to extreme heat in Canada, and overheating is yet to be 
addressed by the National Building Code of Canada.
COM-5: Provide incentives to increase passive cooling and reduce 
“waste” heat 
Actions to prevent or reduce the risks from extreme heat can be encouraged with 
incentives such as subsidies and rebates. Several incentives are available through different 
organizations across Canada to improve energy efficiency, without acknowledging their 
potential contribution to reducing the risks of extreme heat.
For example, the Canada Greener Homes Grant provides rebates for building retrofits 
or renovations that improve energy efficiency, but currently does not mention that the 
eligible retrofits may help control indoor temperatures during extreme-heat events.112 
The related EnerGuide home evaluation could be used to identify benefits related to heat 
resilience.113 Natural Resources Canada also maintains a database of energy-efficiency 
programs with incentives across the country.114
Some municipalities offer incentives for green infrastructure initiatives, including:
•	 City of Toronto: the Eco-Roof Incentive Program subsidizes the installation of 
green and cool roofs.115
•	 City of Ottawa: the Trees in Trust program provides tree-planting on private 
property in exchange for three years of tree care by the property owner; the 
3.1 Non-Structural: Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
59
Schoolyard Tree Planting Grant Program provides grants to support tree-planting 
in schoolyards.116
•	 City of Montreal: the program “Un arbre pour mon quartier Soverdi,” supported 
by the city, invites residents to plant one or more trees on their land, and will 
subsidize the cost.117
Communities may also encourage citizens to participate in programs from major utility 
companies that offer customers subsidies for reducing indoor waste heat and improving 
heat control in their buildings.
Key additional benefits: Many actions that increase energy efficiency also reduce 
energy use and costs for individuals and building owners, while improving heat control in 
buildings and reducing greenhouse-gas emissions.
Potential limitations: At present, incentive programs rarely mention the beneficial 
link between boosting energy efficiency and reducing the risks of heat-related illnesses. 
The effectiveness of incentive plans depends on how many people choose to participate.
COM-6: Develop extreme-heat emergency plan
Every community should prepare for future climate-related rising temperatures by 
creating an emergency-response plan for extreme heat. Emergency plans rely on the 
collaboration and co-ordination of several stakeholders including emergency services, 
non-profit organizations, volunteers, government, and media outlets.118 In particular, 
organizations representative of the population groups at greatest risk should be involved 
in emergency planning to reflect specific needs. 
Emergency plans may consider thresholds for action that are based on regional 
relationships between health effects and climate. For example, in Quebec, special weather 
statements are issued to public health units based on the provincial SUPREME system 
established by the Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ), using criteria 
specific to different regions of Quebec.119
Specific plans for heat waves can encompass many components, including securing 
the additional human resources required to respond; the broadcast of  public-
information messages about how to protect oneself  during a heat wave; how to 
respond to power outages, and “check-in” programs for vulnerable populations 
3.1 Non-Structural: Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
60
(Action COM-3). Health Canada offers specific guidance for communities about 
“Heat Alert and Response Systems.”120 
Community emergency response plans may include:
•	 Extending the opening hours of beaches, swimming pools and water parks or 
games, and certain air-conditioned municipal buildings such as libraries or town halls
•	 Opening cooling or refreshment centres. Many cities have interactive maps showing 
the location of cooling centres.121
•	 Visiting children’s day camps to remind people of preventive measures.
•	 Visiting groups of municipal workers who are most at risk.
•	 Offering free public transportation to travel to air-conditioned places.
•	 Offering free drinking water in all municipal areas. 
•	 Appealing to owners and managers of apartment buildings to check their tenants to 
ensure that their health does not deteriorate.
•	 Establishing patrols in the most disadvantaged areas of the community to distribute 
bottled water and provide assistance as needed.
Key additional benefits: Emergency response planning can help bring together the 
different parties that are also required to take preventative action to reduce risk before an 
extreme-heat event.
Potential limitations: Emergency planning does not address the underlying causes of 
the urban heat island effect. Preventative action is required to reduce risk in advance of 
an extreme-heat event, as well as planning how to respond to an emergency situation.
Photo 226560676 © Ritaanisimova | 
Dreamstime.com
3.1 Non-Structural: Communities
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
61
3.2 
Green Infrastructure (GI)
3.2.1 Using Nature
 
GI-1: Plant and maintain trees 
Deciduous trees can be planted and maintained to provide shade, particularly along the 
south, east and west sides of low-rise homes and buildings, while still allowing heating by 
the sun in winter. High-rise buildings can be designed to support cooling vegetation on 
balconies, as demonstrated by the Bosco Verticale (Vertical Forest) residential towers in 
the centre of Milan.122 Canada’s first “vertical forest” is planned for Toronto in 2023, as 
part of the Designer’s Walk development near Davenport Road and Bedford Road.123
Trees help to cool areas by providing shade and through evapotranspiration (when water 
produced by the tree evaporates from its leaves, cooling the surrounding air).124 Some tree 
species are more effective than others – species with both a high leaf-area density and a 
high transpiration rate are more effective at cooling the air.125 Existing mature trees should 
be maintained and well cared for; excessive pruning and damage to roots should be 
avoided. A selection of different native species that are well adapted to regional and future 
climate conditions should be used, 126 as diversity can help to maintain the urban forest in 
the long term.127 In areas with limited space, such as balconies, shrubs may be grown.
Many communities are planting trees on a large scale to reduce the urban-heat-island 
effect. For example, in 2020, the City of Brampton approved a program to plant one 
million trees by 2040.128 Montreal’s Climate Plan 2020-2030 aims to, “plant, maintain 
and protect 500,000 trees, especially in zones vulnerable to heat waves.”129 Trees and 
vegetation may also be planted and maintained in strategic green or “cooling” corridors, 
including along urban river valleys.130 
Key additional benefits: Trees and vegetation promote physical and mental health 
for urban residents alongside the protection they offer from extreme heat. 131,132 According 
to several studies, the shade provided by trees and vegetation can decrease indoor air 
temperatures enough to reduce the energy required to cool the building, reducing costs.133 
Conifers may help protect homes from cold winds in the winter.134 
Toronto’s urban forest contributes to energy savings of $6.42-million annually through 
3.2 Green Infrastructure: Using Nature
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
62
shading and climate moderation, the city and Toronto-Dominion Bank have reported.135 
The presence of mature trees can also increase property values.136 Trees and vegetation 
also store and sequester carbon, improve air quality,137 and contribute to local wildlife habitat 
and biodiversity.138 There is an opportunity for communities to partner with the Government 
of Canada, which has committed to planting two billion trees over the next 10 years.139 
Potential limitations: Younger trees do not initially offer the same benefits as mature 
trees and need to be well cared for and watered to help them grow over time. Trees 
and vegetation compete for space with other activities in gardens, on balconies, around 
buildings and in communities. Increasing the tree canopy may also unintentionally 
displace marginalized populations living in neighbourhoods that have traditionally been 
underserved by natural infrastructure, and who cannot afford increasing property 
values. Pollen from certain species of  trees, in particular birch and alder, may cause 
allergic reactions.140 
Dense trees may block beneficial winds that can contribute to natural ventilation and help 
to reduce air pollution at street level.141 When planting trees, water and sewer pipes and 
electric cables should be avoided.
Tree-planting in places at risk of wildfire, particularly at the wildland-urban interface, 
must be done with care. According to FireSmart guidance,142 deciduous trees and shrubs 
should be kept at least 1.5 metres away from buildings. Conifers should be avoided 
within 10 metres of buildings. In the area 10 metres to 100 metres away from buildings, 
single trees or groups of trees should have at least three metres of space between their 
outermost branches; the lower branches of conifers should be removed to a height of two 
metres from the ground. 
GI-2: Expand vegetation cover and absorb water to keep gardens 
and balconies cooler
Artificial surfaces absorb, store, and re-emit more solar radiation or heat than natural 
and vegetated surfaces. To reduce heat on an individual property or building lot, artificial 
surfaces should be reduced in size and vegetation should be increased on the grounds, in 
gardens and parking areas -- and even on balconies and terraces, where plants may be 
grown in containers.
Replacing artificial surfaces with vegetation also helps retain and absorb water, and 
increases the moisture content of soil. Through evaporation, wet soils have cooling 
$6.42-million
Annual energy 
savings provided 
by urban forest 
shading and climate 
moderation in 
Toronto.
!
3.2 Green Infrastructure: Using Nature
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
63
capacities similar to those of vegetation, and therefore provide more cooling than dry 
soils.143 Water absorption can be encouraged by using permeable vegetated surfaces 
on paths and in parking areas (including grass and vegetated permeable paving). Rain 
gardens can also increase the absorption and retention of surface water.144
At the larger community level, vegetation, rivers, and wetlands can be a strategic 
component of public infrastructure, often referred to as “blue-green” infrastructure. 
Communities and organizations can support residents in creating green alleyways or 
streets, and protecting and linking important wildlife habitats such as urban forests. These 
activities can complement de-paving initiatives, the creation of ecological corridors, and 
projects to restore wetlands and river corridors. 
Examples of initiatives that bring more vegetation into urban areas include:
•	 The “Depave Paradise” project by Green Communities Canada that supports 
volunteers and neighbourhoods in replacing unwanted pavement with gardens of 
native plants.145
•	 The “Greening Canada School Grounds” program by Tree Canada that has 
improved 700 schoolyards since 1992.146
•	 The “Butterfly Way Project” by the David Suzuki Foundation created pollinator 
gardens in more than 400 communities across Canada in 2021.147
•	 The “Green Alleyway Support Program” in the City of Montreal that has 
supported neighbourhoods in creating at least 444 green alleyways in city.148 149
•	 The use of “Natural Heritage System” planning by municipalities and river-basin 
organizations in Ontario to identify opportunities to enhance natural systems.150 151
•	 The “Rain City Strategy” in Vancouver, which uses green infrastructure to soak up 
and manage rainwater.152
3.2 Green Infrastructure: Using Nature
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
64
Communities can create more space for natural infrastructure by reducing the space 
taken up by built infrastructure. For example, open-air parking lots can be replaced with 
underground or multi-storey parking lots. 
More than 30 Canadian municipalities have also made inventories of the natural assets 
within their jurisdictions that help to regulate temperatures. These municipalities are 
actively managing their natural assets alongside their built infrastructure as part of regular 
municipal asset management. 153 
Key additional benefits: Blue-green infrastructure can enhance stormwater 
management by retaining water, which helps to protect communities against flooding 
and erosion. It can also remove pollutants, which reduces water-treatment costs. Blue-
green corridors also enhance habitats and biodiversity, and can provide opportunities for 
recreation, walking and cycling, when combined with foot paths and bike lanes. 
Community greening projects, such as green alleyways, can help strengthen community 
relationships and support mental well-being.154 And fruit and vegetable gardens, on 
balconies, in yards or on public land, can help control local temperatures as well as 
provide food.
Potential limitations: In large urban centres, high land costs and constraints on land 
use may make it difficult and expensive to reintroduce vegetation and water bodies. In areas 
at risk of wildfire, particularly at the wildand-urban interface, vegetation should be kept 
1.5 metres away from buildings. Vegetation in the area between 1.5 metres and 10 metres 
from buildings should be fire-resistant, and grass should be no longer than 10 centimetres.
During prolonged, dry extreme-heat events, soils and rain gardens will dry out and their 
ability to reduce temperatures will decrease with time. Water bodies retain heat, and may 
exacerbate heat stress during oppressive (humid) conditions at night. Their ability to cool 
the local environment will also decrease through the day and through the summer.155
 
3.2.2 Green Buildings
GI-3: Install a green (vegetated) roof 
A green roof is a layer of vegetation grown on top of a roof, covering a portion of the 
roof or its entirety.156 Green roofs are used to replace traditional, heat-absorbing roofing 
materials with plants, shrubs, and small trees. The construction of green roofs can be 
3.2 Green Infrastructure: Using Nature
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
65
complex, but typically includes high-quality waterproofing, a root-repellent system, a 
drainage system, filter cloth, a lightweight growing medium, and plants.157 
Compared with traditional roofs, green roofs have cooler surfaces and transfer less heat 
to the inside of the building. Water absorbed by soil and plants on the roof is evaporated, 
which helps to cool the surface. The plants also provide some shade, which lowers the 
surface temperature. The soil also provides extra insulation, which helps to reduce the 
transfer of heat to the interior of the building.158 
Green roofs may be extensive (shallower and simpler with low-lying plants) or intensive 
(deeper and more complex, supporting a variety of plants similar to a garden). Numerous 
communities and research centres have compared the surface temperatures of green 
roofs and conventional roofs. A New York study found that at peak daytime temperatures, 
the surface temperature of green roofs was on average 33oC cooler than the surface 
of traditional roofs.159 160 161 A Chicago study found that on a hot August day the air 
temperature one metre above a green roof was 3.9oC lower than the temperature above 
an adjacent traditional black roof.162 Green roofs are now required in some Canadian 
municipalities (see Action COM-4). 
Key additional benefits: Although the costs of building and maintaining green roofs 
may exceed those of conventional roofs in the short term, they generally last about two or 
three times longer than conventional roof surfaces.163 
Green roofs may help reduce energy use and costs. A study by Walmart for a single-storey 
store in Chicago found that a 6,970-square-metre green roof reduced the energy required 
to heat the building by 6 per cent to 11 per cent, and cut the energy required to cool it by 
7 per cent to 15 per cent. The result was an overall cost savings of between 6 per cent and 
10 per cent when compared with Walmart’s standard white roof.164 
Intensive green roofs can create outdoor garden spaces for residents. They reduce 
stormwater runoff by capturing rainwater in the substrate and increasing rates of 
evapotranspiration. The plants on green roofs can also capture airborne pollutants, 
improving air quality.165 In certain places, green roofs may be eligible for subsidies.166 167
Potential limitations: The National Building Code does not address the construction 
of green roofs, and provincial standards for their construction may differ.168 In some 
communities, changes to bylaws may be required in order to permit green roofs. 
Professional advice is required when installing a green roof to ensure that the extra weight 
can be supported and the roof is functional. 
Green roofs may be expensive to install. Prices will vary, depending on the type, location, 
materials, and design.169 Appropriate maintenance is critical, especially for intensive green 
!
6-10%
Overall energy 
cost savings due 
to Walmart’s 
6,970-square-
metre green roof in 
Chicago.
3.2 Green Infrastructure: Green Buildings
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
66
roof designs. In drought conditions, green roofs may be difficult to maintain, and may 
require irrigation. Because they are combustible, and can increase the risk of wildfire, 
green roofs are not appropriate in wildland-urban interface areas.
 
GI-4: Install a green (vegetated) facade
A green façade uses climbing plants to cover a wall, reducing the temperature of the 
building envelope and increasing its thermal mass, which helps to reduce the transfer 
of heat to indoor spaces. Care should be taken to avoid invasive species and choose 
appropriate climbing plants such as Boston ivy, Virginia creeper, climbing honeysuckle, 
or climbing hydrangea.170 Limited space is required at the foot of  the wall for the 
plants’ roots.171
Another cooling mechanism is a green or “living” wall. Living wall systems consist of pre-
vegetated panels, modules, blankets or bags affixed to a structural wall or free-standing 
frame. These modules are designed to support a greater diversity and density of plant 
species than green façades.172
Green walls can reduce temperature fluctuations at the wall’s surface to a range of 5°C 
to 30°C, compared with fluctuations of 10°C to 60°C for an ordinary wall. In turn, this 
limits the transfer of heat through the wall from the outside to the inside. Green walls 
achieve this by trapping a layer of air within the mass of plants, by reducing the ambient 
outdoor temperature through evapotranspiration and shading, and by creating a buffer 
against wind during the winter months.173 
Key additional benefits: Climbing plants on green façades and walls take up little 
space on the ground, and may protect the surface of the building from sunlight, wind and 
rain.174 Green façades are also aesthetically pleasing and contribute to local biodiversity, 
and some climbing plants produce edible fruits such as grapes and beans.
Potential limitations: Some climbing plants, such as those using tendrils or hooks, 
may require support in the form of a trellis or wires. If the plants need to be removed 
from the wall at any point, this must be done carefully to avoid damage.
Living walls may be more challenging to maintain than green façades; watering, for 
instance, may be more difficult because some plant roots are located higher up on the 
wall.175 Green façades and walls must be designed for the cold winters in Canada with 
appropriate plant species, and in order to avoid freezing irrigation pipes or cisterns.176 
3.2 Green Infrastructure: Green Buildings
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
67
They may also be difficult to maintain in droughts, and are not appropriate in wildland-
urban interface areas as they are combustible and increase wildfire risk to buildings.177
3.3 
Grey (Built) Infrastructure (BI)
Adaptation to extreme heat using grey, or built, infrastructure includes retrofitting 
existing infrastructure and considering extreme-heat resilience in the design of new 
infrastructure. Actions described in this section are largely focused on practical measures 
that individuals, property owners and managers, and communities can apply to retrofit 
existing infrastructure, since heat-resilient design for new buildings (which may include 
orientation, ventilation, window-to-wall ratios and thermal mass) is a professional 
discipline of its own.
The grey-infrastructure actions have been organized according to the following different 
types of approaches:
•	 Passive cooling for buildings (does not require power)
•	 Active cooling for buildings
•	 Emergency preparedness of buildings
•	 Community infrastructure 
3.3.1 Passive Cooling for Buildings
BI-1: Enhance insulation and airtightness
Effective insulation in a building can enhance its ability to regulate the indoor 
temperature, helping to keep hot air out in summer and cold air out in winter.178 
Insulating the exterior walls, basement and attic space will control the transfer of heat. 
Air leakage can be reduced by using sealants around potential weak points such as 
windows, doors, cracks in the walls, interior trim and ceiling light fixtures.179
In addition to these measures, owners of multi-unit residential or commercial buildings 
should consider insulating hallways, lobbies, elevator shafts, stairwells, loading docks, 
service rooms and other common areas.
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Passive Cooling for Buildings
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
68
Key additional benefits: Insulating a house and making it airtight can improve 
its overall energy efficiency; the home will require less heating in winter and, where 
air conditioning is used, less cooling in summer, saving on costs. An EnerGuide home 
evaluation can help Canadian homeowners identify retrofits that can improve their 
insulation and airtightness.180 Some expenses for insulating and sealing a house may be 
eligible for reimbursement under the Canada Greener Homes Grant program.181
Potential limitations: If a building is not well designed (for instance, with respect to its 
orientation, ventilation, window-to-wall ratios and thermal mass), and its insulation and 
airtightness are improved, unwanted hot air could be trapped inside, making overheating 
worse.182 Inadequate ventilation in a building could also result in condensation, mould, 
and poor air quality.183
BI-2: Install “cool” (reflective) roof / wall / paving surfaces 
Cool roofs, walls and paving surfaces reflect more solar radiation and sunlight and absorb 
less heat than their conventional counterparts. Roof and pavements, in particular, have 
historically been made with dark, heat-retaining materials such as asphalt shingles and tar. 
These materials absorb large amounts of solar radiation. 
Cool roofs, walls and paving surfaces use light-coloured materials or reflective coatings to 
reflect sun and heat away from the surface, which results in a lower temperature.184 For 
example, on a very hot day with an outdoor temperature of 38°C, a traditional roof can 
reach a temperature of 66°C or more. A cool roof under the same conditions may be 
more than 28°C cooler.185 
In parking lots, reflective paving surfaces can help to cool surface temperatures. 
Permeable parking surfaces, such as gravel, can also absorb water and help to cool the 
ambient air through evaporation.
Key additional benefits: Cool roofs and walls help reduce the cost of energy required 
for cooling in air-conditioned homes. 
Potential limitations: Cool roofs may become less effective with the accumulation 
of dirt and dust, and therefore must be maintained. Cool roofs and walls may increase 
residential heating costs in the winter. In cooler Canadian climates, they will therefore 
likely have a smaller overall impact on household energy efficiency.186 However, as 
temperatures increase with climate change, this limitation will likely become less significant. 
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Passive Cooling for Buildings
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
69
BI-3: Use concrete, brick, stone and tile finishes that absorb heat
Concrete, brick, stone and tile finishes are referred to as “thermal mass.” These surfaces 
absorb heat during the day and release it at night, helping to regulate air temperature 
by retaining heat in winter and staying cool in the summer. Thermal masses should be 
located where they can absorb heat energy from the lower-angle sun in the winter, and be 
hidden from higher-angle sun in the summer, under overhangs.187 188
Key additional benefits: The use of thermal masses can reduce the energy required 
for cooling, thereby reducing costs.
 
Potential limitations: Thermal mass surfaces may require night ventilation to cool 
them down so they are ready for the next day. Some exposed surfaces may be too cold for 
comfort (for instance, for bare feet). 
BI-4: Install windows that reduce heat gain from the sun 
Windows, glass doors and skylights are one of the primary ways that heat moves 
into buildings. High-performance glazing, or glass, can significantly improve indoor 
temperatures by reducing the amount of heat transferred into the building. 
Features that achieve this include double and triple layers of glass, inert gas fillings (such 
as argon and krypton) between layers, insulated frames, and low-conductivity edge seals. 
Low emissivity (low-E) coatings on glass are also effective in reducing heat gain from the 
sun.189 A lower-cost alternative is heat-controlling window films.
Key additional benefits: Using high-performance glass in windows, doors and 
skylights can improve the overall energy efficiency of a home, reducing heating 
requirements and costs in winter and keeping the home cooler in summer. The 
installation of energy-efficient windows and doors may be eligible for reimbursement 
under the Canada Greener Homes Grant program.190
Potential limitations: Heat-resilient glazing can be a costly investment. To avoid 
trapping unwanted heat inside a building, the building’s design characteristics and 
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Passive Cooling for Buildings
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
70
internal heat gains should be considered before installing windows that reduce the 
transfer of heat.191
BI-5: Install shading devices 
Devices that shade windows can help to reduce the heat entering a building where 
shade is not provided by trees. Trees and exterior devices such as shutters, awnings and 
overhangs are more effective at providing shade than indoor apparatus, because they 
block solar heat before it reaches the glass.192, 193 Indoor blinds and curtains are less 
effective but easy to operate, and several models are designed specifically to limit heat. 
Key additional benefits: Shading devices can reach areas that are not shaded by trees 
or other vegetation, and can improve privacy, particularly at night when lights are on in 
the home. Some indoor shades have electronic settings that can be adjusted for weather 
conditions, time of day and activities taking place in the home.
Potential limitations: External shading devices are not common in Canada at present. 
Some shading devices may restrict light, natural ventilation, and views outside the 
building, particularly if they are fixed in place. 
3.3.2 Active Cooling for Buildings
BI-6: Install temperature and humidity monitors or controls
During extreme-heat events it is important to monitor both the temperature and the 
relative humidity level inside and outside a building. This information can alert people 
to conditions that create a high risk of heat-related illness, so that they can take further 
precautions to protect themselves and others. “Smart” thermostats can automatically 
activate air conditioning and ventilation when the temperature and humidity reach 
certain thresholds, and avoid wasting electricity when cooling is not required. 
Key additional benefits: Using a thermostat that can be programmed to control 
temperature and air conditioning can reduce energy requirements and may result in 
cost savings. 
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Active Cooling for Buildings
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
71
Potential limitations: Temperature / humidity monitors do not themselves help to 
reduce extreme-heat conditions unless they are linked to the operation of air conditioning 
or other cooling systems.
BI-7: Use ceiling or portable fans 
Increased ventilation can help homeowners and tenants feel more comfortable by 
increasing the movement of air, which also helps to cool the skin through evaporation.194 
In the summer, ceiling fans should rotate counter-clockwise, so that the blades push air 
down to create a wind-chill effect that makes occupants feel cooler.195
Key additional benefits: Fans may be used with air conditioning to help circulate 
cooled air and use less energy.196 In the winter, ceiling fans can be operated clockwise to 
help circulate warm air, which may conserve energy and reduce costs.197 
Potential limitations: Ceiling fans and portable fans do not lower room temperatures, 
and they may be counterproductive when the air temperature is very hot.198 199 
Regardless of humidity levels, the maximum temperature for the safe use of fans is 39°C 
for healthy adults 18 to 40 years old; 38°C for healthy adults under 65; and 37°C for 
older adults who take certain medications.200
BI-8: Install and maintain air conditioning or heat pumps
Air conditioning can help people keep cool during extreme-heat events. However, all the 
factors that may contribute to indoor heat should be addressed before the requirement for 
air conditioning is determined. Actions to minimize indoor heat can significantly reduce 
the need for air conditioning. Air conditioning or heat pumps may be installed in specific 
rooms or as a centralized system. Heat pumps supply heat in the winter and cooling in the 
summer, and in some cases, they heat water.201 Professional advice is recommended.
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Active Cooling for Buildings
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
72
Air conditioning systems, like furnaces, should be maintained regularly to ensure that they 
are working properly and also efficiently.202 Experts advise the following steps:
•	 Clean the air filters at least once each season. A dirty air filter reduces airflow and, 
in some cases, this could damage the air-conditioning unit.
•	 Keep the condenser clean and free of leaves and other debris
•	 Clean drain holes or tubes that become blocked
•	 If the unit’s performance seems to have deteriorated, have it serviced. A small loss 
of refrigerant can cause a significant drop in efficiency. It is important to have leaks 
fixed, and refrigerant should be recycled. 
In multi-unit residential and commercial buildings, cooling rooms can give residents or 
workers access to air conditioning; cooling rooms are mandated for multi-unit residential 
buildings in some locations, including Toronto. 
Air conditioning is also required in buildings such as health-care facilities and long-term 
care homes. Additionally, many municipalities have developed and promoted cooling 
centres for use during extreme-heat events, such as libraries, shopping malls, community 
centres and other existing air-conditioned locations. 
Key additional benefits: Heat pumps can cool buildings as well as heat them. A heat 
pump may be a good choice when an air-conditioning or heating system needs to be 
replaced, because the cost to switch from a heating-only or cooling-only system to a heat 
pump is often quite low. 203
 
Potential limitations: Air conditioning produces heat (outdoors) that contributes to 
the urban-heat-island effect. Unlike many other heat-reducing actions identified in this 
report, the use of air conditioning increases energy consumption and the associated costs. 
The resulting increased demand for energy during peak periods may necessitate the use 
of additional, non-renewable energy sources, increasing greenhouse-gas emissions. If 
there is a power outage during a heat event, which may occur due to excessive demand, 
air conditioning will not work.
Heat
Pump
Outside air
Heated 
air
Cooled air
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Active Cooling for Buildings
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
73
Air conditioning systems are also expensive to install, and the people who are most 
vulnerable to heat may not be able to afford them. It may be necessary to upgrade a 
building’s electrical system to enable the installation of air conditioning, and in some 
apartment buildings it may not be possible for tenants to add their own systems.
Cooling rooms and networks are effective only if people use them; vulnerable people may 
need help to get to cooling rooms. Socially isolated individuals may not be willing to use 
cooling rooms, whether in a residential building or a public cooling centre. 
3.3.3 Emergency Preparedness of Buildings
BI-9: Install and maintain backup power generation 
During extreme-heat events, building owners and managers can reduce the risks caused 
by power outages that may cause a buildup of indoor heat and elevate the risk of heat-
related illnesses. Building owners can install backup power generation, in addition to 
measures that improve what is known as “passive survivability.”204 Passive survivability is a 
construction term that means the ability to survive without help from electricity.
The National Building Code requires emergency generators for health-care facilities, 
life-safety systems and emergency building services; these requirements include 
an emergency power supply for two hours for working elevators, a water supply for 
firefighting, and electric fans to maintain ventilation and air quality.205 With an emergency 
power supply, residents can evacuate their apartments and emergency services personnel 
can access the building. 
The national standards relevant to extreme-heat emergencies include CSA Z32-09, 
“Electrical safety and essential electrical systems in health care facilities”206 and CSA 
C282-15, “Emergency electrical power supply for buildings.”207
There is no current code or standard in any Canadian jurisdiction that addresses 
sustained, area-wide power outages that affect a multi-unit residential building when 
there is no emergency in the building itself. Extreme heat is not currently considered an 
emergency by the National Building Code.
In 2016, the City of Toronto developed minimum guidelines for the provision of 
backup power in multi-unit residential buildings. The guidelines—which can be adopted 
voluntarily but are not mandatory—include providing backup power for 72 hours, and 
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Emergency Preparedness of Buildings
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
74
backing up air conditioning or cooling systems for a common refuge area.208 However, 
Waterfront Toronto—the waterfront revitalization organization involving the federal, 
provincial and municipal governments—is requiring developers to demonstrate how they 
will address these backup-power guidelines in the design of all new residential projects.209
Key additional benefits: Backup power generation helps increase resilience to 
flooding, wildfires, ice storms and other natural hazards that may cause power outages.
Potential limitations: The installation of backup power generation does not reduce 
occupants’ exposure to extreme heat when systems are functioning normally (such as 
when there is no power outage).
 
BI-10: Arrange for backup water supply during power outages
The upper floors of high-rise buildings depend on electrical power for their tap water. 
During power outages, especially in a heat wave, people need water to stay hydrated and 
reduce the risks of heat-related illnesses. 
Building owners can maintain a water supply with backup power to operate domestic 
water booster pumps.210 They can also install outdoor water fixtures connected to a 
gravity-fed source in a location easily accessible to building occupants.211
Key additional benefits: Maintaining a water supply during power outages helps 
increase resilience to flooding, wildfires, ice storms and other natural hazards that may 
cause power outages.
Potential limitations: Installation of alternative water supplies does not reduce 
occupants’ exposure to heat illnesses when systems are functioning normally (outside a 
power outage). 
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Emergency Preparedness of Buildings
Photo 163003821 © Pressfoto | Dreamstime.com
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
75
3.3.4 Community Infrastructure
BI-11: Adapt community infrastructure to extreme heat 
Extreme heat is a danger to community infrastructure and public health. Community 
infrastructure may be owned and operated by the municipality (water treatment, roads 
and sewers, for instance) or by other parties (such as electricity and gas utilities and railways).
Once a community and/or owner has assessed infrastructure for vulnerabilities to extreme 
heat (Action COM-1), they can work to reduce the risks to the infrastructure itself, and 
the associated impacts on health. When communities are designing new infrastructure or 
adapting existing infrastructure to be heat-resilient, they should consider future potential 
climatic conditions, including the risks from extreme heat, as a matter of routine. 
Key additional benefits: Communities may work with infrastructure owners 
strategically, to reduce health risks during extreme-heat events. For example, in Montreal, 
the urban transportation provider, STM, helps move people to cooling centres.212 
Potential limitations: Adapting aging infrastructure to be climate resilient can be 
challenging and costly and needs integrating into long-term planning. Close collaboration 
is likely to be required between communities and infrastructure owners, who may 
have different objectives. Many identified actions may be outside the control of the 
community itself.
BI-12: Reduce vehicular traffic 
Motorized vehicles produce heat in urban areas and reduce air quality. Communities can 
take steps to reduce the use of such vehicles, including:213
•	 Providing safe public transportation options, and routes dedicated to self-propelled 
transportation such as walking and bicycling 
•	 Increasing urban density
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Community Infrastructure
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
76
•	 Developing mixed-use neighbourhoods that give people access to businesses and 
services without using a car 
•	 Restricting the use of motorized vehicles in urban centres
Key additional benefits: Reduced vehicular traffic also reduces the production of 
greenhouse gases. Infrastructure that encourages active, or self-propelled, transport (such 
as foot paths and bike lanes) can boost recreational opportunities and citizens’ feelings of 
well-being.
Potential limitations: To reduce the heat created by motor vehicles, people must decide 
to change their modes of transport, and/or continue to work from home post-pandemic.
 
BI-13: Install “cool” reflective or permeable pavements
Traditional asphalt and concrete roads store and emit heat. “Cool pavements” use 
alternative materials that are more reflective or permeable, and this helps to reduce 
surface and ambient temperatures. 
Permeable pavements or similar surfaces (such as driveways or patios of crushed stone 
over soil) contain voids that allow air, water, and water vapour inside. When wet, these 
pavements can lower surrounding air temperatures through evaporative cooling. 
Reflective pavements are lighter in colour, or more reflective, than traditional dark 
asphalt. This helps them absorb less heat, so they are less hot.214 The United States 
Green Building Council (USGBC) suggests that the most cost-effective way of increasing 
reflectivity in road surfaces is by increasing the albedo (the proportion of absorbed light 
that a surface reflects back into the atmosphere) of the resurfacing materials that cities 
already use in road maintenance.215 
Key additional benefits: Reducing the surface temperatures of dark pavement can 
also reduce the risk of premature failure of that pavement, such as rutting in asphalt 
pavements (depressions in the wheel paths). Reflective pavements can enhance visibility 
at night, potentially reducing the amount of lighting needed. And permeable pavements 
have been found to recharge the underlying groundwater, as well as reduce stormwater 
runoff and associated pollution.216,217
Potential limitations: Results from pilot projects, including the Cool Streets project 
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Community Infrastructure
Photo 161445682 © Think Design Manage Services Ltd. | Dreamstime.com
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
77
in Los Angeles, suggest that reflective surfaces may not be appropriate for sidewalks, 
because the reflectivity may expose pedestrians to more heat.218 219 Permeable pavements 
are not appropriate for areas with high-speed traffic (although they can be used on smaller 
residential streets and in parking lots).220 
Permeable or cool pavements require maintenance, and communities should factor this 
into their decisions. Care should also be taken to avoid additional clean water entering 
sanitary sewer pipes through the ground.
BI-14: Expand artificial shade 
Communities of all sizes can create shade with a variety of structures, including portable 
items (such as canopies, tents and umbrellas), canopies or awnings attached to buildings, 
and free-standing open-air structures with roofs.221
Key additional benefits: Shade can be created in places where the potential for 
trees to grow is limited. Man-made or constructed shade is effective: in low-humidity 
conditions, people cannot discern a difference in temperature between natural shade and 
constructed shade, according to a recent study.222 Also, shade structures that incorporate 
solar panels can provide a source of renewable energy.
Potential limitations: Constructed shade does not offer the same ecosystem-service 
benefits as trees (see action GI-1).
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Community Infrastructure
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
78
BI-15: Install water-based cooling systems and drinking fountains 
Man-made pools, ponds and fountains are commonly found in urban settings, and they 
can have a cooling effect. On hot days, the surface temperature of these water bodies may 
be several degrees lower than that of the surrounding built environment. Warm air will 
evaporate water from their surfaces, which will cool the surrounding air temperature. 
Communities can also employ more active water-based cooling methods, such as 
sprinklers and evaporative wind towers.223 Drinking fountains also help keep residents 
hydrated on hot days. 
Key additional benefits: Water features are often used to increase aesthetic value in 
communities, and may also offer opportunities for recreation, such as splash pads for children.
Potential limitations: There is limited knowledge about the potential of water-based 
evaporative techniques to mitigate heat. In drought conditions, the use of water may be 
restricted. During periods of high humidity, the cooling effects of water bodies may be 
constrained. Water systems need to be designed and maintained to prevent the spread of 
diseases, such as Legionnaires’ disease, that may flourish in high temperatures.224 
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure: Community Infrastructure
Photo 154550622 © Marc Bruxelle | Dreamstime.com
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
79
Achieving Multiple 
Benefits
Chapter 
4
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
80
Many actions that reduce the risks 
of heat-related illnesses also bring 
additional, tangible benefits, often 
termed “co-benefits.”
For individuals, investing in extreme-heat resilience can result in direct co-benefits such as:
•	 Improved comfort, well-being, and mental health
•	 Lower energy bills
•	 Improved productivity
•	 Enhanced property values
•	 Stronger social networks and relationships
For property owners and managers, investing in extreme-heat resilience can result in co-
benefits such as:
•	 Better experiences for tenants
•	 Lower operating costs
•	 A greater chance of avoiding business interruptions 
•	 An enhanced reputation
•	 Improved performance in terms of Environmental, Social and 
Governance (ESG) criteria
•	 Additional foot traffic in pedestrian and retail environments  
•	 Higher property values and rent premiums, and lower vacancy rates 
For communities, investing in extreme-heat resilience can result in co-benefits such as:
•	 Reduced greenhouse-gas production (where energy is produced 
using fossil fuels)
•	 Carbon sequestration and storage by vegetation and soils
•	 Improved habitats and biodiversity
•	 Flood and erosion regulation
•	 Improved air quality
•	 Opportunities for recreation and self-propelled transportation 
Chapter 4: Achieving Multiple Benefits
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
81
Table 6 provides an overview of key co-benefits that may be associated with each of the 
35 practical actions described in Chapter 3. It is worth noting that many co-benefits can 
be achieved with natural infrastructure solutions, which can be applied at all scales.
Table 6: Co-benefits associated with practical actions to reduce risks from extreme 
heat (as described in Chapter 3)
Human 
Co-Benefits
Ecosystem Service 
Co-Benefits
Direct 
Financial 
Co-Benefits
Ref.
Action
Knowledge and Education
Social Networks and Relationships
Recreation / Active Transport
Improved Air Quality
Reduced GHG Production
Vegetation and Soils
Improved Habitat and Biodiversity
Improved Water Quality
Flood and Erosion Regulation
Enhanced Value / Longer Design Life
Improved Business / Work Continuity
Energy-Efficiency and Cost Savings
IND-1
Work with neighbours, friends and family to 
prepare
IND-2
Arrange to receive public heat warnings
IND-3
Learn how to use natural ventilation
IND-4
Minimize “waste” indoor heat production
IND-5
Plan for modified working, living and sleeping 
arrangements
PROP-1
COM-1
Understand building-scale vulnerabilities /
assess and map vulnerability to extreme heat
PROP-2
COM-2
Provide information and outreach to help 
occupants adapt / encourage preventive 
action before a heat event
PROP-3
COM-3
Identify and support vulnerable occupants / set 
up community support programs 
PROP-4
Use natural ventilation in common areas
PROP-5
COM-6
Develop extreme-heat emergency plan with 
occupants
COM-4
Require heat-sensitive urban planning, 
infrastructure design, and operation
COM-5
Provide incentives to increase passive cooling 
and reduce “waste” heat
Chapter 4: Achieving Multiple Benefits
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
82
Human 
Co-Benefits
Ecosystem Service 
Co-Benefits
Direct 
Financial 
Co-Benefits
Ref.
Action
Knowledge and Education
Social Networks and Relationships
Recreation / Active Transport
Improved Air Quality
Reduced GHG Production
Vegetation and Soils
Improved Habitat and Biodiversity
Improved Water Quality
Flood and Erosion Regulation
Enhanced Value / Longer Design Life
Improved Business / Work Continuity
Energy-Efficiency and Cost Savings
GI-1
Plant and maintain trees
GI-2
Expand vegetated areas and water bodies 
and absorb more water
GI-3
Install green roofs
GI-4
Grow green façades or green walls on buildings
BI-1
Enhance insulation and airtightness
BI-2
Install cool roofs, walls and paving surfaces
BI-3
Use concrete, brick, stone and tile finishes to 
absorb heat
BI-4
Install windows that reduce heat transfer
BI-5
Install shading devices
BI-6
Install temperature and humidity monitors or 
thermostat controls
BI-7
Install ceiling or portable fans
BI-8
Install and maintain air conditioning or heat 
pumps
BI-9
Install and maintain backup power generation
BI-10
Maintain a water supply during power 
outages
BI-11
Adapt community infrastructure to extreme 
heat
BI-12
Reduce vehicular traffic
BI-13
Install cool or permeable pavements
BI-14
Expand artificial shade
BI-15
Build water-based cooling systems and 
drinking fountains
Chapter 4: Achieving Multiple Benefits
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
83
Conclusion and 
Next Steps
Chapter 
5
Photo 32893394 © Andres Garcia Martin | Dreamstime.com
Extreme heat is an urgent 
national issue for Canada. 
To avoid worsening 
impacts, fatalities and 
costs resulting from rising 
temperatures, swift 
action is required. 
Chapter 5: Conclusion and Next Steps
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
85
To become resilient in the face of 
extreme heat—to withstand and recover 
from dangerously hot weather—
Canadians must learn to adapt. 
This report presents a compendium of practical actions that can be used by everyone, at 
home, in multi-unit buildings, and in the wider community, to build heat-resilience. As 
with efforts to improve resilience to flooding and wildfires, the challenge is not necessarily 
“knowing what to do,” but rather, putting preventive actions into practice on the ground. 
To help accelerate Canada’s progress in preparing for a hotter future, decision-makers 
should capitalize on these key opportunities:
1.	 Governments and other organizations should recognize extreme-heat events as 
“natural disasters” and include extreme heat in their messaging, in the same way 
that flooding and wildfire are seen as natural disasters.225
2.	 Public-health agencies and other organizations should expand their existing 
communications with more information about how to reduce heat-related risks 
before a heat event. Messages about how to respond during a heat event should 
also be amplified. All messages should include easy-to-understand infographics 
and be adapted to specific vulnerable populations, in a range of languages.
3.	 The public sector and private investors should co-operate to maximize win-win 
situations. For example, tree-planting programs designed to store carbon could 
be carried out in places where they could reduce the urban-heat-island effect 
too—resulting in more than one benefit. Programs to improve energy efficiency in 
buildings could be expanded to reduce extreme-heat risks at the same time.
4.	 Home inspections or evaluations (for instance, as part of the EnerGuide 
program226) should include advice about how to increase the dwelling’s resilience 
to climate, including extreme heat. Any future initiative to rate homes on their 
climate-readiness should include heat-resilience as a factor.
Ultimately, a desire to build Canadians’ resilience to extreme heat must 
become the norm, not the exception, in decision-making by everyone from 
homeowners and tenants to businesses and community leaders. Everyone has 
a responsibility to reduce their own risks from extreme heat, and an opportunity to help 
protect others more vulnerable than themselves.
Chapter 5: Conclusion and Next Steps
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
86
Appendix A: 
Assessment of Extreme 
Heat Projections 
The assessment of extreme-heat projections presented in Chapter 2 was undertaken 
using data from the Climate Atlas of Canada portal (www.climateatlas.ca). Details of the 
assessment are provided below:
Communities
This analysis included all 35 census metropolitan areas (CMAs) in Canada (defined as 
areas with a total population of at least 100,000, of which 50,000 live in the core),227 
as well as the capital cities and a selection of representative small and medium-sized 
communities in each province. In total, 70 communities were considered (see Table A1.) 
Indicators
Climate projections were considered for three indicators of extreme heat, for which the 
full definitions are provided below:
•	 Very Hot Days (30°C +): A very hot day is one when the temperature rises to at 
least 30°C. Data are available with respect to projected changes in the average 
number of very hot days per year.
•	 Warmest Maximum Temperature: The warmest maximum temperature is the 
highest temperature of the year. Data are available about projected changes in the 
average annual warmest maximum temperature.
•	 Average length of heat waves: A heat wave occurs when the temperature reaches 
or exceeds 30°C at least three days in a row. Data are available about projected 
changes in the average length of heat waves in days.
Climate Scenarios
Climate projections were extracted for two possible climate futures. Each assumes a 
different level of future greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions, which leads to either more 
global warming, or less. The technical name for these scenarios is “Representative 
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
87
Concentration Pathways (RCPs).”
1.	 The More Climate Change / “High Carbon” Scenario: This scenario assumes 
that world GHG emissions continue to increase at current rates through the end 
of the twenty-first century. This large volume of GHG emissions results in more-
severe global warming. This scenario is also called the “high-carbon” future, and is 
based on the RCP 8.5 emissions scenario.
2.	 The Less Climate Change / “Low Carbon” Scenario: This scenario assumes that 
GHG emissions increase until about 2050 and then rapidly decline. This decline 
in emissions leads to less-severe global warming than the alternative high-carbon 
scenario. This scenario is also called the “low-carbon” future, and is based on the 
RCP 4.5 emissions scenario.
Time Horizons
This analysis was based on data for the relatively recent past (1976–2005) and climate 
projections for the near future (2051–2080).
 
Assessment
National maps of climate projections for 2051–2080 under the “High Carbon” scenario 
were examined to identify key trends in the three extreme-heat indicators (presented in 
Section 2.1.)
Climate projections for the 35 census metropolitan areas were subsequently ranked to 
identify the top 10 CMAs considering each of three extreme-heat indicators (presented in 
Section 2.2.). Where projected conditions were the same, the same ranking was applied, 
meaning more than ten metropolitan areas were identified. 
From the 70 communities considered in total (Table A1), additional communities were 
identified that had climate projections similar to those of the top 10 in any of these respects: 
•	 Number of Very Hot Days (30°C +): 53.7 days or more per year
•	 Average Annual Warmest Maximum Temperature: 38.4°C or above
•	 Annual average heat-wave length: 7.8 days or longer
Appendix A
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
88
Table A.1.: Metropolitan areas and communities in Canada assessed for 
extreme-heat projections
Province or Territory
Census Metropolitan Areas 
Smaller communities 
Alberta
Calgary
Edmonton
Lethbridge
Brooks
Drumheller
Medicine Hat
Taber
British Columbia
Abbortsford-Mission
Kelowna
Vancouver
Victoria
Creston
Kamloops
Penticton
Vernon
Manitoba
Winnipeg
Emerson
Morden
Souris
Steinbach
New Brunswick
Moncton
St John
Fredericton
Woodstock
Newfoundland and Labrador
St. John’s
Labrador City
Nova Scotia
Halifax
Windsor
Northwest Territories
Inuvik
Yellowknife
Nunavut
Iqaluit
Rankin Inlet
Ontario
Barrie
Belleville
Brantford
Greater Sudbury
Guelph
Hamilton
Kingston
Kitchener-Waterloo-Cambridge
London
Niagara Falls-St. Catharines
Oshawa
Ottawa
Peterborough
Toronto
Thunder Bay
Windsor
Chatham
Leamington
Sarnia
Appendix A
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
89
Province or Territory
Census Metropolitan Areas 
Smaller communities 
Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown
Summerside
Quebec
Montreal 
Quebec City
Saguenay
Sherbrooke
Trois-Rivières
Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu
Salaberry-de-Valleyfield
Saskatchewan
Regina
Saskatoon
Estevan
Leader
Maple Creek
Prince Albert
Weyburn
Yukon Territory
Carmacks
Whitehorse
Appendix A
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
90
Appendix B: Heat 
Warning Criteria in 
Canada
Table B.1. Criteria used by Environment and Climate Change Canada for issuing a 
Heat Warning, by province and territory (Source: Government of Canada. 2020.)228
Location
Threshold criteria
Alberta: Extreme south (including 
Pincher Creek, Cardston, Lethbridge, and 
Medicine Hat)
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 32°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
16°C or warmer.
Alberta: Remainder of Alberta (including 
the Cities of Edmonton, Red Deer and 
Calgary)
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 29°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
14°C or warmer.
British Columbia, Northeast: Northern 
Interior; Central Interior, including 
Chilcotin, Cariboos, Prince George, 
North Thompson, and North Columbia; 
BC Peace region; Bulkley Valley and the 
Lakes, and Fort Nelson
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 29°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
14°C or warmer.
British Columbia, Northwest: Central 
and Northern Coast (inland and coastal 
regions); Northern Vancouver Island; 
Northwestern BC
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 28°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
13°C or warmer.
British Columbia, Southeast: Southern 
interior (including South Thompson and 
Okanagan); Kootenays; Columbias (south)
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 35°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
18°C or warmer.
British Columbia, Southwest: Western 
Metro Vancouver including the North 
Shore; City of Vancouver; Richmond; 
Howe Sound; Whistler; Sunshine Coast; 
Vancouver Island (except northern 
sections)
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 29°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
16°C or warmer.
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
91
Location
Threshold criteria
British Columbia, Southwest inland: 
Eastern Metro Vancouver including 
Coquitlam and Surrey; Fraser Valley
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 33°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
17°C or warmer.
Manitoba, North
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 29°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
16°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 34 or higher.
Manitoba, South
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 32°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
16°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 38 or higher.
New Brunswick
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 30°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
18°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 36 or higher.
Newfoundland and Labrador
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 28°C or warmer and 
nighttime maximum temperatures are expected to fall to 
16°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 36 or higher.
Northwest Territories
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 29°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
14°C or warmer.
Nova Scotia
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 29°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
16°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 36 or higher.
Appendix B
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
92
Location
Threshold criteria
Nunavut
No Heat Warning program at this time.
Ontario, extreme Southwest (Essex and 
Chatham-Kent Counties)
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 31°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
21°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 42 or higher.
Ontario, North
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 29°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
18°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 36 or higher.
Ontario, remainder of Southern Ontario 
(including the District of Parry Sound)
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 31°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
20°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 40 or higher.
Prince Edward Island
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 28°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
18°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 36 or higher.
Quebec, except Nunavik
The humidex value is 40 or higher and the temperature is 
30°C or warmer, and both conditions persist for at least one 
hour.
Or
The temperature is 40°C or warmer.
Saskatchewan, North and Central 
(including Meadow Lake, The Battlefords, 
Prince Albert, and Hudson Bay)
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 29°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
14°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 34 or higher.
Appendix B
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
93
Location
Threshold criteria
Saskatchewan, South
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 32°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
16°C or warmer.
Or
Two or more consecutive days of humidex values are 
expected to reach 38 or higher.
Yukon Territory
Two or more consecutive days of daytime maximum 
temperatures are expected to reach 28°C or warmer and 
nighttime minimum temperatures are expected to fall to 
13°C or warmer.
Appendix B
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
94
References
All references accessed Nov. 8, 2021.
Executive Summary
1   Bush, E. and D.S. Lemmen, editors. 2019. “Canada’s Changing Climate Report.” Government of Canada. 
Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/
2   Jay, O. et al.2021. “Reducing the health effects of hot weather and heat extremes: from personal cooling 
strategies to green cities.” The Lancet, vol. 398, issue 10301, 2021, pp. 709-724. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(21)01209-5
3   FireSmart Canada. 2019. “FireSmart Begins At Home Manual.” Accessed at: https://www.firesmartcanada.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/FS_Generic-HomeOwnersManual_Booklet-November-2018-Web.pdf
Chapter 1: Urgent Need for Action to Combat Extreme Heat in Canada
4   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2021. “Summary for Policymakers.”  In Climate Change 
2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of  Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of  the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. In press. Accessed at: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM 
5   Bush, E. and D.S. Lemmen, editors. 2019. “Canada’s Changing Climate Report.” Government of Canada. 
Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/
6   Public Safety Canada. Year. “Floods.” Accessed at: https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/ntrl-
hzrds/fld-en.aspx
7   Blaze Baum, K. and M. McClearn. “Extreme, deadly heat in Canada is going to come back, and worse. Will 
we be ready?” The Globe and Mail. Sept. 25, 2021. Accessed at: https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-
extreme-deadly-heat-in-canada-is-going-to-come-back-and-worse-will-we/ 
8   BC Coroners’ Service. “Almost 600 lives lost to extreme heat in summer 2021.” Nov. 1, 2021. Accessed at: 
https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/birth-adoption-death-marriage-and-divorce/deaths/coroners-service/news/
bccs-heat-death-update.pdf
9   IPCC. 2021. “Regional fact sheet–Urban Areas.” In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. (Cambridge 
University Press). In press. Accessed at: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/factsheets/IPCC_
AR6_WGI_Regional_Fact_Sheet_Urban_areas.pdf
1.1 Urban Heat Islands: A Key Challenge for Canada’s Cities and Towns
10   Brown, C. et al. 2021. “Cities and Towns.” In Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report, Government 
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
95
of Canada. Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/national-issues/chapter/2-0/ 
11   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2008. “Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies.” 
Accessed at: https://www.epa.gov/heatislands/heat-island-compendium 
12   Ibid
13   Ibid
14   Statistics Canada. 2021. “Canada’s population estimates: Subprovincial areas, July 1, 2020.” Accessed at: 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/210114/dq210114a-eng.htm 
15   IPCC. 2021. “Regional fact sheet - Urban Areas.” In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. 
(Cambridge University Press). In press. Accessed at: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/factsheets/
IPCC_AR6_WGI_Regional_Fact_Sheet_Urban_areas.pdf
16   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2008. “Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies.” 
Accessed at: https://www.epa.gov/heatislands/heat-island-compendium
17   Reducing urban heat islands to protect health in Canada.” Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/en/
services/health/publications/healthy-living/reducing-urban-heat-islands-protect-health-canada.html  
18   Giguère, M. 2009. “Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies.” Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec. Accessed at: https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/1513_
urbanheatislandmitigationstrategies.pdf
1.2 Impacts of Extreme Heat
19   City of Montreal. 2017. “Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Agglomeration of Montreal 2015-
2020–Report, 2017 edition.” Accessed at: https://ville.montreal.qc.ca/pls/portal/docs/PAGE/ENVIRO_FR/
MEDIA/DOCUMENTS/2017_PACCAM_2015-2020_REPORT.PDF 
20   Health Canada. 2011. “Extreme Heat Events Guidelines: Technical Guide for Health Care Workers.” 
Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/
climat/workers-guide-travailleurs/extreme-heat-chaleur-accablante-eng.pdf
21   Ibid
22   Health Canada. 2021. “Extreme heat: heat waves.” Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/
services/sun-safety/extreme-heat-heat-waves.html 
23   Health Canada. 2011. “Extreme Heat Events Guidelines: Technical Guide for Health Care Workers.” 
Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/
climat/workers-guide-travailleurs/extreme-heat-chaleur-accablante-eng.pdf
24   Kennedy, E., H. Olsen, and J. Vanos. 2020. “Thermally Comfortable Playgrounds.”colon? A review of 
literature and survey of experts.” National Program for Playground Safety, University of Northern Iowa. Accessed 
at: https://www.scc.ca/en/system/files/publications/SCC_Playgrounds_Report_v_1.1_EN.pdf 
25   Poitras, A. 2021. “Extreme heat waves in Québec.” Accessed at: https://climatedata.ca/case-study/extreme-
heat-waves-in-quebec/
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
96
26   Vicedo-Cabrera, A.M., et al. 2021. “The burden of heat-related mortality attributable to recent human-
induced climate change.” Nature Climate Change. vol. 11, 2021, pp. 492–500. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41558-021-01058-x
27   Health Canada. 2011. “Extreme Heat Events Guidelines: Technical Guide for Health Care Workers.” 
Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/
climat/workers-guide-travailleurs/extreme-heat-chaleur-accablante-eng.pdf 
28   Health Canada. 2020. “Reducing urban heat islands to protect health in Canada.” Accessed at: https://
www.canada.ca/en/services/health/publications/healthy-living/reducing-urban-heat-islands-protect-health-
canada.html 
29   Guo, Y, et al. “Quantifying excess deaths related to heatwaves under climate change scenarios: A 
multicountry time series modelling study.” PLOS Medicine, vol. 15, no. 7, 2018, pp. 1-17. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002629
30   Cianconi P, S. Betrò S and L. Janiri. “The Impact of Climate Change on Mental Health: A Systematic 
Descriptive Review.” Frontiers in Psychiatry, vol. 11 article 74, 2020, pp. 1-15. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyt.2020.00074
31   Ibid
32   Gouvernement du Québec. 2019. “Enquête épidémiologique - Vague de chaleur à l’été 2018 à Montréal.” 
Accessed at: https://santemontreal.qc.ca/fileadmin/user_upload/Uploads/tx_asssmpublications/pdf/
publications/Enquete_epidemiologique_-_Vague_de_chaleur_a_l_ete_2018_a_Montreal_version15mai_
EUSHV_finale.pdf 
33   Health Canada. 2011. “Extreme Heat Events Guidelines: Technical Guide for Health Care Workers.” 
Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/
climat/workers-guide-travailleurs/extreme-heat-chaleur-accablante-eng.pdf  
34   Ibid
35   Issa, M.A., F. Chebana, P. Masselot et al. “A heat-health watch and warning system with extended season 
and evolving thresholds.” BMC Public Health, vol. 21, no. 1479, 2021, pp.1-13. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12889-021-10982-8
36   Health Canada. 2011. “Extreme Heat Events Guidelines: Technical Guide for Health Care Workers.” 
Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/
climat/workers-guide-travailleurs/extreme-heat-chaleur-accablante-eng.pdf
37   AECOM. 2015. “Toronto Hydro-Electric System Limited Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment.” 
Accessed at: https://pievc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/AECOM-RSI-Toronto-Hydro-June-2015.pdf
38   Riverside Technology inc. 2014. “Climate Risks Study for Telecommunications and Data Center Services.” 
Report prepared for the General Services Administration. Accessed at: https://sftool.gov/Content/attachments/
GSA%20Climate%20Risks%20Study%20for%20Telecommunications%20and%20Data%20Center%20
Services%20-%20FINAL%20October%202014.pdf
39   Ofcom. 2010. “Climate Change Adaptation: Impact on our functions. A response to the Secretary of State’s 
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
97
Direction of 31 March 2010.” Accessed at: https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0031/56947/
climate-change-adaptation.pdf
40   Metrolinx. 2017. “Planning for Resiliency: Toward a Corporate Climate Adaptation Plan.“ Accessed at: 
http://www.metrolinx.com/en/aboutus/sustainability/Planning_for_Resiliency_2017_EN_final.pdf 
41   Palko, K. and D.S. Lemmen, editors. 2017. “Climate risks and adaptation practices for the Canadian 
transportation sector 2016.” Government of Canada. Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.
gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/ClimatRisk-E-ACCESSIBLE.pdf 
42   Ibid
43   Sinisi, L. and R. Aertgeerts, editors. 2011. “Guidance on Water Supply and Sanitation in Extreme 
Weather Events.” World Health Organization. Accessed at: https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0016/160018/WHOGuidanceFVLR.pdf 
44   HOK Canada. 2008. “Climate Change Vulnerability: A Case Study of Public Buildings.” In: Adapting to 
Climate Change – Canada’s First National Engineering Vulnerability Assessment: Appendix B-7, Government of  Canada Buildings, 
Ottawa, Ontario. Accessed at: https://pievc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/government_of_canada_buildings_
pwgsc_ottawa_ontario_final_report-1.pdf
45   Labbé, S. “B.C. heat wave leads to 11-hour ambulance wait time, spike in sudden deaths.” June 29, 2021. BC 
Rural Health Network. Accessed at: https://bcrhn.ca/b-c-heat-wave-leads-to-11-hour-ambulance-wait-time-spike-in-
sudden-deaths/
46   Bustinza, R., G. Lebel, P. Gosselin, et al. “Health impacts of the July 2010 heat wave in Québec, Canada.” 
BMC Public Health, vol. 13, no. 56, 2013. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-56 
47   Health Canada. 2020. “Health Facilities Preparation for Extreme Heat: Recommendations for Retirement 
and Care Facility Managers.” Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environmental-
workplace-health/reports-publications/climate-change-health/health-facilities-preparation-extreme-heat-
recommendations-retirement-care-facility-managers-health-canada-2011.html 
48   Vodden, K. and A. Cunsolo. 2021. “Rural and Remote Communities.” In Canada in a Changing Climate: 
National Issues Report. Government of Canada. Accessed at: https://changingclimate.ca/national-issues/
chapter/3-0/
49   University of Minnesota Extension. 2020. “Heat stress in dairy cattle.” Accessed at: https://extension.umn.
edu/dairy-milking-cows/heat-stress-dairy-cattle
50   Allen, B. and H. Atter. “Desperate Prairie ranchers are selling cattle early amid drought, lack of feed.” CBC 
News. August 5, 2021. Accessed at: https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatchewan/cattle-drought-agriculture-
industry-heat-1.6129876 
51   Zeuli, K. et al. “The Impact of Climate Change on the Food System in Toronto.” International Journal 
of  Environmental Research and Public Health. vol. 15, no. 11, 2018, pp. 2344. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15112344 
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
98
52   Stillman, J. “Heat Waves, the New Normal: Summertime Temperature Extremes Will Impact Animals, 
Ecosystems, and Human Communities.” Physiology. vol. 34, issue 2, 2019, pp. 86-100. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1152/physiol.00040.2018
53   Chan, A. 2021. “More than 1 billion marine animals may have died in B.C. heat wave: UBC professor.” 
Vancouver Sun. July 6, 2021. Accessed at: https://vancouverisland.ctvnews.ca/more-than-1-billion-marine-animals-
may-have-died-in-b-c-heat-wave-ubc-professor-1.5498668
54   Sharma, S., I. Woolway and J. P. Smol. 2021. “Extreme heat waves are putting lakes and rivers in hot water 
this summer.” The Conversation. July 15, 2021. Accessed at: https://theconversation.com/extreme-heat-waves-are-
putting-lakes-and-rivers-in-hot-water-this-summer-164227
55   Ho, J.C., A.M. Michalak, and N. Pahlevan. “Widespread global increase in intense lake phytoplankton 
blooms since the 1980s.” Nature. vol. 574, 2019, pp. 667–670. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1648-7
56   Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2020. “2020 Facts of the Property and Casualty Insurance Industry in 
Canada.” Accessed at: http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2020/IBC-2020-Facts.pdf
57   Dasgupta, P. 2021. “The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review.” London: HM Treasury. ” 
Accessed at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/962785/The_Economics_of_Biodiversity_The_Dasgupta_Review_Full_Report.pdf
58   Clark, D. G., R. Ness, D. Coffman, D. Beugin. 2021. “The Health Costs of Climate Change: How Canada 
Can Adapt, Prepare, and Save Lives.” Canadian Institute for Climate Choices. Accessed at: 
https://climatechoices.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/ClimateChoices_Health-report_Final_June2021.pdf
1.3 Related Impacts
59   Global Heat Health Information Network. 2021. “Manage and Adapt to Heat in the Environment – 
Cascading Risks.” Accessed at: https://ghhin.org/in-the-environment/
60   Climate Atlas of Canada. “Health Impact of Extreme Heat”. Accessed at: https://climateatlas.ca/health-
impacts-extreme-heat
61   Ibid
62   U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Climate 
Change Decreases the Quality of the Air We Breathe.” Accessed at: https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/
pubs/AIR-QUALITY-Final_508.pdf
63   Clark, D. G., R. Ness, D. Coffman, D. Beugin. 2021. “The Health Costs of Climate Change: How Canada 
Can Adapt, Prepare, and Save Lives.” Canadian Institute for Climate Choices. Accessed at: 
https://climatechoices.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/ClimateChoices_Health-report_Final_June2021.pdf
64   Government of Canada. 2021. “Canada’s Wildfire Smoke Prediction System (FireWork) - Daily smoke 
forecast maps.” Accessed at: https://weather.gc.ca/firework/index_e.html
65   NOAA National Severe Storms Laboratory. “Severe Weather 101: Thunderstorm Basics.” Accessed at: 
https://www.nssl.noaa.gov/education/svrwx101/thunderstorms/
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
99
66   Maybank, J. 2015. “Thunderstorm.” The Canadian Encyclopedia. Accessed at: https://www.
thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/thunderstorm
Chapter 3: Resilience to Extreme Heat: 35 Practical Actions
67   Health Canada. 2020. “Reducing urban heat islands to protect health in Canada.” Accessed at: https://
www.canada.ca/en/services/health/publications/healthy-living/reducing-urban-heat-islands-protect-health-
canada.html 
68   Guilbault, S. P. Kovacs, P. Berry and G.R.A. Richardson (eds.) “Cities Adapt to Extreme Heat – Celebrating 
Local Leadership.” Accessed at: https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/PDFS/cities-adapt-to-extreme-heat.
pdf
69  Jay, O. et al. “Reducing the health effects of hot weather and heat extremes: from personal cooling strategies 
to green cities.” The Lancet, vol. 398, issue 10301, 2021, pp. 709-724. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(21)01209-5
70   FireSmart Canada. 2019. “FireSmart Begins At Home Manual.” Accessed at: https://www.firesmartcanada.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/FS_Generic-HomeOwnersManual_Booklet-November-2018-Web.pdf
3.1.1 Non-Structual Actions: Individuals (IND)
IND-1 Work with neighbours, friends and family to prepare
71   Health Canada. 2011. “Extreme Heat Events Guidelines: Technical Guide for Health Care Workers.” 
Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/
climat/workers-guide-travailleurs/extreme-heat-chaleur-accablante-eng.pdf
IND-2: Arrange to receive public heat warnings
72   Government of Canada. “Public Weather Alerts for Canada.” Accessed at: https://weather.gc.ca/warnings/
index_e.html
73   Government of Canada. 2020. “Criteria for public weather alerts: Heat.” Accessed at: https://www.canada.
ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/types-weather-forecasts-use/public/criteria-alerts.html#msc-map
74   Government of Canada. 2020. “WeatherCAN” Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-
climate-change/services/weather-general-tools-resources/weathercan.html
75   Government of Canada, 2021. “MetNotes”. Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-
change/services/weather-general-tools-resources/weathercan/metnotes.html
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
100
76   Adrienne Arsht-Rockefeller Foundation Resilience Center. 2020. “Extreme Heat Resilience Alliance: 
Reducing Extreme Heat Risk for Vulnerable People.” Accessed at: https://www.onebillionresilient.org/post/
extreme-heat-resilience-alliance-reducing-extreme-heat-risk-for-vulnerable-people
IND-3: Learn how to use natural ventilation
77   Laouadi, A. et al. 2021. “Climate resilience buildings: guideline for management of overheating risk in 
residential buildings.” National Research Council of Canada. no. CRBCPI-Y4-10. Accessed at: https://nrc-
publications.canada.ca/eng/view/ft/?id=9c60dc19-ca18-4f4c-871f-2633f002b95c 
78   Giguère, M. 2009. “Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies. ”Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec. Accessed at: https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/1513_
urbanheatislandmitigationstrategies.pdf
79   Janusz, A. 2019. “Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Energy Costs in Canadian Buildings Using 
Thermal Mass.” Masters Thesis, Department of Civil & Mineral Engineering, University of Toronto. Accessed at: 
https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/bitstream/1807/98100/3/Janusz_Alexander_%20_201911_MAS_thesis.pdf
80   Laouadi, A. et al. 2021. “Climate resilience buildings: guideline for management of overheating risk in 
residential buildings.” National Research Council of Canada. no. CRBCPI-Y4-10. Accessed at: https://nrc-
publications.canada.ca/eng/view/ft/?id=9c60dc19-ca18-4f4c-871f-2633f002b95c
IND-4: Minimize “waste” indoor heat production
81   Natural Resources Canada. 2020. “Light bulbs or lamps” Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy-
efficiency/energy-efficiency-products/product-information/lighting/light-bulbs-or-lamps/13918
82   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “Appliances for residential use” Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
energy-efficiency/products/product-information/appliances-for-residential-use/13630
83   Giguère, M. 2009. “Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies. ”Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec. Accessed at: https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/1513_
urbanheatislandmitigationstrategies.pdf
3.1.2. Non-Structural Actions: Property Owners and Managers (PROP)
84   Community Resilience to Extreme Weather (CREW). “Extreme Weather Volunteers: floor & block 
captains.” Accessed at: https://www.crewtoronto.ca/our-projects/floor-and-block-captains/
85   Community Resilience to Extreme Weather (CREW). “Social Networks.” Accessed at: https://
crewresilience.ca/impacts/social-networks/
86   Laouadi, A. et al. 2021. “Climate resilience buildings: guideline for management of overheating risk in 
residential buildings.” National Research Council of Canada. no. CRBCPI-Y4-10. Accessed at: https://nrc-
publications.canada.ca/eng/view/ft/?id=9c60dc19-ca18-4f4c-871f-2633f002b95c
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
101
87   City of Toronto. “Hot Weather Plan for Landlords.” Accessed at: https://www.toronto.ca/community-
people/health-wellness-care/health-programs-advice/hot-weather/hot-weather-plan-for-landlords/
3.1.3. Non-Structural Actions: Communities (COM)
COM-1: Assess and map vulnerability to extreme heat
88   Ville de Montréal. 2017. “Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Montreal Urban Agglomeration 2015-
2020: Report 2017 Edition.” Accessed at: https://ville.montreal.qc.ca/pls/portal/docs/PAGE/ENVIRO_FR/
MEDIA/DOCUMENTS/2017_PACCAM_2015-2020_REPORT.PDF
89   Ville de Montréal. 2017. “Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Montreal Urban Agglomeration 2015-
2020: Report 2017 Edition.” Accessed at: https://ville.montreal.qc.ca/pls/portal/docs/PAGE/ENVIRO_FR/
MEDIA/DOCUMENTS/2017_PACCAM_2015-2020_REPORT.PDF
90   City of Toronto. “Toronto Public Health - Heat Vulnerability.” Accessed at: https://map.toronto.ca/maps/
map.jsp?app=TPH_HVMAP
91   Vancouver Coastal Health. 2021. “Community Health and Climate Change: Mapping Exposure, Sensitivity, 
and Adaptive Capacity to Four Health-Related Climate Hazards.” Accessed at: https://storymaps.arcgis.com/
stories/7bf7141bb6fd41fb9b61a02cfbc61ecd
92   Laval University. “Atlas de la vulnérabilité de la population québécoise aux aléas climatiques : Vulnérabilité 
aux vagues de chaleur.” Accessed at: https://atlas-vulnerabilite.ulaval.ca/vague-de-chaleur/
COM-2: Use education and outreach campaigns to encourage preventive action
93   BC Housing. “Mobilizing Building Adaptation and Resilience (MBAR) – Design Discussion Primer: Heat 
Waves.” Accessed at: https://www.bchousing.org/research-centre/library/residential-design-construction/MBAR
94   Institute of Catastrophic Loss Reduction. 2020. “Protect your home from: Extreme heat.” Accessed at: 
https://issuu.com/iclr/docs/iclr_extreme_heat_2020 
95   Canadian Red Cross. 2021. “Heat Waves: Before, During & After” https://www.redcross.ca/how-we-help/
emergencies-and-disasters-in-canada/types-of-emergencies/heat-waves 
96   Vivre en ville. 2021. “Construire avec le Climat.” Accessed at: https://www.construireavecleclimat.org/ 
97   City of Montreal. 2021. “The green patrol: An awareness squad in action all summer.” Accessed at: https://
montreal.ca/en/articles/green-patrol-awareness-squad-action-all-summer-15220
98   City of Montreal. 2020. “Climate Plan 2020–2030.” Accessed at: https://portail-m4s.s3.montreal.ca/pdf/
climate_plan_2020_2030_vdm.pdf
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
102
COM-3: Set up community support programs for vulnerable populations
99   Gouvernement du Québec. 2019. “Chaleur accablante et extrême 2019 : Plan régional de prévention et de 
protection et Guide à l’intention des établissements de santé. Accessed at: https://ciusss-centresudmtl.gouv.qc.ca/
sites/ciussscsmtl/files/media/document/2019_PlanChaleurAccablanteExtreme.pdf
100   Réseau québécois de Villes et Villages en santé (RQVVS). 2017. “ Voisins Solidaires : Guide de mise en 
œuvre.” Accessed at: https://espacemuni.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/PARTICIPATIN-CITOYENNE-
VOISINS-SOLIDAIRES-Guide-de-mise-en-oeuvre-1.pdf
COM-4: Require heat-sensitive urban planning, infrastructure design, and operation
101   City of Toronto. 2021. “City of Toronto Green Roof Bylaw.” Accessed at: https://www.toronto.ca/city-
government/planning-development/official-plan-guidelines/green-roofs/green-roof-bylaw/
102   Ville de Montreal. 2019. “Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie – Toit.” Accessed at: http://www1.ville.montreal.
qc.ca/banque311/node/2197
103   Ville de Gatineau. 2019. “Règlement numéro 502-298-2019”. Accessed at: https://www.gatineau.ca/
upload/avis_publics/2020122122527_-1088982534_r_-_502-298-2019.pdf
104   Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety. 2021. “Temperature Conditions – Legislation.” 
Accessed at: https://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/phys_agents/temp_legislation.html
105   Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety. 2017. “Temperature Conditions - Hot.” Accessed at: 
https://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/phys_agents/max_temp.html
106   Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety. 2018. “Thermal Comfort for Office Work.” 
Accessed at: https://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/phys_agents/thermal_comfort.html
107   Bureau de normalisation du Québec. 2019. “BNQ 3019-190/2013 – Reducing the Urban Heat Island 
Effect - Parking Lot Development – Design Guide”. Accessed at: https://www.bnq.qc.ca/en/standardization/
environment/reducing-the-urban-heat-island-effect.html
108   Kennedy, E., H. Olsen, and J. Vanos. 2020. “Thermally Comfortable Playgrounds: A review of literature 
and survey of experts”. National Program for Playground Safety, University of Northern Iowa. Accessed at: 
https://www.scc.ca/en/system/files/publications/SCC_Playgrounds_Report_v_1.1_EN.pdf
109   CSA Group. 2018. “Z1010-18: Management of work in extreme conditions.” Accessed at: https://www.
csagroup.org/store/product/2704389/
110   U.S. Green Building Council. 2021. “LEED rating system.” Accessed at: https://www.usgbc.org/leed
111  Institute for Sustainable Infrastructure (ISI). 2021. “Envision®: The Solution for Sustainable 
Infrastructure.” Accessed at: https://sustainableinfrastructure.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Final-
Envision-3-17-21-1.pdf
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
103
COM-5: Provide incentives to increase passive cooling and reduce “waste” heat
112   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “Canada Greener Homes Grant.” Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.
gc.ca/energy-efficiency/homes/canada-greener-homes-grant/23441
113   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “EnerGuide energy efficiency home evaluations.” Accessed at: 
https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/energuide/energuide-energy-efficiency-home-evaluations/20552
114   Natural Resources Canada. “Main Directory of Energy Efficiency and Alternative Energy Programs in 
Canada.” Accessed at: https://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/corporate/statistics/neud/dpa/policy_e/programs.cfm
115   City of Toronto. “Eco-Roof Incentive Program.” Accessed at: https://www.toronto.ca/services-payments/
water-environment/environmental-grants-incentives/green-your-roof/
116   City of Ottawa. “Tree planting.” Accessed at: https://ottawa.ca/en/living-ottawa/environment-
conservation-and-climate/trees-and-urban-forests/tree-planting#green-acres-ottawas-rural-reforestation-program
117   Soverdi. “Passez à l’action.” Accessed at: https://soverdi.org/services/services#services
118   Singh, R., et al. 2019. “Heatwave Guide for Cities.” Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre. Accessed at: 
https://www.climatecentre.org/downloads/files/IFRCGeneva/RCCC%20Heatwave%20Guide%202019%20
A4%20RR%20ONLINE%20copy.pdf 
119   Gouvernement du Québec. 2019. “Chaleur extrême : Systèmes d’alerte et de surveillance.” Accessed at: 
https://www.msss.gouv.qc.ca/professionnels/sante-environnementale/chaleur-extreme/systemes-d-alerte-et-de-
surveillance/
120   Health Canada. 2012. “Heat Alert and Response Systems to Protect Health: Best Practices Guidebook.” 
Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/
climat/response-intervention/response-intervention-eng.pdf
121   Ville de Montreal. “Opening hours for air-conditioned public places and refreshment points in the 
Montréal agglomeration.” Interactive Map. Accessed at: https://www.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.htm
l?id=68d1f4fc71f74ce6bac59d68f2402a67&extent=-8228820.3365%2C5685618.2283%2C-8176155.224%2C57
15428.6693%2C102100
3.2.1. Green Infrastructure : Using Nature
GI-1: Plant and maintain trees
122   Greenroofs.com. “Bosco Verticale (Vertical Forest), Milan.” Accessed at: https://www.greenroofs.com/
projects/bosco-verticale-vertical-forest-milan/
123   Hanes, T. 2020. “Branching Out: Is There Room To Grow For Toronto’s Vertical Forests?” Ontario Home 
Builders’ Association (OHBA). Accessed at: https://www.ohba.ca/branching-out/
124   Smithers, R. J. et al. “Comparing the relative abilities of tree species to cool the urban environment.” 
Urban Ecosystems. vol. 21, 2018, pp. 851–862. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11252-018-0761-y
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
104
125   Gillner, S. et al. “Role of street trees in mitigating effects of heat and drought at highly sealed urban 
sites.” Landscape and Urban Planning, vol 143, 2015, pp. 33-42. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2015.06.005
126   Nature Québec. 2019. “Passeport aux idées fraiches, pour un milieu de vie en santé!” Accessed at: 
https://naturequebec.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Passeport_2019.pdf
127   Paquette, A. et al. “Praise for diversity: A functional approach to reduce risks in urban forests.” 
Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, vol. 62, 127157, 2021. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2021.127157
128   City of Brampton. 2021. “One Million Trees Program”. Accessed at: https://www.brampton.ca/EN/
residents/Trees/Pages/One-Million-Trees.aspx 
129   Ville de Montréal. 2020. “Climate Plan 2020–2030.” Accessed at: https://portail-m4s.s3.montreal.ca/pdf/
climate_plan_2020_2030_vdm.pdf
130   Greenbelt Foundation. 2020. “Cooling Corridors: The Role of Green Infrastructure in Building Resilience 
to Extreme Heat.” Accessed at: https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/greenbelt/pages/12295/attachments/
original/1589917754/Final_Working_paper_URV_GI_Heat_Modeling_Report.pdf?1589917754 
131   Turner-Skoff, JB and N. Cavender. “The benefits of trees for livable and sustainable communities.” Plants, 
People, Planet. vol. 1, 2019, pp. 323– 335. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ppp3.39 
132   Greenbelt Foundation. 2020. “EcoHealth Economic Valuation Framework Quantifying the Health Return 
on Investments in Greenspace. Case Study: Increasing Tree Canopy, Brampton, Ontario.” Accessed at: https://
static1.squarespace.com/static/5c3cebfd45776eee4408f72d/t/603b1d6a73d375051e0b4d6f/1614486893019/
GB_Ecohealth_BRAMPTON_casestudy_E-ver.pdf
133   Turner-Skoff, JB and N. Cavender. “The benefits of trees for livable and sustainable communities.” Plants, 
People, Planet. vol. 1, 2019, pp. 323– 335. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ppp3.39
134   Nature Québec. 2019. “Passeport aux idées fraiches, pour un milieu de vie en santé!” Accessed at: 
https://naturequebec.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Passeport_2019.pdf
135   TD Economics. 2014. “Urban Forests: The value of trees in the city of Toronto.” Accessed at: 
https://www.td.com/document/PDF/economics/special/UrbanForests.pdf
136   GreenBlue Urban. 2017. “How Trees Increase Property Values.” Accessed at: https://greenblue.com/ce/
how-trees-increase-property-values/ 
137   Nowak, D. et al. “Air pollution removal by urban forests in Canada and its effect on air quality and human 
health.” Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, vol. 29, pp 40-48. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2017.10.019 
138   Turner-Skoff, JB and N. Cavender. “The benefits of trees for livable and sustainable communities.” Plants, 
People, Planet. vol. 1, 2019, pp. 323– 335. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ppp3.39 
139   Government of Canada. 2021. “2 Billion Trees Commitment.” Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/en/
campaign/2-billion-trees.html
140   Sousa-Silva, R. et al. “Strong variations in urban allergenicity riskscapes due to poor knowledge of tree 
pollen allergenic potential.” Scientific Reports, vol. 11, no.1, 2021, 10196. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
021-89353-7
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
105
141   Janhäll, S. “Review on urban vegetation and particle air pollution–Deposition and dispersion.” Atmospheric 
environment, vol. 105, 2015, pp.130-137. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2015.01.052
142   FireSmart Canada. 2019. “FireSmart Begins At Home Manual.” Accessed at: https://www.
firesmartcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/FS_Generic-HomeOwnersManual_Booklet-November-2018-
Web.pdf 
GI-2: Expand vegetated areas and absorb more water
143   Giguère, M. 2009. “Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies. ”Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec. Accessed at: https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/1513_
urbanheatislandmitigationstrategies.pdf
144   Nature Québec. 2019. “Passeport aux idées fraiches, pour un milieu de vie en santé!” Accessed at: 
https://naturequebec.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Passeport_2019.pdf
145   Green Communities Canada. 2021. “Let’s Get Dirty! Rip up unused pavement and plant gardens!” 
Accessed at: https://depaveparadise.ca/
146   Tree Canada. “Greening Canada School Grounds.” Accessed at: https://treecanada.ca/greening-
communities/community-tree-grants/greening-canada-school-grounds/ 
147   David Suzuki Foundation. 2021. “The Butterfly Way Project”. Accessed at: https://davidsuzuki.org/take-
action/act-locally/butterflyway/ 
148   Regroupement des éco-quartiers. 2019. “Ruelles vertes de Montréal.” Accessed at: https://www.
ruellesvertesdemontreal.ca/
149   Simard, V. 2020. “Un palmarès des plus belles ruelles vertes.” La Presse. Accessed at: https://www.lapresse.
ca/maison/cour-et-jardin/2020-09-08/un-palmares-des-plus-belles-ruelles-vertes.php
150   Ontario Nature. 2014. “Best Practices Guide to Natural Heritage Systems Planning.” Accessed at: 
https://ontarionature.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/nhs-guide-web-1.pdf
151   Credit Valley Conservation. 2021. “Credit River Natural Heritage System.” Accessed at: https://cvc.ca/
conservation-planning/credit-river-natural-heritage-system/
152   City of Vancouver. 2019. “Rain City Strategy: A green rainwater infrastructure and rainwater 
management initiative.” Accessed at: https://vancouver.ca/files/cov/rain-city-strategy.pdf
153   Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation. 2021. “Consultation Response to Exposure Drafts ‘The Conceptual 
Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public Sector’ and ‘Financial Statement Presentation, Proposed Section 
PS 1202’ – Supporting Information.” Accessed at: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2021/07/2021-06-30-PSAB-Response-ICCA-KMPG-MNAI-Natural-Assets-Supporting-Information.
pdf
154   National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health. 2015. “Green Space and Mental Health: 
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
106
Pathways, Impacts and Gaps.” Accessed at: https://ncceh.ca/documents/evidence-review/green-space-and-
mental-health-pathways-impacts-and-gaps
155   Gunawardena, K.R., M.J. Wells and T. Kershaw. “Utilising green and bluespace to mitigate urban heat 
island intensity.” Science of The Total Environment. vol. 584–585, 2017, pp. 1040-1055. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.01.158
3.2.2. Green Infrastructure : Green Buildings
GI-3: Install green roofs
156   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. “Using Green Roofs to Reduce Heat Islands.” Accessed at: 
https://www.epa.gov/heat-islands/using-green-roofs-reduce-heat-islands
157   Green Roofs for Healthy Cities. “About Green Roofs.” Accessed at: https://greenroofs.org/about-green-
roofs
158   Ibid
159   Gaffin, S.R. et al. “A Temperature and Seasonal Energy Analysis of Green, White, and Black Roofs.” 
Columbia University, Center for Climate Systems Research. Accessed at: https://sftool.gov/Content/
attachments/Columbia_A_Temperature_%20and_Seasonal_Energy_Analysis.pdf 
160   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. “Using Green Roofs to Reduce Heat Islands.” Accessed at: 
https://www.epa.gov/heat-islands/using-green-roofs-reduce-heat-islands
161   Garrison, N. and C. Horowitz. 2012. “Looking up: How green roofs and cool roofs can reduce energy use, 
address climate change, and protect water resources in southern California.” NRDC Report R:12-06-B. Accessed 
at: https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/GreenRoofsReport.pdf 
162   Kats, G., and K. Glassbrook. 2018. “Delivering Urban Resilience.” U.S. Green Buildings Council. Accessed 
at: https://www.usgbc.org/sites/default/files/delivering-urban-resilience-2018.pdf
163   Ibid
164   Ibid
165   Green Roofs for Healthy Cities. “About Green Roofs.” Accessed at: https://greenroofs.org/about-green-
roofs
166   City of Toronto. “Eco-Roof Incentive Program.” Accessed at: https://www.toronto.ca/services-payments/
water-environment/environmental-grants-incentives/green-your-roof/
167   Ville de Montréal. 2021. “RénoPlex: Grant amounts per type of work.” Accessed at: https://montreal.ca/
en/articles/renoplex-grant-amounts-type-work-11573
168   National Research Council of Canada. “Codes Canada - frequently asked questions: Other questions.” 
Accessed at: https://nrc.canada.ca/en/certifications-evaluations-standards/codes-canada/codes-canada-
frequently-asked-questions 
169   van Dyck, K., G. Cardon, and G. Bunsen. 2010. “Toronto’s Green Roof Bylaw A Water Governance 
Assessment.” Accessed at: https://www.uu.nl/sites/default/files/rebo-ucwosl_assessment_green_roofs_toronto.pdf
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
107
GI-4: Grow green façades or green walls on buildings
170   Bernier, A. 2011. “Les plantes grimpantes : une solution rafraîchissante.” Centre d’écologie urbaine de 
Montréal. Accessed at: https://numerique.banq.qc.ca/patrimoine/details/52327/2219252
171   Giguère, M. 2009. “Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies. ”Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec. Accessed at: https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/1513_
urbanheatislandmitigationstrategies.pdf 
172   Green Roofs for Healthy Cities. “About Green Walls.” Accessed at: https://greenroofs.org/about-green-
walls
173   Ibid
174   Giguère, M. 2009. “Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies. ”Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec. Accessed at: https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/1513_
urbanheatislandmitigationstrategies.pdf
175   Capital Region District. “Living Walls.” Accessed at: https://www.crd.bc.ca/education/stormwater-
wastewater-septic/green-stormwater-infrastructure/living-walls
176   Kumph, J., K. Royce, and I. Feng. 2018. “Green Buildings: Living Walls.” Greenest City Action Plan 2.0. 
Accessed at: https://www.citystudiovancouver.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/GCAP-2.0-Final-Report-
Green-Buildings-Goal-3.pdf
177   Bénichou, N. et al. 2021. “National guide for wildland-urban-interface fires: guidance on hazard and 
exposure assessment, property protection, community resilience and emergency planning to minimize the impact 
of wildland-urban interface fires.” Accessed at: https://doi.org/10.4224/40002647
3.3 Grey (Built) Infrastructure (BI)
BI-1: Enhance insulation and airtightness
178   Giguère, M. 2009. “Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies. ”Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec. Accessed at: https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/1513_
urbanheatislandmitigationstrategies.pdf
179   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “Keeping The Heat In - Section 4: Comprehensive air leakage control 
in your home.” Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/homes/make-your-home-more-energy-
efficient/keeping-the-heat/section-4-comprehensive-air-leakage-control-your-home/15635
180   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “EnerGuide energy efficiency home evaluations.” Accessed at: 
https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/energuide/energuide-energy-efficiency-home-evaluations/20552
181   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “Eligible grants for my home retrofit.” Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.
gc.ca/energy-efficiency/homes/canada-greener-homes-grant/make-your-home-more-energy-efficient/plan-
document-and-complete-your-home-retrofits/eligible-grants-for-my-home-retrofit/23504
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
108
182   Laouadi, A. et al. 2021. “Climate resilience buildings: guideline for management of overheating risk in 
residential buildings.” National Research Council of Canada. no. CRBCPI-Y4-10. Accessed at: https://nrc-
publications.canada.ca/eng/view/ft/?id=9c60dc19-ca18-4f4c-871f-2633f002b95c
183   Fernández-Agüera, J. et al. “Thermal comfort and indoor air quality in low-income housing in Spain: The 
influence of airtightness and occupant behaviour.” Energy and Buildings, vol. 199, no. 15, 2019, pp. 102-114. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2019.06.052
BI-2: Install cool roofs, walls and paving surfaces 
184   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2012. “Cool Pavements.” Chapter 5 in: “Reducing Urban 
Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies.” Draft. Accessed at: https://www.epa.gov/heatislands/heat-island-
compendium
185   Urban, B. and K. Roth. 2010. “Guidelines for Selecting Cool Roofs.” U.S. Department of Energy. 
https://heatisland.lbl.gov/sites/default/files/coolroofguide_0.pdf
186   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2008. “Cool Roofs.” Chapter 4 in: “Reducing Urban Heat Islands: 
Compendium of Strategies.” Draft. Accessed at: https://www.epa.gov/heatislands/heat-island-compendium
BI-3: Use concrete, brick, stone and tile finishes to absorb heat
187   Kesik, T., L. O’Brien, and T. Peters. 2019. “MURB Design Guide: Enhancing the Liveability and 
Resilience of Multi-Unit Residential Buildings (MURBs)” Accessed at: https://pbs.daniels.utoronto.ca/faculty/
kesik_t/PBS/Kesik-Resources/MURB-Design-Guide-v2-Feb2019.pdf
188   Ibid
BI-4: Install windows that reduce heat gain from the sun
189   Kesik, T., L. O’Brien, and T. Peters. 2019. “MURB Design Guide: Enhancing the Liveability and 
Resilience of Multi-Unit Residential Buildings (MURBs)” Accessed at: https://pbs.daniels.utoronto.ca/faculty/
kesik_t/PBS/Kesik-Resources/MURB-Design-Guide-v2-Feb2019.pdf
190   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “Eligible grants for my home retrofit.” Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.
gc.ca/energy-efficiency/homes/canada-greener-homes-grant/make-your-home-more-energy-efficient/plan-
document-and-complete-your-home-retrofits/eligible-grants-for-my-home-retrofit/23504
191   Laouadi, A. et al. 2021. “Climate resilience buildings: guideline for management of overheating risk in 
residential buildings.” National Research Council of Canada. no. CRBCPI-Y4-10. Accessed at: https://nrc-
publications.canada.ca/eng/view/ft/?id=9c60dc19-ca18-4f4c-871f-2633f002b95c
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
109
BI-5: Install shading devices
192   Kesik, T., L. O’Brien, and T. Peters. 2019. “MURB Design Guide: Enhancing the Liveability and 
Resilience of Multi-Unit Residential Buildings (MURBs)” Accessed at: https://pbs.daniels.utoronto.ca/faculty/
kesik_t/PBS/Kesik-Resources/MURB-Design-Guide-v2-Feb2019.pdf
193   Laouadi, A. et al. 2021. “Climate resilience buildings: guideline for management of overheating risk in 
residential buildings.” National Research Council of Canada. no. CRBCPI-Y4-10. Accessed at: 
https://nrc-publications.canada.ca/eng/view/ft/?id=9c60dc19-ca18-4f4c-871f-2633f002b95c
BI-7: Use ceiling or portable fans
194   Giguère, M. 2009. “Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies. ”Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec. Accessed at: https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/1513_
urbanheatislandmitigationstrategies.pdf
195   Energy Star. “Ceiling Fan Installation and Usage Tips.” Accessed at: https://www.energystar.gov/
products/lighting_fans/ceiling_fans/installation_usage_tips
196   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “Ceiling fans.” Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/
energy-efficiency-products/product-information/cooling-ventilating-equipment-re/ceiling-fans/16203
197   Energy Star. “Ceiling Fan Installation and Usage Tips.” Accessed at: https://www.energystar.gov/
products/lighting_fans/ceiling_fans/installation_usage_tips
198   National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health. “Fans.” Accessed at: https://ncceh.ca/content/
fans
199   National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health. “Room Cooling.” Accessed at: 
https://ncceh.ca/content/room-cooling
200   Jay, O. et al. “Reducing the health effects of hot weather and heat extremes: from personal cooling 
strategies to green cities.” The Lancet, vol. 398, issue 10301, 2021, pp. 709-724. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01209-5
BI-8: Install and maintain air conditioning or heat pumps
201   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “Heating and Cooling With a Heat Pump.” Accessed at: https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star-canada/about/energy-star-announcements/publications/heating-and-
cooling-heat-pump/6817
202   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “Air Conditioning Your Home.” Accessed at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
energy-efficiency/energy-star-canada/about/energy-star-announcements/publications/air-conditioning-your-
home/6051
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
110
203   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “Heating and Cooling With a Heat Pump.” Accessed at: https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/energy-star-canada/about/energy-star-announcements/publications/heating-and-
cooling-heat-pump/6817
BI-9: Install and maintain backup power generation
204   BC Housing. “Mobilizing Building Adaptation and Resilience (MBAR) – Design Discussion Primer: Power 
Outages and Emergencies.” Accessed at: https://www.bchousing.org/research-centre/library/residential-design-
construction/MBAR
205   National Research Council of Canada. 2015. “National Building Code of Canada: 2015.” Canadian 
Commission on Building and Fire Codes. Accessed at: https://doi.org/10.4224/40002005 
206   CSA Group. 2015. “CSA Z32-09 - Electrical Safety and Essential Electrical Systems in Health Care 
Facilities” Accessed at: https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/Z32-15/ 
207   CSA Group. 2015. C282-15 Emergency electrical power supply for buildings.” Accessed at: 
https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/C282-15/ 
208   City of Toronto. 2016. Minimum Backup Power Guidelines for MURBs: Voluntary Performance Standards 
for Existing and New Buildings.” Accessed at: https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/91ca-
Minimum-Backup-Power-Guideline-for-MURBs-October-2016.pdf
209   WATERFRONToronto. 2021. “Green Building Requirements, Version 3.0” Accessed at: https://www.
waterfrontoronto.ca/nbe/wcm/connect/waterfront/db7b12c6-3155-4f55-a545-9ae0f24869f2/Waterfront+Toron
to+Green+Building+Requirements+%28GBR%29+Version+3.0+-+January+2021.pdf?MOD=AJPERES
BI-10: Maintain a water supply during power outages
210   City of Toronto. 2016. Minimum Backup Power Guidelines for MURBs: Voluntary Performance Standards 
for Existing and New Buildings.” Accessed at: https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/91ca-
Minimum-Backup-Power-Guideline-for-MURBs-October-2016.pdf
211   BC Housing. “Mobilizing Building Adaptation and Resilience (MBAR) – Design Discussion Primer: Power 
Outages and Emergencies.” Accessed at: https://www.bchousing.org/research-centre/library/residential-design-
construction/MBAR
BI-11: Adapt community infrastructure to extreme heat
212   Gouvernement du Québec. 2019. “Chaleur accablante et extrême 2019 : Plan régional de prévention et de 
protection et Guide à l’intention des établissements de santé. Accessed at: https://ciusss-centresudmtl.gouv.qc.ca/
sites/ciussscsmtl/files/media/document/2019_PlanChaleurAccablanteExtreme.pdf
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
111
BI-12 Reduce vehicular traffic needs
213   Giguère, M. 2009. “Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies. ”Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec. Accessed at: https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/1513_
urbanheatislandmitigationstrategies.pdf
BI-13: Install cool or permeable pavements
214   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2012. “Cool Pavements.” Chapter 5 in: “Reducing Urban 
Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies.” Draft. Accessed at: https://www.epa.gov/heatislands/heat-island-
compendium
215   Kats, G., and K. Glassbrook. 2018. “Delivering Urban Resilience.” U.S. Green Buildings Council. Accessed 
at: https://www.usgbc.org/sites/default/files/delivering-urban-resilience-2018.pdf 
216   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2012. “Cool Pavements.” Chapter 5 in: “Reducing Urban 
Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies.” Draft. Accessed at: https://www.epa.gov/heatislands/heat-island-
compendium
217   Sustainable Technologies Evaluation Program. 2021. “Permeable pavements”. Accessed at: 
https://wiki.sustainabletechnologies.ca/index.php?title=Permeable_pavements&oldid=11940
218   Middel, A. et al. 2020. “Solar reflective pavements—A policy panacea to heat mitigation?” Environmental 
Research Letters. vol. 15, 064016. Accessed at: https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab87d4
219   Erell, E. et al. “Effect of high-albedo materials on pedestrian heat stress in urban street canyons” Urban 
Climate. vol. 10, 2013, pp. 367–386. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.uclim.2013.10.005
220   Ibid
BI-14: Expand artificial shade
221   City of Toronto. 2007. “Policy for the Provision of Shade at Parks, Forestry and Recreation Sites.” Accessed 
at: https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2008/pe/bgrd/backgroundfile-10540.pdf
222   Middel, A. et al. 2016. “Impact of shade on outdoor thermal comfort—a seasonal field study in Tempe, 
Arizona.” International Journal of  Biometeorology. vol. 60, 2016, pp. 1849-1861. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00484-016-1172-5
BI-15: Build water-based cooling systems and drinking fountains
223   Santamouris, M. et al. “Passive and active cooling for the outdoor built environment – Analysis and 
assessment of the cooling potential of mitigation technologies using performance data from 220 large scale 
projects.” Solar Energy. vol. 154, 2017, pp. 14-33. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.12.006
Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities from a Lethal Future
112
224   National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health. 2021. “Legionella.” Accessed at: https://ncceh.
ca/environmental-health-in-canada/health-agency-projects/legionella
Chapter 5: Conclusion And Next Steps
225   Government of Canada. 2019. “Natural hazards.” Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/en/services/
policing/emergencies/hazards.html
226   Natural Resources Canada. 2021. “EnerGuide energy efficiency home evaluations.” Accessed at: 
https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy-efficiency/energuide/energuide-energy-efficiency-home-evaluations/20552
Appendices
227   Statistics Canada. 2021. “Canada’s population estimates: Subprovincial areas, July 1, 2020.” Accessed at: 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/210114/dq210114a-eng.htm
228   Government of Canada. 2020. “Criteria for public weather alerts: Heat.” Accessed at: https://www.
canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/types-weather-forecasts-use/public/criteria-alerts.
html#msc-map
To find out more:
Joanna Eyquem PGeo. ENV SP. CWEM. CEnv.
Managing Director, Climate-Resilient Infrastructure
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
514-268-0873 | joanna.eyquem@uwaterloo.ca
www.intactcentre.ca | Twitter @ICCA_Canada
