Joanna Eyquem
Bailey Church
Roy Brooke
Michelle Molnar
October 2022
Supported by:
GETTING NATURE ON THE 
BALANCE SHEET: RECOGNIZING 
THE FINANCIAL VALUE 
PROVIDED BY NATURAL ASSETS 
IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
2
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
About the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation 
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is an applied research centre at the University of 
Waterloo. The Intact Centre was founded in 2015 with a gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s largest 
property and casualty insurer. The Intact Centre helps homeowners, communities and businesses to reduce risks 
associated with climate change and extreme weather events. 
For additional information, visit: www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca 
About the University of Waterloo 
The University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation university. With more than 42,000 full and part-time 
students (Fall 2020), the university is home to the world’s largest co-operative education system of its kind. The 
university’s unmatched entrepreneurial culture, combined with an intensive focus on research, powers one of the 
top innovation hubs in the world. 
For additional information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca
About KPMG 
KPMG is a global organization of professional services firms providing audit, tax and advisory services in 144 
countries and territories. KPMG LLP is an Ontario-headquartered limited liability partnership and a member 
firm affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. The firm has 
roots in Canada that date back to 1869 and operates from more than 40 locations across the country.
For additional information, visit: www.home.kpmg/ca/en 
About MNAI 
The Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI) is a Canadian not-for-profit that is changing the way 
municipalities deliver everyday services - increasing the quality and resilience of infrastructure at lower costs 
and reduced risk. The MNAI team provides scientific, economic and municipal expertise to support and guide 
local governments in identifying, valuing and accounting for natural assets in their financial planning and asset 
management programs, and developing leading-edge, sustainable and climate-resilient infrastructure.
For additional information, visit: www.mnai.ca
About the Intact Financial Corporation 
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX: IFC) is the largest provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in 
Canada, a leading provider of global specialty insurance, and, with RSA, a leader in the U.K. and Ireland. Our 
business has grown organically and through acquisitions to over $20 billion of total annual premiums. In Canada, 
Intact distributes insurance under the Intact Insurance brand through a wide network of brokers, including its 
wholly-owned subsidiary BrokerLink, and directly to consumers through belairdirect. Intact also provides affinity 
insurance solutions through the Johnson Affinity Groups. In the U.S., Intact Insurance Specialty Solutions provides 
3
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
a range of specialty insurance products and services through independent agencies, regional and national brokers, 
and wholesalers and managing general agencies. Outside of North America, the Company provides personal, 
commercial and specialty insurance solutions across the U.K., Ireland, and Europe through the RSA brands.
For additional information, visit: https://intactfc.com/  
Citation 
Eyquem, J. L, Church, B. Brooke, R and Molnar, M. 2022. Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing 
the Financial Value of Natural Assets in a Changing Climate. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University 
of Waterloo.
For information about this report, contact Joanna Eyquem: joanna.eyquem@uwaterloo.ca 
Disclaimer 
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible. The Intact Centre 
cannot make any guarantees of any kind, as to the completeness, accuracy, suitability or reliability of the data provided in the report. This 
report has been prepared for general guidance on matters of interest only and does not constitute professional advice. You should not act 
upon the information contained in this publication without obtaining specific professional advice. No representation or warranty (express 
or implied) is given as to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this publication, and Intact Centre employees and 
affiliates do not accept or assume any liability, responsibility, or duty of care for any consequences to you or anyone else acting, or refraining 
to act, in reliance on the information contained in this report or for any decision based upon it. 
4
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements
5
Executive Summary
8
1. Introduction to Natural Assets
11
1.1	 Natural Assets in Canada
14
1.2	 A Valuable Ally in Tackling Climate Change 
15
1.3	 Natural Assets and Financial Disclosures 
16
2. Inventory and Valuation of Municipal Natural Assets in Canada
17
2.1	 Overview of Progress to Date
17
2.2	 Illustrative Case Studies
20
3. Methods of Valuing Natural Assets
22
4. Evolution of International Approaches
25
5. Progress and Next Steps
28
Appendix A
30
Endnotes
37
5
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the stakeholders listed below, and Natalia Moudrak for supporting the ability to recognise 
non-purchased natural assets in public sector financial statements. A letter, jointly signed by those listed below, 
was formally submitted to the Public Sector Accounting Board in June 2021 in response to the consultation on 
drafts “The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public Sector” and “Financial Statement 
Presentation, Proposed Section PS 1202” (see Appendix A). The content of this report draws on, and updates, 
supporting information originally prepared and jointly submitted under separate cover by the Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation, KPMG and the Municipal Natural Assets Initiative as part of the same consultation.
Julia Aspinall, CPA, CMA, Director, Financial Services, City of Vancouver
Jeff Atherton, P.Eng., Senior Asset Management Consultant, AECOM Canada Ltd
Hassaan Bassit, President and CEO, Conservation Halton
Sonia Baxendale, President and CEO, Global Risk Institute
Al Beaver, Executive Director, Wildland Fire Risk Management Ltd
Susan Black, Ph.D., President and CEO, The Conference Board of Canada
Jerry Blackwood, CPA, CGA, Executive Director, CFO Finance and Asset Management, Halifax Regional 
Municipality
DG Blair, Executive Director, Stewardship Centre for BC
Alain Bourque, Executive Director, Ouranos - Consortium sur les changements climatiques
Sandra Califaretti, CPA, CA, Director, Accounting Services, City of Toronto
Christopher Chen, CPA, Executive Director, Asset Management Ontario
Will Cole-Hamilton, Steering Committee, Climate Caucus (300+ elected officials)
Michael Coroneos, CPA, CMA, Deputy City Manager, CFO and Treasurer, City of Vaughan
Jennifer Court, (former) Executive Director, Green Infrastructure Ontario
Laura Cui, CPA, CGA, National Director of Finance, Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society (CPAWS)
Raoul Cyr, CPA, CA, Director, Accounting and Financial Information, City of Montreal 
Jérôme Dupras, Ph.D., Associate Professor, Canada Research Chair in Ecological Economics, University of 
Quebec in Outaouais 
Lara Ellis, Senior Vice-President, Policy and Partnerships, ALUS
Blair Feltmate, Ph.D., Head, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo
Richard Florizone, Ph.D., President & CEO, International Institute for Sustainable Development
Myriah Foort, BBA, CPA, CA, CFO, Comox Valley Regional District
Daisy Foster, Managing Director, Atlantic Infrastructure Management (AIM) Network
Jonathan Fowlie, Chief External Relations Officer, Vancouver City Savings Credit Union
Kim Gavine, General Manager, Conservation Ontario
Julie Gelfand, (former) Federal Commissioner of Environment and Sustainable Development, Office of the 
Auditor General of Canada
Isabel Gordon, CPA, MBA, Director, Financial Services, District of West Vancouver
Deborah Harford, (former)Executive Director, Adaptation to Climate Change Team, Simon Fraser University
6
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Lisa Helps, Mayor, City of Victoria
Jenn Hepting, CFO and Director of Finance, City of Colwood
Michel Houle, CPA, CMA, (former) VP, Corporate Services and CFO, National Capital Commission
Dan Huang, RPP, MCIP, President, Canadian Institute of Planners
Jeffrey J. Jackson, CPA, CA, MBA, Director of Finance and Treasurer, City of Mississauga
Gabriella Kalapos, Executive Director, Clean Air Partnership
Sean Kidney, CEO, Climate Bonds Initiative
Saul Klein, Ph.D, Dean, Gustavson School of Business, University of Victoria
Catherine Lavoie, President and CEO, Centre d’expertise et de recherche en infrastructures urbaines (CERIU)
Michael Leering P.Eng., Director, Environment and Business Excellence Standards, CSA Group
Moya J. Leighton CPA, CGA, MBA, Town Treasurer & Director of Finance, Town of Halton Hills
Meghan Leslie, President and CEO, WWF-Canada
Emanuel Machado, Chief Resiliency Officer, Town of Gibsons
Deborah Martin-Downs, (former) CAO, Credit Valley Conservation
Gerard McDonald, MBA, P.Eng., ICD.D, CEO, Engineers Canada
Edward McDonnell, CEO, Greenbelt Foundation
Mark Medeiros, Director of Finance / City Treasurer (acting), City of Brampton
Susan Nesbitt, Ph.D. P.Eng., Professor, Co-Director, Urban Systems Master of Engineering Leadership, The 
University of British Columbia
Bernadette O’Connor, Manager, Municipal Asset Management, Canada, WSP Canada Inc.
Sarah Pacey, Chief Administrative Officer, Town of Florenceville-Bristol
Jennifer Petruniak, PMP., Technical Lead, Environmental Services, Dillon Consulting
Jennifer Place, Board Chair, Government Finance Officer of Alberta (GFOA) 
Jay Ritchlin, Director-General, Western Canada/National Nature portfolio lead, David Suzuki Foundation
Florian Roulle, Senior Director, Head of Sustainable Finance, Finance Montreal
Carole Saab, CEO, Federation of Canadian Municipalities
Rachel Samson, (former) Clean Growth Research Director, Canadian Institute for Climate Choices
Ron Scheckenberger, P.Eng., Principal, Wood Canada Ltd
Robert Siddall, FCPA, FCA, Independent
Colleen Sklar, Executive Director, Winnipeg Metropolitan Region
Robert Smith, Principal, Midsummer Analytics
Craig Stewart, Vice President, Federal Affairs Insurance Bureau of Canada 
Marcy Sullivan, CPA, CA, CFO, Ducks Unlimited Canada
Kevin Travers, Partner, Infrastructure Government and Healthcare Practice, KPMG Canada
Martin Vaillancourt, Executive Director, Regroupement national des conseils régionaux de l’environnement du Québec 
Antoine Verville, (former) Executive Director, Regroupement des organismes de bassins versants du Québec 
Andrea Waldie, P.Geo., FGC, CEO, Geoscientists Canada
Andy Wardell, CPA, CGA, General Manager, Finance and CFO, District of North Vancouver
Wally Wells, P.Eng., Executive Director, Asset Management BC
Kevin Wilkinson, CPA, CA, MBA, Controller, Windsor-Detroit Bridge Authority
Mike Wilson, Executive Director, Smart Prosperity Institute
Robert Wilson, Director of Conservation Finance, Nature Conservancy of Canada
7
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
“Wetlands, forests, saltmarshes 
and grasslands aren’t only vital to 
biodiversity. They are our front-
line allies in reducing the impacts of 
flooding and erosion, extreme heat 
and drought, as well as removing 
carbon emissions to slow down climate 
change. The value of these services 
makes nature a sound economic driver 
- we need an accounting system that 
recognises this reality.”
Mike Pedersen, Chair, Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC), 
Corporate Director, and Chair, Nature Conservancy of Canada.
8
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Executive Summary
Nature is valuable and underpins our economy. While 
governments and businesses may agree in principle with 
this statement, the services that nature provides are not 
routinely accounted for in investment decisions, asset 
management or accounting. As a result, decisions may 
not be economically-sound in the long-term. Decisions 
may also lead to continued degradation of the services 
that nature provides, rather than the accelerated 
investment in natural-climate solutions that is needed.
9
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Nature has a particular role to play in tackling climate 
change, where it serves “double-duty” - by building 
community resilience (for example, by acting like a 
sponge during major rainfall events) and by reducing 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere (through storing 
and sequestering carbon). Preservation of nature is 
an important first step. Tackling climate change and 
reversing biodiversity loss will also require investment 
in nature-positive actions that restore and enhance 
natural assets.
The good news is that, in Canada, many local 
governments are already identifying and pro-
actively managing their natural assets. Several local 
Nature-based solutions
Actions to protect, sustainably manage and restore natural or modified ecosystems that address societal 
challenges effectively and adaptively, simultaneously providing human well-being and biodiversity benefits.1
Natural-climate solutions
A subset of nature-based solutions, natural-climate solutions include conservation, restoration, and 
improved land and sea management that increase carbon storage and/or avoid greenhouse gas emissions, 
enhance resilience and assist climate adaptation across global forests, wetlands, mangroves, grasslands, and 
agricultural lands and other habitats.2,3
governments have also assessed the economic value of 
services from these assets and are ready to make related 
disclosures in their financial statements. 
In parallel, the rise of sustainable finance and use of 
Environmental, Social, Governance (ESG) performance 
ratings in the financial sector has also placed increased 
emphasis on private investment in natural assets (also 
termed natural capital). Further, the Taskforce on 
Nature-related Financial Disclosures (TNFD) framework 
provides a template for disclosing nature-related risks 
and opportunities that specifically recognizes the positive 
benefits of natural-climate solutions.
Executive Summary
10
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
A key challenge in Canada is mainstreaming 
recognition of the role and value of natural assets 
within a timeframe that supports accelerated 
investment in natural-climate solutions. This discussion 
paper provides an overview of progress to date, with 
specific focus on public sector accounting, reporting 
and decision-making, and concludes by recommending 
three avenues for short-term focus:
1.	 Reverse Natural Asset Accounting 
Exclusions: Remove the explicit exclusion 
of natural assets from public sector financial 
statements, understanding that this does not 
obligate public-sector entities to include natural 
resources in their financial position statements 
(action led by Public Sector Accounting Board). 
2.	 Establish National Natural Asset 
Guidelines and Standards: Establish 
practical guidelines and national standards 
for inventory, management, and valuation of 
local government natural assets. The current 
development of a national standard for natural 
asset inventory is the first step in this process 
(action led by Standards Council of Canada, 
CSA Group, other standards setters).
3.	 Engage Financial Institutions in Nature-
Positive Action: Engage Canadian financial 
institutions and organizations in testing and 
refining the draft TNFD framework and making 
investments that build natural capital. This 
includes both making investments that “do no 
harm” as well as actively investing in solutions 
that enhance and restore nature and the 
ecosystem services provided to people (action led 
by Sustainable Finance Action Council).
These actions will help Canada enlist and work with 
nature to slow climate change, increase climate resilience 
and reverse biodiversity loss, ultimately benefiting the 
wellbeing of people in Canada and beyond.
Executive Summary
11
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
1. Introduction to 
Natural Assets
The term “natural assets” refers to the stock of 
natural resources and ecosystems.4 Examples of 
natural assets include: 
rivers
lakes
forests
fields
coastal
marshes
dunes
soils
wetlands
12
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Benefits that people obtain from natural assets are 
termed ecosystem goods and services, and 
may be divided into provisioning, regulation and 
maintenance, and cultural services as described below:5 
•	 Provisioning services are the products 
obtained from ecosystems, including, for 
example, food, wood, and fresh water.
•	 Regulation and maintenance services 
are services that regulate ecosystem processes 
and support the production of other 
ecosystem services, including, for example 
climate regulation and water cycling.
•	 Cultural services include spiritual, 
recreational, and cultural benefits that people 
obtain from nature, including for example, 
aesthetic enjoyment, and physical and mental 
health benefits.
These are all services provided by nature that 
ultimately benefit people. 
Economists often refer to natural assets as “natural 
capital”. The role of ecosystems and the services they 
provide, in underpinning all economic activity, has 
been amply documented nationally and internationally. 
In the landmark report produced for the U.K. 
government, “The Economics of Biodiversity: The 
Dasgupta Review”, the role of natural capital in 
supporting both human capital (reﬂecting the value of 
people and society) and produced capital (financial and 
manufactured outputs) was clearly illustrated (Fig. 1).6 
It is notable that both biodiversity and abiotic (non-
living) components of ecosystems are highlighted as 
important. The World Economic Forum’s New Nature 
Economy series identified that, “US$44 trillion of 
economic output– more than half the world’s Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) - is moderately or highly 
dependent on nature and its services.”7 The need for 
increased focus on a “nature-positive” economy, was 
also a key topic of discussion at the Forum’s 2022 
meeting of world leaders in Davos, Switzerland.8 
Canada has already committed to reversing biodiversity 
loss by 2030.9
Figure 1: Links From Biodiversity to the Economy 
(adapted from Dasgupta, 2021)
Ecosystems
Components of Natural Capital
Community
Composition
Function
Genetic
Populations
Structure
Traits
Biodiversity
Abiotic
Productivity
Ecosystem resilience
Provisioning, regulating and maintenance, 
and cultural ecosystem services and goods
+
Economy
Human Capital
Produced Capital
Non-living chemical and physical
parts of the environment
1. Introduction to Natural Assets
13
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Nature is clearly 
key to tackling 
the dual crises of 
climate change 
and biodiversity 
loss. There is 
therefore an 
increasingly 
urgent need to 
overcome the 
institutional, 
economic and 
accounting 
failures to 
recognize nature 
and its value. 
1. Introduction to Natural Assets
14
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
This paper starts out by outlining actions that are 
already being taken to actively manage natural assets 
in Canada (Section 2) alongside established methods 
of valuing the services they provide (Section 3). An 
overview is subsequently provided of the evolution of 
international approaches (Section 4) and steps than can 
be taken to recognise and value the services provided 
by nature in public and private sector accounting and 
decision-making (Section 5). 
1.1	 Natural Assets in Canada
The role played by natural assets in delivering services 
to people is becoming more recognized and valued 
in Canada. At the local level, action is being taken by 
a growing number of local governments to manage 
natural assets, since many ecosystem services either 
contribute directly to local government services (e.g., 
to provide stormwater conveyance, erosion control, air 
quality) or are strongly influenced by local decision-
making (e.g., about community well-being). However, 
overall, natural assets are not routinely inventoried, 
the services they provide are not valued, and non-
purchased natural assets are explicitly excluded in 
public-sector financial reporting.
The lack of management and disclosure of the value 
of Canada’s natural assets values in Canada is one 
issue that has historically led to their mismanagement 
and to the degradation of the services they provide to 
public-sector entities. Associated consequences and 
risks include:
•	 Ill-informed decision-making: 
Since the value of intact natural assets is 
excluded from public-sector entity financial 
statements, the costs of damage to natural 
infrastructure or the benefits of restoration 
are not appropriately factored into economic 
decision-making. Consequently, short-
term monetary gains that often drive the 
degradation of natural assets are frequently 
prioritized above the long-term economic 
value of services provided year-on-year by 
intact natural assets. 
•	 Unknown or undocumented liabilities:  
Degraded natural assets may present 
otherwise undocumented liabilities. For 
example, a degraded aquifer can lead to 
substantial costs to find or build a suitable 
alternative water source. A local government 
that does not understand the extent to which 
it relies on natural assets for core services 
is also likely to be conveying an incomplete 
picture of potential liabilities in annual 
financial reports.
•	 Inappropriate representation of 
natural assets as an overall cost: 
Whereas the costs of managing and 
maintaining natural assets are included in 
financial reports, the value of services derived 
from these assets is currently excluded. 
Financial reports will therefore typically 
misrepresent the contribution of natural assets 
to the overall public sector entity budget. 
This may disadvantage the borrowing ability 
of public sector entities who are proactively 
managing their natural assets.
•	 Difficulty securing private investment 
in nature-based solutions: The exclusion 
of natural assets from public sector financial 
reporting makes it difficult to demonstrate 
the financial return on investment in nature-
based solutions. This is a key problem in view 
of the needs identified by the United Nations 
Environment Programme to a) close a 4.1 
trillion USD financing gap in nature by 2050 
and b) up-scale the role of private finance 
(which accounted for only 14% of investment 
in nature-based solutions in 2021).10 
1.1 Natural Assets in Canada
15
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
•	 Lack of  incentive to manage natural 
assets: The inability to reflect the value 
of  natural assets in financial statements 
may discourage many public sector entities 
from proactively identifying and managing 
natural assets. 
1.2	 A Valuable Ally in Tackling 
Climate Change 
Natural assets bring direct financial benefits to 
public sector entities, including those associated with 
addressing climate change and biodiversity – two 
heavily intertwined global crises.
The effective management of natural assets by public-
sector entities can contribute two-fold to addressing 
climate change by: a) contributing to reduction of 
climate-related risks (climate adaptation) and b) by 
increasing carbon sequestration thereby reducing 
greenhouse gases (GHG) in the atmosphere (climate 
mitigation). These specific ecosystem services, as well as 
the value of biodiversity, are incorporated in the overall 
value of natural capital. 
The significant financial value of natural assets in 
reducing the damages from flooding was highlighted 
in a framework established in 2016 by the Insurance 
Bureau of Canada, the International Institute for 
Sustainable Development and the Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation.11 Natural assets also play an 
important role in reducing the impact of extreme heat 
created by the “urban heat island effect;” and several 
major cities are increasing their tree canopy on a large 
scale to counteract such heat.12
On the climate mitigation side, natural assets are key in 
carbon storage and sequestration. Vegetation extracts 
carbon from the atmosphere, while the Earth’s soils hold 
1.2 A Valuable Ally in Tackling Climate Change
16
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
about 2,500 gigatons of carbon— more than three times 
the amount of carbon in the atmosphere and four times 
the amount stored in all living plants and animals.13 
According to the Geological Survey of Canada, the 
peat in Canada’s wetlands holds almost 60 per cent of 
all the carbon stored in soils across the country.14 As 
part of Canada’s Emissions Reduction Plan, the federal 
government announced investment of an additional 
$780 million in the Nature Smart Climate Solutions 
Fund in 2022, in addition to the $4 billion already 
allocated, to deliver additional emission reductions.15
Carbon storage and sequestration is receiving 
increasing attention as countries and businesses 
have adopted “net-zero” targets, and look to nature-
based solutions as a means to offset greenhouse 
gas emissions. GHG offset credits can also be used 
to reduce amounts owed under Canada’s carbon 
pricing system. Although specific arrangements exist 
in different provinces, they must meet the minimum 
federal standard, which include a performance-based 
system for industries, known as the Output-Based 
Pricing System, as well as a regulatory fuel charge.16 
GHG offset credits are likely to appreciate in value 
driven by increased demand, although their pricing 
within the carbon market will likely not reflect the 
full range of services provided by natural assets. 
Public sector entities could potentially play a role in 
generating credits under the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) 
Offset Credit System if they register and implement 
projects that reduce GHGs using a published federal 
GHG offset protocol.17 
1.3	 Natural Assets and 
Financial Disclosures 
Natural assets can help manage both climate and 
nature-related risks and opportunities, for which 
different frameworks for financial disclosures have 
been developed.
In relation to climate, Canada’s Budget 2021 
stated that, “... to ensure a stable and predictable 
transition to a low-carbon economy, markets, 
insurers, policy makers, and the public require 
standardized information about the climate-related 
risks and opportunities organizations face.”18 Crown 
corporations are required to meet milestones for 
climate-related financial disclosures by 2022 or 2024, 
depending on the value of assets held. Disclosures 
are to follow the Task Force on Climate-related 
Financial Disclosures (TCFD) standards, or “more 
rigorous, acceptable standards ... applicable to the 
public sector at time of disclosure”.19 According to 
Budget 2022, federally regulated financial institutions 
will also be required to publish climate disclosures—
aligned with the TCFD framework - using a phased 
approach, starting in 2024.20 It is also notable that 
the cities of Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver have 
also been reporting on their climate-related risks and 
opportunities under the TCFD framework since 2019 
and contributed to CPA published guidance to help 
other cities do the same.21
In relation to nature, the Task Force for Nature-
Related Financial Disclosures (TNFD) was established 
in September 2020, and in April 2022 launched its 
“beta” framework for pilot testing and review.22 The 
beta framework includes specific mention of natural 
climate solutions as an opportunity to enhance natural 
resilience.23 The Government of Canada is part of 
the TNFD Forum24 and, as part of the G7, recently 
committed, “to increase and improve our climate 
finance contributions through to 2025, including 
increasing adaptation finance and finance for nature-
based solutions.”25
1.3 Natural Assets and Financial Disclosures
17
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
2. Inventory and Valuation 
of Municipal Natural Assets 
in Canada
2.1	 Overview of Progress to Date
Since 2016, local governments across Canada have 
been undertaking asset management-based approaches 
that recognize natural assets as infrastructure to 
be protected and managed for the long-term. This 
includes conducting inventories, modeling, valuing and 
managing natural assets (Figure 2, Table 1), and the rate 
of such activities is increasing. 
British
Columbia
Alberta
Saskatchewan Manitoba
Ontario
Quebec
New
Brunswick
Nova
Scotia
Prince
Edward
Island
Newfoundland
and Labrador
North West Territories
3
2
11
35
3
1
1
2
1
Size of circle represents number of local governments
Number of local governments
5
27
3
18
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Several organizations are currently working together 
to develop a new national standard for Canada for the 
inventory of natural assets – the first step in managing 
and valuing these assets.
The value of the services provided by natural assets 
has been calculated in economic terms through 
the work of the Municipal Natural Assets Initiative 
(MNAI), the Greenbelt Foundation, the Toronto 
Region Conservation Authority (TRCA), Credit Valley 
Conservation (CVC), Ouranos, the University of 
Quebec in Outaouais (Research Chair in Ecological 
Economics), the International Institute of Sustainable 
Development, the Insurance Bureau of Canada, the 
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, and ALUS, 
among others.
Figure 2: Local governments across Canada where natural asset management efforts, including 
inventory, modelling, valuation and management, have already been undertaken. 
N.B. This is not an exhaustive inventory and is designed to illustrate progress rather than documenting all activity.
2.1 Overview of Progress to Date
19
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Table 1: Local governments across Canada where natural asset management efforts, including inventory, modelling, valuation and 
management, have already been undertaken (this list is not exhaustive). 
British Columbia
35. Village of Cumberland
65. Town of Lincoln
1. City of Abbotsford
North West Territories
66. Town of Newmarket
2. City of Campbell River
36. City of Yellowknife
67. Town of Oakville
3. City of Colwood
Alberta
68. Town of The Blue Mountains
4. City of Courtenay
37. City of Calgary
Quebec
5. City of Cranbrook
38. City of Edmonton
69. National Capital Region (Ottawa/Gatineau)
6. City of Dawson Creek
39. Town of Okotoks
70. Montreal Metropolitan Community
7. City of Grand Forks
Saskatchewan
71. Quebec Metropolitan Community 
8. City of Kelowna
40. City of Saskatoon
72. Municipality of Compton
9. City of New Westminster
Manitoba
73. Watershed of the Rivière Chaudière
10. City of Port Coquitlam
41. Winnipeg Metropolitan Region
New Brunswick
11. City of Prince George
Ontario
74. City of Edmundston
12. City of Rossland
42. City of Brantford
75. City of Fredericton
13. City of Surrey
43. City of Burlington
76. City of Moncton
14. City of Vancouver
44. City of Hamilton
77. Northwest Regional Service Commission 
15. City of West Kelowna
45. City of London
78. Point-du-Chêne
16. District of Kent
46. City of Markham
79. Town of Florenceville-Bristol
17. District of Mackenzie
47. City of Mississauga
80. Town of Riverview
18. District of Saanich
48. City of Orillia
81. Town of Sackville
19. District of Sparwood
49. City of Oshawa
82. Town of Saint Andre
20. District of Vanderhoof
50. City of Ottawa
83. Village of Drummond
21. District of West Vancouver
51. City of Peterborough
84. Village of Riverside-Albert
22. Regional District of Alberni-Clayoquot
52. City of Richmond Hill
Nova Scotia
23. Regional District of Comox Valley
53. City of St. Catharine
85. District of Lunenburg
24. Regional District of Central Kootenay
54. City of Vaughan
86. Halifax Regional Municipality
25. Regional District of Central Okanagan
55. City of Windsor
87. Town of New Glasgow
26. Regional District of East Kootenay
56. County of Dufferin
Prince Edward Island
27. Regional District of Kootenay Boundary
57. County of Northumberland 
88. City of Charlottetown
28. Regional District of Nanaimo
58. Municipality of Port Hope
89. Town of Stratford
29. Regional District of Squamish-Lillooet 
59. National Capital Region (Ottawa / Gatineau)
Newfoundland and Labrador
30. Resort Municipality of Whistler
60. Region of Peel
90. City of St. John’s
31. Town of Comox
61. Region of Niagara
91. Town of Logy Bay-Middle Cove-Outer-Cove
32. Town of Gibsons
62. Region of York
33. Town of Golden
63. Tay Valley Township
34. Township of Langley
64. Town of Halton Hills
2.1 Overview of Progress to Date
$18.9
MILLION
$3.5-4
MILLION
$2.4
MILLION
$1.4
MILLION
$49.8
MILLION
$5.5
MILLION
$44.2
MILLION
20
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
2.2	 Illustrative Case Studies
The examples below illustrate the significance of natural assets for stormwater management and 
flood resilience, based on MNAI’s assessments26, which use the same detailed modeling as for many 
engineered assets:
•	 A seven-kilometre riverbank in the Oshawa Creek watershed in Ontario 
provides $18.9-million worth of stormwater conveyance/drainage annually to 
nearby communities based on replacement cost;
•	 Naturally occurring ponds in White Tower Park in Gibsons, B.C. provide 
between $3.5-million and $4-million in stormwater storage to the local 
government based on replacement cost; 
•	 Widening and naturalizing 1,292 metres of the Courtenay River riverbank in 
Courtenay, B.C. provides $2.4-million in flood-damage reduction to downstream 
properties during a 1-in-200-year flood event; and
•	 Protecting four wetlands that comprise 13 791 square metres in the Mill Creek 
Watershed in New Brunswick delivers $1.4-million in benefits during a 1-in-100 
year flood event.
The findings of numerous other organizations in Canada similarly document the significant monetary value of 
natural assets for flood-risk reduction and other services:
•	 The ability of wetlands to slow down, store and enable the evaporation of excess 
rainwater helps to reduce flood damages in the metropolitan area of Quebec 
City, a service worth $49.8-million annually.27
•	 In the National Capital Region, which contains the cities of Ottawa, Ont. and 
Gatineau, Que., urban and rural forests provide erosion control services worth 
an estimated $327,500 and $5.2-million annually, respectively.28
•	 In the City of Hamilton, a restored wetland complex costing approximately 
$15.3-million (compared with $28.5-million for an engineered solution) will reduce 
floods and provide recreation and other services valued at up to $44.2-million.29
2.2 Illustrative Case Studies
$16.3
BILLION
$2.9
MILLION
21
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
In relation specifically to climate regulation through carbon storage and sequestration: 
•	 Within the metropolitan area of Quebec City, rural and urban forests have been 
estimated to provide carbon storage services to a value of $11 59 billion (total), 
and carbon sequestration services of $ 9.3 million (per year). Wetlands have been 
estimated to provide carbon storage services to a value of $ 4 67 billion (total), 
and carbon sequestration services of $ 0.9 million (per year).30
•	 Wetlands within the National Capital Region were estimated to provide climate 
regulation services to a value of $ 2.9 million per year.31
2.2 Illustrative Case Studies
22
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
3. Methods of Valuing 
Natural Assets
The exclusion of natural assets within public accounting 
rests in part on an argument that their value cannot 
be reliably determined. However, this understanding is 
outdated, given the availability of methods of valuing 
natural assets, and their active use by local governments 
in Canada.
23
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
The extent of the services provided by natural assets 
can be identified using a combination of modeling and 
monitoring. Their value can then be determined by 
applying well-defined economic approaches.
Natural assets that have not been purchased may 
be valued using several well-developed techniques, 
grouped into three approaches: 1) direct market 
valuation, 2) revealed preference and 3) stated 
preference. A fourth category, the benefit-transfer (or 
value-transfer) method, involves applying the results 
from prior studies of a specific ecosystem service to 
a new area of interest. Each of these methods has its 
strengths and weaknesses, and most can only be applied 
to a subset of ecosystem services. 
A frequently recommended method for assessing the 
value of natural assets is the Replacement Cost 
method. This employs a direct market valuation and 
can be readily calculated. It shows what it would cost 
to replace or substitute a natural asset’s service (in 
this case, by an engineered means). This valuation 
method is appropriate when the services being 
provided by a natural asset could be replaced by 
conventional infrastructure (e.g., engineered stormwater 
management). In this case, the cost of replacing the 
asset’s capacity to provide a specific service can be 
estimated using the replacement cost of conventional 
infrastructure. 
Revealed Preference may be an appropriate method 
when a local government would like to understand how 
a natural asset is affecting the market price of a related 
good (e.g., the travel cost incurred to visit the location). 
Stated Preference is an appropriate method of 
valuation when local governments would like to get a 
sense of what the community would be willing to pay 
(in taxes for instance) to ensure the continued health of 
a service (e.g., the cost of maintaining forest cover to 
promote desired air quality). 
In situations where a natural asset contributes multiple 
services to a public entity (e.g., water filtration and 
recreation) it may be necessary to employ more than 
one valuation technique at the same time to arrive at 
the value of an asset.
As has been well documented by MNAI and others, 
it is possible and often straightforward to calculate 
the services and corresponding service values for 
many types of  natural assets. For example, it is now 
routine to calculate the water-filtration and storage 
services provided by wetlands, using modeling to 
ensure accuracy, and to determine with a high degree 
of  precision the capital and operating costs of  an 
engineered storage and filtration system required for 
the same task. There are ways to make direct market-
value comparisons for many other services provided 
by natural assets that can be used to characterize 
service value. 
Further discussions may be required to 
determine how to calculate appropriate values 
of natural assets -- but not whether they exist, 
are tangible, and can be determined. 
To foster more rapid inclusion of natural assets in 
financial statements, accounting efforts could focus 
on the ample array of  natural assets and services 
for which valuation methods are the most developed. 
Similarly, local governments just starting work on 
natural asset management can also begin by assessing 
the role of natural assets in providing specific services 
that are of relevance to their community and most 
readily determined. 
It should also be noted that the valuation of assets 
that are already recognized does not necessarily 
yield a precise “correct” answer; asset values may 
vary significantly over time according to short-term 
market fluctuations. While a wetland’s services and 
corresponding value will typically depend on its context 
and location, the same is equally true of, for example, a 
3. Methods of Valuing Natural Assets
24
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
building whose value will vary according to its location, 
market conditions and other context-dependent factors. 
Natural assets should not be held to a higher 
standard of accounting certainty than that 
demanded for other asset classes. 
3. Methods of Valuing Natural Assets
25
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
4. Evolution of 
International Approaches
On the international 
stage, the way in which 
“value” is accounted for 
is changing – standards 
must evolve to keep pace 
in Canada. 
26
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
In March 2021, the 52nd United Nations Statistical 
Commission adopted the System of Environmental-
Economic Accounting—Ecosystem Accounting 
(SEEA EA).32 This new statistical framework will 
enable countries to measure their natural capital, and 
understand the contributions of nature to prosperity 
and the importance of protecting it. In March 2020, 
the International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
Board (IPSASB) Natural Resources Project was 
established to address issues relating to the recognition, 
measurement, presentation and disclosure of natural 
resources. Its Project Brief notes that: “Items that 
are not recognized risk being mismanaged. Because 
natural resources are such a significant revenue source 
for many jurisdictions, the lack of recognition and 
measurement was highlighted as a public interest 
issue.”33 The consultation paper that was recently 
published for comment, focused on financial reporting 
of tangible and naturally occurring resources, such as  
subsoil, water and living resources, in their natural state.34 
There are already moves in several countries to adopt 
natural capital accounting systems. 
In the U.K., at the Office for 
National Statistics (ONS), 
natural capital accounts are 
being compiled annually, in 
line with the guidelines recommended by the United 
Nations SEEA EA. 
In South Africa, the Accounting 
Standards Board’s Standard 
of Generally Recognized 
Accounting Practice (GRAP) 
Standard for Living and Non-living Resources (GRAP 
110) was published in 2017. This standard prescribes 
the requirements for the recognition, measurement, 
presentation and disclosure of living resources, and the 
disclosure requirements for non-living resources.35
In the United States, the Federal Accounting Standards 
Advisory Board (FASAB) 
introduced guidance (which 
took effect in 2013) requiring 
federal entities to report the 
value of the federal government’s estimated royalties and 
other revenue from federal natural resources that are 
under lease, contract or other long-term agreement, 
and are reasonably estimable.36 In addition, President 
Biden signed an Executive Order in April 2022, which 
included several actions under “enlisting nature in the 
fight against climate change”, including:37 
•	 for the Office of Management and 
Budget to issue valuation guidance to 
help agencies better account for services 
provided by ecosystems; 
•	 an interagency initiative to improve and 
update baseline information on the economic 
value of existing natural assets and new 
nature-based solutions and;
•	 the first U.S. National Nature Assessment.
The focus on the importance of natural capital has 
also increased notably since the beginning of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The value of natural assets to 
local communities and human well-being has been 
brought sharply into focus as a result of stay-at-home 
orders and restrictions on activities and travel. 
The public sector – international institutions 
and countries – has recognized the monetary 
value of natural assets, and the private sector 
is rapidly following suit.
Asset managers, institutional investors, banks and 
insurance companies are also actively seeking 
opportunities to incorporate natural-capital 
considerations into investment decision-making and 
financial services. A key example is BlackRock, the 
world’s biggest asset manager. In a report detailing its 
4. Evolution of International Approaches
27
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
engagement priorities for 2021, BlackRock says: “All 
companies rely on natural capital in some way and, as 
the world transitions to a low-carbon economy, we ask 
companies to demonstrate how they are minimizing 
their negative impacts on, and ideally enhancing the 
stock of, the natural capital on which their long-term 
financial performance depends.”38 
Natural capital is an integral part of Environmental, 
Social and Governance (ESG) performance, the 
metrics of which are being used to determine credit 
ratings, including for public-sector entities. It is also 
an important factor for entities to consider when they 
set targets to meet the United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals, such as the protection and 
restoration of ecosystems and efforts to halt the loss of 
biodiversity (Goal 15, “Life on Land”).39
In Canada, Swiss Re, the Insurance Bureau of Canada, 
the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation and MNAI 
have been exploring insurance products that would 
provide explicit coverage to protect natural assets 
against potential damage from natural disasters, such 
as earthquakes, hurricanes, floods, droughts and 
wildfires.40 These new insurance products highlight 
the significance of natural assets to community well-
being – and demonstrate that their protection merits 
attention similar to that afforded to traditional/ 
grey infrastructure assets. Under this “parametric 
insurance,” claim payouts are triggered by a predefined 
event such as a hurricane of a certain magnitude; the 
payout is almost immediate, in order to repair any 
damages to the natural asset so that it can continue to 
deliver its ecosystem benefits. 
Institutional investors are also actively looking for 
investment opportunities to increase natural capital as 
part of their sustainable-finance initiatives. For example, 
Fondaction in Quebec has employees whose specific 
role is to develop these investment opportunities. 
MNAI, together with not-for-profit global discovery 
organization Dark Matter Labs, is exploring scalable 
investment models of capital market financing for 
natural assets and ecosystems. This work will review 
existing innovative financing models and regulatory 
frameworks that could be used to finance the protection 
and restoration of natural assets, and the services they 
provided, without commodifying nature. 
Major banks are also forecasting growth in the green-
loan market in Canada, as an alternative financial 
instrument to green bonds. The preservation and 
restoration of natural capital projects could be funded 
by green loans, accessed by local governments. Public-
sector entities that want to take advantage of new green 
financing opportunities may need to measure and 
account for a baseline value for their natural capital, in 
order to demonstrate their return on investment (ROI), 
which would logically be reflected in their financial 
position statements. 
4. Evolution of International Approaches
28
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
5. Progress and Next Steps
Canada is rich in natural assets that deliver economic 
and social benefits to public-sector entities and the 
people they serve, including carbon sequestration and 
storage, flood protection and biodiversity. There is 
also significant momentum in Canada to understand, 
account for, and ultimately protect and manage these 
natural assets to preserve the vital services they provide.
29
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
At a federal level, the definition of “infrastructure” 
in Canada has also been broadened in many 
circumstances to include “natural infrastructure”. 
For example:
•	 An advisory table on Resilient Natural and 
Built Infrastructure was established to inform 
development of Canada’s first National 
Adaptation Strategy.41 
•	 There is a stated intention that the first 
National Infrastructure Assessment will 
cover “all sectors of economic, social, 
sustainable and natural infrastructure.”42 
•	 The Government of Canada’s Budget 2021 
established a Natural Infrastructure Fund that 
is slated to receive $200-million over the next 
three years (2022-2025).43  
In addition, the report “Human Activity and the 
Environment 2021: Accounting for ecosystem change 
in Canada”, published by Statistics Canada in 2022, 
represents an initial effort to make comprehensive 
information on Canada’s ecosystems and their 
condition more readily available.44 This is part of 
ongoing work being undertaken to develop and 
implement a Canadian System of Environmental-
Economic Accounts,45 which is particularly welcomed.
A key challenge now is mainstreaming recognition of 
the role and value of natural assets within a timeframe 
that supports accelerated investment in natural-climate 
solutions, urgently required to tackle climate change 
and reverse biodiversity loss. 
Three avenues are recommended for immediate focus:
•	 Reverse Natural Asset Accounting 
Exclusions: Remove the explicit exclusion 
of natural assets from public sector financial 
statements, understanding that this does 
not obligate public-sector entities to include 
natural resources in their financial position 
statements (action led by Public Sector 
Accounting Board).
•	 Establish National Natural Asset 
Guidelines and Standards: Establish 
practical guidelines and national standards 
for inventory, management, and valuation of 
local government natural assets. The current 
development of a national standard for natural 
asset inventory is the first step in this process 
(action led by Standards Council of Canada, 
with CSA Group, Public Sector Accounting 
Board and other standards setters).
•	 Engage Financial Institutions in 
Nature-Positive Action: Engage Canadian 
financial institutions and organizations 
in testing and refining the draft TNFD 
framework and making investments that build 
natural capital. This includes both making 
investments that “do no harm” as well as 
actively investing in solutions that enhance 
and restore nature and the ecosystem services 
provided to people (action led by Sustainable 
Finance Action Council).
These actions will help Canada enlist and work with 
nature in slowing climate change, reducing climate risk 
and reversing biodiversity loss, ultimately benefiting the 
well-being of people in Canada and beyond.
5. Progress and Next Steps
June 30, 2021 
Michael Puskaric 
Director 
Public Sector Accounting Board  
277 Wellington Street West  
Toronto, ON M5V 3H2  
info@psabcanada.ca 
 
Re: “The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public Sector” and “Financial Statement 
Presentation, Proposed Section PS 1202” -- Consultation Response to Exposure Drafts 
 
Dear Mr. Puskaric,  
On behalf of the undersigned organizations, please find attached a consultation response to the exposure drafts 
that describe proposed revisions to the Public Sector Accounting Board's "Conceptual Framework for Financial 
Reporting in the Public Sector," and introduce the proposed new standard "Financial Statement Presentation, 
Section PS 1202." 
This submission relates to the recognition of natural assets in Canadian public-sector accounting. Our response 
explains our position in relation to the need for public-sector accounting to be able to reflect the monetary value of 
natural assets in Canada, including carbon sequestration and storage, flood protection and biodiversity benefits. 
In particular, we recommend that the explicit exclusion of non-purchased natural resources be removed from the 
proposed new Financial Statement Presentation standard, Section PS 1202. The exclusion of natural assets from 
financial statements means that resources available to public-sector entities are not faithfully represented. The 
removal of this exclusion -- thereby permitting the inclusion of natural assets -- would not obligate a public-sector 
entity to recognize its natural assets. 
We also recommend that the PSAB undertake a project to develop guidance about the recognition and 
measurement of natural resources, similar to projects under way at the International Public Sector Accounting 
Standards Board. With guidance, public-sector entities that are already prepared to recognize natural assets in 
their financial statements could do so in a consistent manner.  
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on this very important undertaking, and would be pleased to provide 
any additional information that may be required. We also welcome the opportunity to assist PSAB in the 
development of standards and guidance materials to support public-sector entities to incorporate natural assets in 
their financial statements.  
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Joanna Eyquem, P.Geo, ENV SP,. 
CWEM, CEnv, 
Managing Director, Climate-Resilient 
Infrastructure, Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, University of Waterloo 
Bailey Church, CPA, CA, CIA 
Partner, Professional Practice 
KPMG Canada 
Roy Brooke 
Executive Director, 
Municipal Natural Assets Initiative 
30
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Appendix A
p
 
 
 
 
 
Sonia Baxendale 
 
President and CEO, 
Global Risk Institute  
 
Florian Roulle 
Senior Director, Strategy and 
Partnerships, Head of Sustainable 
Finance,  Finance Montréal 
Kevin Travers 
Partner, Infrastructure Government 
and Healthcare Practice 
KPMG Canada 
 
 
 
Jonathan Fowlie 
Chief External Relations Officer, 
Vancouver City Savings Credit Union 
 
Craig Stewart 
Vice President, Federal Affairs 
Insurance Bureau of Canada 
Jennifer Place 
Board Chair  
Government Finance Officer of Alberta 
(GFOA)  
 
 
 
Dr Richard Florizone 
President & CEO, 
International Institute for Sustainable 
Development 
Dr Susan Black 
President and CEO, 
The Conference Board of Canada 
 
Mike Wilson 
Executive Director, 
Smart Prosperity Institute  
 
 
 
Sean Kidney 
CEO, 
Climate Bonds Initiative 
 
Rachel Samson 
Clean Growth Research Director, 
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices 
Blair Feltmate, Ph.D. 
Head, Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, 
University of Waterloo 
 
 
 
Robert Siddall, FCPA, FCA 
Independent 
Julie Gelfand 
Former Federal Commissioner of 
Environment and Sustainable 
Development, Office of the Auditor 
General of Canada 
Carole Saab 
CEO 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities 
 
 
 
Sandra Califaretti, CPA, CA  
Director, Accounting Services 
City of Toronto 
 
Raoul Cyr, CPA, CA 
Directeur Comptabilité et informations 
financières,  
Ville de Montréal 
Julia Aspinall, CPA, CMA 
Director, Financial Services 
City of Vancouver  
31
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Appendix A
 
 
 
 
 
Michel Houle, CPA, CMA 
VP, Corporate Services and CFO, 
National Capital Commission 
Jeffrey J. Jackson, MBA, CPA, CA  
Director of Finance and Treasurer 
City of Mississauga 
Colleen Sklar 
Executive Director,  
Winnipeg Metropolitan Region 
 
 
 
Mark Medeiros 
Acting Treasurer, 
City of Brampton 
Jerry Blackwood, CPA, CGA 
CFO, 
Halifax Regional Municipality 
 
Michael Coroneos, CPA, CMA 
Deputy City Manager, Chief Financial 
Officer & Treasurer, 
City of Vaughan 
 
 
 
Lisa Helps 
Mayor, 
City of Victoria 
Andy Wardell, CPA, CGA, 
General Manager, Finance & Chief 
Financial Officer  
District of North Vancouver 
Moya J. Leighton CPA, CGA, MBA 
Town Treasurer & Director of Finance 
Town of Halton Hills 
 
 
 
Myriah Foort, BBA, CPA, CA 
Chief Financial Officer 
Comox Valley Regional District 
Jenn Hepting 
Chief Financial Officer /  
Director of Finance,  
City of Colwood 
Isabel Gordon, MBA, CPA   
Director, Financial Services,  
District of West Vancouver 
 
 
 
Emanuel Machado 
Chief Resiliency Officer 
Town of Gibsons 
Sarah Pacey 
Chief Administrative Officer,  
Town of Florenceville-Bristol 
 
Kevin Wilkinson, CPA, CA, MBA  
Controller, 
Windsor-Detroit Bridge Authority 
 
 
 
Will Cole-Hamilton 
Steering Committee, 
Climate Caucus 
Gabriella Kalapos 
Executive Director 
Clean Air Partnership 
 
Edward  McDonnell 
CEO, 
Greenbelt Foundation 
 
 
32
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Appendix A
 
 
 
 
 
Gerard McDonald, MBA, P.Eng., 
ICD.D 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Engineers Canada 
Andrea Waldie, P.Geo., FGC 
Chief Executive Officer 
Geoscientists Canada 
Dan Huang RPP, MCIP 
President 
Canadian Institute of Planners 
 
 
 
Michael Leering P.Eng. 
Director, Environment and Business 
Excellence Standards 
CSA Group 
Christopher Chen 
Executive Director 
Asset Management Ontario 
Jennifer Court 
Executive Director 
Green Infrastructure Ontario 
 
 
 
Catherine Lavoie 
Présidente-directrice générale 
Centre d'expertise et de recherche en 
infrastructures urbaines (CERIU) 
Wally Wells P.Eng. 
Executive Director 
Asset Management BC 
Daisy Foster 
Managing Director, 
Atlantic Infrastructure Management 
(AIM) Network  
 
 
 
Bernadette O’Connor 
Manager, Municipal Asset 
Management, Canada 
WSP Canada Inc. 
Jeff Atherton, P.Eng. 
Senior Asset Management Consultant 
AECOM Canada Ltd 
Ron Scheckenberger, P.Eng. 
Principal,  
Wood Canada Ltd 
 
 
 
Jennifer Petruniak, PMP. 
Technical Lead, Environmental 
Services 
Dillon Consulting 
Al Beaver 
Executive Director. 
Wildland Fire Risk Management Ltd  
Robert Smith 
Principal, 
Midsummer Analytics 
 
 
 
Alain Bourque 
Directeur général  
Ouranos - Consortium sur les 
changements climatiques 
Jérôme Dupras, Ph.D. 
Professeur agrégé, Titulaire, Chaire de 
recherche du Canada en économie 
écologique, Université du Québec en 
Outaouais  
Dr Saul Klein 
Dean, Gustavson School of Business, 
University of Victoria 
 
33
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Appendix A
 
 
 
 
Susan Nesbitt, Ph.D. P.Eng. 
Professor, Co-Director, Urban Systems 
Master of Engineering Leadership,  
The University of British Columbia 
Deborah Harford 
Executive Director 
Adaptation to Climate Change Team, 
Simon Fraser University 
Robert Wilson 
Director of Conservation Finance, 
Nature Conservancy of Canada 
 
 
 
Meghan Leslie 
President and CEO, 
WWF-Canada 
Jay Ritchlin 
Director-General, Western 
Canada/National Nature portfolio lead 
David Suzuki Foundation 
Marcy Sullivan, CPA, CA 
Chief Financial Officer 
Ducks Unlimited Canada 
 
 
 
Laura Cui, CPA, CGA 
National Director of Finance, 
Canadian Parks and Wilderness 
Society (CPAWS) 
Lara Ellis 
Senior Vice-President, Policy and 
Partnerships, 
ALUS 
Antoine Verville 
Directeur général, 
Regroupement des organismes de 
bassins versants du Québec 
 
 
 
Martin Vaillancourt 
Directeur général,  
Regroupement national des conseils 
régionaux de l'environnement du 
Québec 
Kim Gavine 
General Manager, 
Conservation Ontario 
Deborah Martin-Downs 
CAO 
Credit Valley Conservation 
 
 
 
Hassaan Bassit 
President and CEO,  
Conservation Halton 
 
DG Blair 
Executive Director, 
Stewardship Centre for BC 
 
 
 
34
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Appendix A
 
Proposed Changes to the PSA Handbook's Conceptual 
Framework and Context 
The PSAB notes that its current Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public Sector specifies that 
certain types of assets are to be excluded from recognition in financial statements:   "These exclusions relate to:  
• 
natural resources and Crown lands that have not been purchased; 
• 
developed and inherited intangibles; and 
• 
works of art and historical treasures." 
 
The PSAB is proposing to relocate these exclusions from the Conceptual Framework to its new standard for 
Financial Statement Presentation, Section PS 1202; it says "such exclusions are standards-level decisions, not 
concepts underlying financial statements." 1  
The PSAB has concluded that “before these exclusions can be removed, each type of economic resource must 
be considered individually. Appropriate guidance regarding their recognition and measurement must be 
provided."2  
Response 
• Canada is rich in natural capital, or natural assets (the stock of natural resources and ecosystems), that deliver 
economic benefits to public-sector entities. Under the proposed changes to the PSAB Conceptual Framework, 
this wealth will remain explicitly excluded from public-sector financial statements, except where natural assets 
have been damaged and have needed to be recreated/restored, or have otherwise effectively been 
"purchased."  
 
• Failure to recognize, in any form, the value of intact "inherited" natural assets understates the resources 
available to a public-sector entity to provide services. This conflicts with the financial reporting objective noted 
in Chapter 6 of the proposed Conceptual Framework: "reporting [an entity's] financial position." Paragraph 6.15 
observes: “To make such assessments, users require information about the total economic resources available 
to serve the public and the total claims on those resources (i.e., economic obligations) at the financial 
statement date.”  
 
• By excluding the value of their inherited natural assets, public-sector entities are not providing adequate 
information about all assets - users do not have information about the state of natural assets, or their potential 
impairment. This lack of information has historically led to the mismanagement of natural assets, and to the 
deterioration of the services they provide to the communities and economies over which public-sector entities 
have jurisdiction. Degraded natural assets may also present otherwise undocumented liabilities.  
 
• It is also critical that public-sector entities account for, and value, the carbon sequestration and storage 
services of natural assets, which can be used to offset greenhouse gas emissions and contribute to fulfilling 
Canada’s commitment to achieving net-zero emissions by the year 2050. 
 
• Reliable methods of measurement and data collection already exist for valuing natural assets, are tried and 
tested in Canada, and are already being applied by local public-sector entities to inform their asset-
management planning. Without a recognition of natural assets in financial statements, there is a disconnect 
between asset management and financial reporting, which contradicts the close linkage established between 
existing assets and liabilities.  
35
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Appendix A
 
• By allowing the value of natural assets to be recognized in the Statement of Financial Position, the PSAB can 
support public-sector entities in making more financially sound decisions about the management of natural 
assets in the short, medium and long term.  
 
• In addition to removing the exclusion of non-purchased natural resources from the PSAB Conceptual 
Framework, we recommend that the explicit exclusion of non-purchased natural resources be removed 
from the proposed new Financial Statement Presentation standard, Section PS 1202. This removal would 
enable public-sector entities that are ready to recognize natural assets in their financial statements to do so in 
a consistent and defined manner. The removal of this exclusion -- thereby permitting the inclusion of natural 
assets -- would not obligate a public-sector entity to recognize its natural assets. 
 
• The PSAB should regard natural assets as a priority topic from now on, and the inclusion of natural assets in 
the financial statements of public-sector entities should be addressed in the forthcoming 2022-2027 Strategic 
Plan. Future work could include, for example, incorporating consideration of natural assets within the technical 
agenda and in a Statement of Recommended Practice. In the absence of timely and concerted action, the risk 
is that public-sector accounting standards will become less relevant in a world where natural capital is 
increasingly recognized as a central part of Canada's economy by investors, accountants, economists and 
public-sector entities.  
 
Endnotes 
 
1 Public Sector Accounting Board. 2021. "Exposure Draft -- The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public 
Sector," p. iv. Accessed at: https://www.frascanada.ca/en/public-sector/documents/psab-ed-conceptual-framework 
 
2 Public Sector Accounting Board. 2021. "Exposure Draft -- The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public 
Sector," p.111. Accessed at: https://www.frascanada.ca/en/public-sector/documents/psab-ed-conceptual-framework 
36
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
Appendix A
37
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
1	  International Union for Conservation of  Nature. 2020. “IUCN Global Standard for Nature-based 
Solutions: a user-friendly framework for the verification, design and scaling up of  NbS : first edition.” Accessed 
at: https://portals.iucn.org/library/node/49070 
2	  Girardin, C., Jenkins, S., et al. 2021. “Nature based solutions can help cool the planet.” Nature. vol. 593, 
pp.191-194. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-021-01241-2  
3	  Griscom, B.W., Adams, J., et al. 2017. “Natural climate solutions.” Proceedings of  the National Academy of  Sciences, 
vol. 114, no.44, pp.11645-11650. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1710465114 
4	  Municipal Natural Assets Initiative. 2017. “Defining and Scoping Municipal Natural Assets.” Accessed 
at: https://www.assetmanagementbc.ca/wp-content/uploads/definingscopingmunicipalnaturalcapital-final-
15mar2017.pdf
5	  Haines-Young, R. and M.B. Potschin. 2018. “Common International Classification of Ecosystem Services 
(CICES) V5.1 and Guidance on the Application of the Revised Structure.” Accessed at: https://cices.eu/content/
uploads/sites/8/2018/01/Guidance-V51-01012018.pdf  
6	  Dasgupta, P. 2021. “The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review.” HM Treasury. London. Accessed 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/final-report-the-economics-of-biodiversity-the-dasgupta-review 
7	  World Economic Forum. 2020. “Nature Risk Rising: Why the Crisis Engulfing Nature Matters for Business 
and the Economy.” New Nature Economy Series. In collaboration with PwC. Accessed at: https://www3.
weforum.org/docs/WEF_New_Nature_Economy_Report_2020.pdf 
8	  World Economic Forum. 2022. “Davos 2022: A key milestone in a pivotal year for nature action.” Accessed 
at: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/05/davos-2022-a-key-milestone-in-a-pivotal-year-for-nature-action-
f8d852f23e/ 
9	  Government of Canada. 2021. “G7 2030 Nature Compact.” Accessed at: https://www.international.gc.ca/
world-monde/international_relations-relations_internationales/g7/documents/2021-06-13-nature_compact-
nature_horizon-2030.aspx?lang=eng 
10	 United Nations Environment Programme. 2021. “State of Finance for Nature 2021.” Nairobi. Accessed at: 
https://www.unep.org/resources/state-finance-nature 
11	 Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B., Venema, H., Osman, H. 2018. “Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural 
infrastructure is an underutilized option.” Prepared for Insurance Bureau of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/09/IBC_Wetlands-Report-2018_FINAL.pdf
12	 Eyquem, J. L, and B. Feltmate. 2022. “Irreversible Extreme Heat: Protecting Canadians and Communities 
from a Lethal Future.” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo. Accessed at: https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/irreversible-extreme-heat-protecting-canadians-and-communities-from-a-lethal-
future/ 
13	 Ontl, T.A. and Schulte, L.A. 2012. “Soil Carbon Storage.” Nature Education Knowledge, vol. 3, 35. Accessed at: 
https://www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/soil-carbon-storage-84223790/ 
Endnotes
All documents were accessed on August 8, 2022.
38
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
14	 Kettles, I. M. and Tarnocai, C. 1999. “Development of a model for estimating the sensitivity of Canadian 
peatlands to climate warning.” Géographie physique et Quaternaire. vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 323–338. DOI : https://doi.
org/10.7202/004838ar 
15	 Environment and Climate Change Canada. 2022. “2030 Emissions Reduction Plan - Canada’s Next Steps 
for Clean Air and a Strong Economy.” Accessed at: https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2022/eccc/
En4-460-2022-eng.pdf 
16	 Government of Canada. 2022. “Carbon pollution pricing systems across Canada.” Accessed at: https://www.
canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/climate-change/pricing-pollution-how-it-will-work.html 
17	 Government of Canada. 2022. “Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Offset Credit System.” Accessed at: https://www.
canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/climate-change/pricing-pollution-how-it-will-work/output-
based-pricing-system/federal-greenhouse-gas-offset-system.html 
18	 Government of Canada. 2021. “Budget 2021: A Recovery Plan for Jobs, Growth, and Resilience.” Accessed 
at: https://www.budget.gc.ca/2021/home-accueil-en.html 
19	 Ibid. 
20	 Government of Canada. 2022. “Budget 2022: A Plan to Grow Our Economy and Make Life More 
Affordable.” Accessed at: https://budget.gc.ca/2022/home-accueil-en.html 
21	 Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada. 2019. “Enhancing Climate-related Disclosure by Cities: A 
Guide to Adopting the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD).” 
Accessed at: https://www.cpacanada.ca/en/business-and-accounting-resources/financial-and-non-financial-
reporting/sustainability-environmental-and-social-reporting/publications/tcfd-guide-for-cities 
22	 Taskforce on Nature-Related Financial Disclosures. 2022. “TNFD Nature-Related Risk & Opportunity 
Management and Disclosure Framework, v0.2 Beta Release.” Accessed at: https://tnfd.global/the-tnfd-
framework/tnfd-framework-summary/#draft-disclosure-recommendations 
23	 Taskforce on Nature-Related Financial Disclosures. 2022. “The TNFD Forum.” Accessed at: https://tnfd.
global/about/the-tnfd-forum/ 
24	 Ibid. 
25	 Government of Canada. 2021. “G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Communiqué.” 5 June 
2021. Accessed at: https://www.canada.ca/en/department-finance/programs/international-trade-finance-policy/
g7-finance-ministers-central-bank-governors-communique.html 
26	 Municipal Natural Assets Initiative. 2020. “Cohort 2 National Projects Overview.” Accessed at: https://mnai.
ca/media/2020/02/MNAI-CohortSummary.pdf
27	 Wood, S.L.R., Dupras, J., Bergevin, C., Kermagoret, C. 2019. “La valeur économique des écosystèmes 
naturels et agricoles de la Communauté métropolitaine de Québec et de la Table de concertation régionale 
pour la gestion intégrée du Saint-Laurent.” Ouranos. Accessed at: https://cmquebec.qc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/09/2019-09_Valeur-%C3%A9conomique-ecosyst%C3%A8mes_UQO_Rapport-final.pdf
28	 Dupras, J., L’Ecuyer-Sauvageau, C., Auclair, Jeoffrey & He, J.& Poder, T. 2016. “Natural Capital: The 
economic value of National Capital Commission green network.” Accessed at: https://ncc-website-2.
s3.amazonaws.com/documents/natural_capital_economic_value_ncc_green_network_final_dec_1_web.pdf 
29	 Greenbelt Foundation. 2019. “Investing in the Future: The Economic Case for Natural Infrastructure in 
Ontario.” Accessed at: https://www.greenbelt.ca/economic_case
30	 Wood, S.L.R., Dupras, J., Bergevin, C., Kermagoret, C. 2019. La valeur économique des écosystèmes 
naturels et agricoles de la Communauté métropolitaine de Québec et de la Table de concertation régionale 
39
Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value Provided by Natural Assets in a Changing Climate
pour la gestion intégrée du Saint-Laurent. Ouranos. 75 p. Accessed at: https://cmquebec.qc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/09/2019-09_Valeur-%C3%A9conomique-ecosyst%C3%A8mes_UQO_Rapport-final.pdf
31	 Dupras, J., L’Ecuyer-Sauvageau, C., Auclair, Jeoffrey & He, J.& Poder, T. 2016. “Natural Capital: The 
economic value of National Capital Commission green network.” Accessed at: https://ncc- https://ncc-website-2.
s3.amazonaws.com/documents/natural_capital_economic_value_ncc_green_network_final_dec_1_web.pdf 
32	 UN Statistical Commission. 2021. “System of Environmental-Economic Accounting—Ecosystem 
Accounting.” Final Draft, Version 5. February 2021. Accessed at: https://unstats.un.org/unsd/statcom/52nd-
session/documents/BG-3f-SEEA-EA_Final_draft-E.pdf 
33	 International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board. 2020. “Natural Resources Project Brief and 
Outline.” Accessed at: https://www.ifac.org/system/files/uploads/IPSASB/Natural%20Resources%20
Project%20Brief%20Final%20March%2027%2C%202020.pdf 
34	 International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board. 2022. “IPSASB Launches Consultation Paper on 
Accounting for Natural Resources.” Accessed at: https://www.ipsasb.org/news-events/2022-05/ipsasb-launches-
consultation-paper-accounting-natural-resources 
35	 Accounting Standards Board. 2019. “Standard of Generally Recognised Accounting Practice. Living 
and Non-Living Resources (GRAP 110), South Africa.” Accessed at: https://www.asb.co.za/wp-content/
uploads/2019/04/GRAP-110-Living-and-Non-living-Resources-2019clean.pdf 
36	 Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board. 2011. “Accounting for Federal Natural Resources Other 
than Oil and Gas.” Technical Bulletin 2011-1. Accessed at: http://files.fasab.gov/pdffiles/original_tech_
bulletin_2011_1.pdf 
37	 The White House. 2022. “FACT SHEET: President Biden Signs Executive Order to Strengthen America’s 
Forests, Boost Wildfire Resilience, and Combat Global Deforestation.” April 22, 2022. Accessed at: https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/04/22/fact-sheet-president-biden-signs-executive-order-
to-strengthen-americas-forests-boost-wildfire-resilience-and-combat-global-deforestation/ 
38	 BlackRock Investment Stewardship. 2021. “Our approach to engagement on natural capital, March 2021.” 
Accessed at: https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/literature/publication/blk-commentary-engagement-on-
natural-capital.pdf 
39	 United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs - Sustainable Development. 2021. “The 17 
goals.” Accessed at: https://sdgs.un.org/goals 
40	 Municipal Natural Assets Initiative. 2020. “Innovative, new, nature-based insurance product to help protect 
natural assets.” Accessed at: https://mnai.ca/insurance-protect-natural-assets/ 
41	 Government of Canada. 2022. “Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy.” Accessed at: https://www.canada.
ca/en/services/environment/weather/climatechange/climate-plan/national-adaptation-strategy.html 
42	 Infrastructure Canada. 2021. “Building Pathways to 2050: Moving Forward on the National Infrastructure 
Assessment.” Accessed at: https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/alt-format/pdf/nia-eni/nia-eni-2-en1.pdf 
43	 Government of Canada. 2021. “Budget 2021. A Recovery Plan for Jobs, Growth, and Resilience.” Accessed 
at: https://www.budget.gc.ca/2021/home-accueil-en.html
44	 Statistics Canada. 2022. “Human Activity and the Environment 2021: Accounting for ecosystem change 
in Canada.” Accessed at: https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/pub/16-201-x/16-201-x2021001-eng.
pdf?st=81lXc2zi 
45	 Statistics Canada. 2022. “Canadian System of Environmental-Economic Accounts - Ecosystem Accounts.” 
Accessed at: https://www23.statcan.gc.ca/imdb/p2SV.pl?Function=getSurvey&amp;SDDS=5331 
To find out more:
Joanna Eyquem PGeo. ENV SP. CWEM. CEnv.
Managing Director, Climate-Resilient Infrastructure
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
514-268-0873 | joanna.eyquem@uwaterloo.ca
www.intactcentre.ca | Twitter @ICCA_Canada
