Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011) 369, 217–241
doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0271
REVIEW
The role of interactions in a world
implementing adaptation and mitigation
solutions to climate change
BY RACHEL WARREN*
Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, University of East Anglia,
Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK
The papers in this volume discuss projections of climate change impacts upon humans
and ecosystems under a global mean temperature rise of 4◦C above preindustrial levels.
Like most studies, they are mainly single-sector or single-region-based assessments.
Even the multi-sector or multi-region approaches generally consider impacts in sectors
and regions independently, ignoring interactions. Extreme weather and adaptation
processes are often poorly represented and losses of ecosystem services induced by
climate change or human adaptation are generally omitted. This paper addresses
this gap by reviewing some potential interactions in a 4◦C world, and also makes
a comparison with a 2◦C world. In a 4◦C world, major shifts in agricultural land
use and increased drought are projected, and an increased human population might
increasingly be concentrated in areas remaining wet enough for economic prosperity.
Ecosystem services that enable prosperity would be declining, with carbon cycle feedbacks
and ﬁre causing forest losses. There is an urgent need for integrated assessments
considering the synergy of impacts and limits to adaptation in multiple sectors and
regions in a 4◦C world. By contrast, a 2◦C world is projected to experience about
one-half of the climate change impacts, with concomitantly smaller challenges for
adaptation. Ecosystem services, including the carbon sink provided by the Earth’s forests,
would be expected to be largely preserved, with much less potential for interaction
processes to increase challenges to adaptation. However, demands for land and water
for biofuel cropping could reduce the availability of these resources for agricultural
and natural systems. Hence, a whole system approach to mitigation and adaptation,
considering interactions, potential human and species migration, allocation of land
and water resources and ecosystem services, will be important in either a 2◦C or
a 4◦C world.
Keywords: climate change; integrated assessment modelling; adaptation;
extreme weather events; ecosystem services; biodiversity
*r.warren@uea.ac.uk
One contribution of 13 to a Theme Issue ‘Four degrees and beyond: the potential for a global
temperature increase of four degrees and its implications’.
This journal is © 2011 The Royal Society
217
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
218
R. Warren
1. Introduction
The projections of climate change impacts under a 4◦C mean global temperature
rise contained in this volume, like most other assessments of future climate change
impacts, generally consider impacts in each sector and region independently. Such
projections often consider a set (or sets) of future socioeconomic futures, some
of which may include a level of mitigation action. This is useful to indicate
the levels of impacts that might occur, with and without mitigation, but the
utility of such projections would be greatly improved by increased consideration
of the interactions between sectoral and regional processes, including human
adaptation to climate change impacts, as well as mitigation actions. Such
interactions may have profound consequences for the future wellbeing of human
and natural capital, particularly for global temperature rises as large as 4◦C
(relative to preindustrial levels). Many of these interactions are currently not
considered, or not well integrated, into quantitative estimations of potential
consequences of climate change, or of beneﬁts of mitigation action. This is
especially true given the potentially important feedback processes in the Earth
system becoming evident through observations, yet not currently adequately
simulated by global circulation models (GCMs). Such feedbacks could greatly
exacerbate impacts for a given greenhouse gas emission scenario beyond those
estimated by models.
This review provides a brief summary of some climate change impact estimates
from this volume and elsewhere, comparing impacts under 4◦C of global mean
temperature rise (hereafter referred to as ‘a 4◦C world’) with those under 2◦C
(hereafter referred to as ‘a 2◦C world’). It discusses prominent examples of eight
types of potentially signiﬁcant interactions and the degree to which they have
been handled in various modelling approaches. It does not, however, provide
complete coverage of all types of interactions, or of all possible interactions
within each type. It notes that these processes might be excluded from modelling
exercises because of an inability to quantify the strength of the interaction, and
also because of ignorance of the importance of interactions between disparate
disciplines. It also suggests potential ways forward in modelling these interactions.
The types of interactions considered are:
— climate change-induced impacts in one sector affecting other sectors in the
same region;
— human adaptation to climate change-induced impacts in one sector
affecting other sectors in the same region;
— climate change impacts in one region having consequences for other
regions;
— climate change mitigation and adaptation involving changes in land use,
which then interacts in a complex fashion with climate change and its
impacts;
— impacts in different sectors coincident in the same region having disastrous
consequences therein;
— projected increases in extreme weather events exacerbating climate change
impacts;
— interactions within sectors that are not combined in analyses; and
— feedback processes that could exacerbate climate change impacts.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
219
Table 1. Typology of IAMs focusing on their potential for representation of interactions
between climate change impacts in various sectors, and between climate change impacts and
mitigation/adaptation processes.
potential to represent
interactions
none
low
high
question to which
typically applied/
for which designed
cost–beneﬁt analysis
scenario analysis or
tolerable windows
approach
scenario analysis
representation of
climate change
impacts
simple, either global
(PAGE) or regional;
sectoral detail only in
FUND
look-up tables based on
process-based model
output
process based
representation of
global economy
detailed
detailed
detailed
examples
FUND, PAGE,
MERGE,
DICE/RICE
ICLIPS, AIM
IMAGE, CIAS,
GCAM
There are thousands of studies examining impacts on a single sector within a
single region with no interactions. When considering impacts holistically at a
global scale, Parry [1] provides one of the ﬁrst studies providing a consistent
assessment across global regions and sectors. This study used the full consistent
set of SRES emissions scenarios [2], consistent downscaled climate scenarios and
up-to-date climate and impact models.
Integrated assessment models (IAMs) were developed to encompass an inter-
disciplinary approach to the study of climate change and climate change policy.
Goodess et al. [3] provide a full review and categorization of these models. A brief
summary of the types of models is given here (table 1).
Biophysically based IAMs such as IMAGE, AIM, ICLIPS, GCAM and
CLIMPACTS ([3] and references therein) variously examine sectors and/or
regions of the world, spanning multiple disciplines, and thus theoretically allowing
models to capture interactions between sectors. However, few have yet exploited
their full potential to study interactions. Hence, table 1 refers to the potential
for IAMs to represent interactions, rather than whether they actually do, or have
done so. Representation of impacts varies signiﬁcantly between these frameworks.
In the case of IMAGE, they are detailed and include interactions such as carbon
cycle-induced terrestrial vegetation die-back owing to climate change (leading to
an accelerated rate of climate change), links between climate change, land-use
change and changes to agricultural systems, and demographics [4]. In others,
such as ICLIPS and AIM, look-up tables relating impacts to climate variables
are used. This precludes detailed interaction between underlying impact model
components. The CIAS integrated modelling framework [5] is designed to handle
interactions between sectors.
Studies considering climate change impacts in a holistic fashion within
or without an IA framework allow estimation of climate change impacts at
a regional scale, and, in some cases, a relatively high spatial resolution.
However, simple integrated models focusing on cost–beneﬁt analysis provide only
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
220
R. Warren
global-scale estimates. Such models typically represent climate change impacts
as a combination of market and non-market economic damages, not in physical
metrics [6], and do not consider the interactions listed earlier. Arguably, the
most useful application of such models is in probabilistic analyses [7,8]. Such
models use simple equations to detail the relationship between monetized impacts
and temperature. The damage function shape used is theoretical and is often
based on an arbitrary choice of function. Speciﬁcally, market damages are
quadratic in DICE/RICE [9] and MERGE [10], between linear and cubic in
a probabilistic fashion in PAGE, and take a variety of theoretical forms in
FUND. Only FUND’s damage functions take into account the rate of temperature
change as well as its magnitude (in the agricultural and ecosystem sectors
only). However, the representation of the climate system in some of these simple
models often is not consistent [11] with that of the Intergovernmental Panel of
Climate Change (IPCC) [12]; for example, FUND shows smaller temperature
responses to reducing emissions than IPCC simulations, and PAGE assumes
strong carbon cycle feedbacks. Modellers have updated their code to remove
these inconsistencies [13,14]. While only FUND is sector-speciﬁc [7], interactions
between sectors are not considered. Non-market damages are estimated through a
willingness-to-pay approach, while only PAGE explicitly simulates adaptation [8].
Damage functions tend to be calibrated using studies of climate change impacts
in the USA, scaled to represent impacts in other regions. In FUND, impacts cause
only instantaneous damage, hence ignoring permanent loss of ecosystem services.
Mastrandrea [6] discusses these issues in further detail.
Although some key insights about some interaction processes have been
obtained from biophysically based IAMs (and these are highlighted in the review),
only a small number of processes has so far been studied. This paper addresses
this gap by considering a much wider range of potential interactions and their
possible consequences.
2. Types of interactions
(a) How impacts in one sector could affect another sector in the same region
While some of the interactions between impacts in different sectors in the same
location are commonly considered, others are not. Models simulating changes in
crop yields generally take into account changes in precipitation and soil moisture,
thus linking change in the agricultural and hydrological sectors. However, other
interactions, such as the ways in which loss of ecosystem services affect human
systems, are rarely considered. I attempt to divide interactions into those
generally included in physically based modelling approaches and those rarely
included. Table 2 summarizes the interactions discussed.
(i) Some interactions between sectors affected by climate change that are generally
covered in physically based impact models
Hydrology has a strong interaction with agriculture through water availability.
However, the relationship between (daily) precipitation and soil moisture is
not constant and, therefore, hydrological processes need to be, and often
are, incorporated into process-based models designed to simulate climate
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
221
change impacts upon agriculture. Models such as CERESWheat [15] simulate
physiological processes in plant development, growth and evapotranspiration,
using
detailed
soil
composition
data
to
derive
water
availability.
They
underlie prominent analyses of global and regional climate change impacts on
agriculture [1,16]. Other models relying on the hedonic method [17,18] assume
that projected future regional precipitation and temperature may be used as
proxies for agro-economical output. Here, the relationship between precipitation
and soil moisture is assumed constant and hence hydrological processes are
ignored [19].
Impacts on agriculture affect human health, largely through the potential
for malnutrition, and hence a few studies have estimated millions at risk of
hunger resulting from climate change impacts on crops [1,4,20]. Here, changes
in yields produced by CERES crop models are aggregated to generate national
cereal production estimates for input to a world food trade model that balances
demand and supply of food according to per capita gross domestic product
(GDP). However, most studies only provide estimates of yield reductions, without
analysing changes in production or trade [21].
Changes in hydrology can also directly affect human health, through mortality
(which tends to fall with rising GDP [22], water stress or loss of livelihoods), and
hydrological changes are used in estimating potential future millions of people
at risk of water stress [23,24]. Similarly persons at risk from ﬂuvial and coastal
ﬂooding have been estimated using detailed spatially downscaled projections of
future populations [1,25].
The impacts of sea-level rise upon coasts will interact with coastal ecosystems
causing globally signiﬁcant losses of coastal wetlands, saltmarsh and mangroves
(e.g. [26,27]). It will also interact with the agricultural sector through inundation,
with case studies illustrating effects in a number of vulnerable regions (e.g.
[25,28,29]) and for the globe as a whole [30]. However, standard approaches to
the simulation of agriculture impacts (e.g. [1,20]) do not include losses owing
to salinization or inundation.
(ii) Some interactions between sectors affected by climate change that are generally
not included in physically based impact models
Loss or disruption of natural ecosystems can lead to a breakdown of ecosystem
functioning, leading to a loss of ecosystem services [32]. The large proportion
of species is at risk of extinction from climate change (e.g. 40% of species
studied in a 4◦C world; table 3); together with the effects of increased extreme
events, such as drought and forest losses due to ﬁre, this means that such
services are at risk. These include the water puriﬁcation provided by wetlands,
the puriﬁcation of air provided by forests, the protection of coastal areas
from storm surges by mangroves and coral reefs, the regulation of pests and
disease, the recycling of waste nutrients and the removal of carbon from the
atmosphere [32,33].
In the USA, at least half of the medicines used today derive from natural
sources and 116 out of 158 new drugs licensed between 1998 and 2002 were derived
from natural origins [34]. However, only 1 per cent of known plants have been
analysed for their potential use in medicine. Animals and microbes also make
vital contributions, and the exploration of the potential of marine organisms is
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
222
R. Warren
Table 2. A variety of examples of cross-sectoral interactions: x-axis—driving sector, which incurs climate change impacts directly; y-axis—the incumbent
sector, which incurs impacts indirectly as a result of the changes in the driving sector. Each example is followed by a (y) or an (n) indicating whether
the driving sector impact has been quantiﬁed at all; secondly a (y) or an (n) indicating whether the effect of the interaction upon the incumbent sector
has generally been included in physically based quantitative assessments of the impacts of climate change on the incumbent sector. Indirect effects
that impact upon the incumbent sector as a result of human adaptation to impacts in the driving sector are also included.
driving sector →
hydrology
agriculture
coasts
terrestrial
oceans
biodiversity
human
ecosystems
health
incumbent sector ↓
hydrology
∗∗∗∗∗
adaptation to
impacts
increasing
demand for
water (n, n)
—
changes in biome
type affect soil
moisture
content and
evapotranspiration
rates (some y, n)
—
as for terrestrial
ecosystems
—
agriculture and food
water stress
reducing crop
yields (y, y)
∗∗∗∗∗
farmland loss owing
to sea-level rise
and salinization
(y, n)
loss of carbon from
soils (y, n)
—
loss of pollinators
(some y, n); loss
of wild crop
types (y, n);
pests and
diseases (some
y, n)
—
coasts
changes in
nutrient levels
in estuaries
(n, n)
agricultural
intensiﬁcation
leading to
increased
nutrient
run-off (n, n)
∗∗∗∗∗
—
—
changes in coastal
ecosystems (y, n)
—
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
223
terrestrial
ecosystems
changes in
hydrology affect
soil moisture
content and
evaporation
rates (y, y)
land conversion
owing to shifts
in agricultural
production
(some y, n)
loss of saltmarsh
and mangroves
to sea-level rise
(y, y)
∗∗∗∗∗
—
loss of keystone
species
(some y, n)
spread in
mosquito-
borne
disease may
encourage
use of DDT
(n, n)
oceans
—
—
declines in
migratory
freshwater ﬁsh
(y, n)
∗∗∗∗∗
changes in marine
productivity
biodiversity
declines in species
(some y, some
y); construction
of dams disrupts
freshwater
ecosystems
agricultural
intensiﬁcation
reducing
biodiversity
(n, n)
loss of coastal
wetlands (y, n)
changes in net
primary
production affect
competition (e.g.
savannah/scrub,
lianas/trees)
(some y, some y)
loss of calcifying
species, potential
disruption of
marine ecosystem,
in particular (n, n)
∗∗∗∗∗
declines
owing to
DDT use
(n, n)
human health
water stress (y, y);
construction of
dams can lead
to outbreaks of
disease such as
malaria and
schistosomiasis
(n, n)
malnutrition
(y, y)
saltwater intrusion
threatening water
supplies; potential
for disease
post-coastal
ﬂooding (n, n)
loss of ecosystem
services, e.g. C
sinks, water
puriﬁcation,
coastal
protection; soil
erosion, nature
deﬁcit syndrome
(some y, n)
loss of ﬁsh stocks, loss
of livelihoods of
persons dependent
on coral reef ﬁsh
(y, y)
loss of medicinal
plants (n, n);
spread of
infectious disease
(y, y)
∗∗∗∗∗
settlements
and
infrastructure
subsidence (n, n);
construction of
dams can lead
to inundation of
settlements
(n, n)
—
damage owing to
storm surges
(y, y)
—
—
—
—
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
224
R. Warren
Table 3. Some projected quantitative estimates of climate change impacts at 4◦C about preindustrial levels under the A1B scenario in the 2080s taken
from this volume and elsewhere.
impact sector
projections at 4◦C above preindustrial
projections at 2◦C above preindustrial
sources
hydrology
15% world population exposed to water stress; 840
million people experience increase in water stress
globally; increase from present-day 1%, to future
30%, of global land area experiencing drought at any
one time
410 million people experience increase in water stress
globally; water stress reduced compared with 4◦C in
most river basins; in a small number where this is
not so, beneﬁts offset by changes in seasonality
[27,46,92]
agriculture and
food
50% of land on which crops currently grown becomes
unsuitable for cultivation; 15% of the globe’s dry land
currently suitable for cultivation becomes unsuitable;
20% of globe’s colder lands become suitable for
cultivation; limited adaptation options in
sub-Saharan Africa; threats to food security
32% of land on which crops currently grown becomes
unsuitable for cultivation; carefully planned
adaptation could maintain food security in
sub-Saharan Africa
[27,47]
coasts
sea-level rise of 0.5–2.0 m if occurs in 2100 (range
includes accelerated ice melt); for median sea-level
rise of approximately 0.47 m in 2100, i.e. excluding
accelerated ice melt (www.avoid.uk.net), more than
30-fold increase in population experiencing
coastal ﬂooding
low risk of accelerated ice melt; for median sea-level
rise of approximately 0.35 m in 2100, i.e. excluding
accelerated ice melt (www.avoid.uk.net); about a
15-fold increase in population experiencing
coastal ﬂooding
[25,27,87,
90]
ecosystems
functional extinction of coral reef ecosystems (converted
to algal mats); risks of extinction to approximately
40% species studied globally, including losses of iconic
species and associated ecotourism; disruption to
functioning of major global ecosystems, Arctic and
salvanization of Amazon rainforest; conversion of
terrestrial carbon sink to a source exacerbating
climate change; large increase in boreal and
Mediterranean ﬁre frequency; 50% of protected areas
cannot fulﬁl objective; major widespread loss of
ecosystem services worldwide
all coral reefs bleached; risks of extinction to
approximately 20% of species studied; some
increases in ﬁre frequency; damage to Arctic
ecosystem functioning; ecosystem services
reduced in some areas; Amazon forest largely
intact
[32,43,46,
80,93]
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
225
oceans
further mean acidiﬁcation by 0.26 pH units (in addition
to the present-day change of 0.1 units); risk of
disruption to marine ecosystems; risk of localized
ocean anoxia
further acidiﬁcation by up to 0.07 pH units;
some damage to marine ecosystems
[89,94,95]
extreme
weather
50% ﬂood-prone people exposed to increased hazard;
ﬂood-affected population rises to 544 million annually
(as deﬁned by those experiencing a present-day 1 in
100 year ﬂood)
25% ﬂood-prone people exposed to increased hazard;
ﬂood-affected population rises to 211 million
annually
[27,96]
human health
health hazards increasingly difﬁcult to control
hazards reduced
[51]
impacts of
feedback
processes in
the Earth
system
loss of terrestrial carbon sink and hence large-scale loss
of forests via dessication and ﬁre (potentially
including up to 50% Amazon (excluding
deforestation) and uncertain fraction of boreal forest)
much reduced risk of loss of terrestrial
carbon sink; Amazon likely to remain
largely intact
[32,52,77,89,
93,98,99]
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
226
R. Warren
just beginning. Hence, climate change impacts on ecosystems may threaten our
future ability to protect human health, especially as pathogens evolve resistance
to current treatments.
Disturbance to forests in proximity to human habitation can lead to increased
prevalence of disease. For example, Olson et al. [35] identiﬁed a 48 per cent
increase in malaria incidence associated with a loss of 4.3 per cent of forest cover
in a 3 year period. This can be via a reduction in populations of the disease
vector’s predators, or because of changing environmental conditions allowing
them to outcompete benign related species [36]. Modelling these interactions into
the future needs to be a priority for future research.
A signiﬁcant proportion of the world’s population is entirely dependent on ﬁsh.
Cheung et al. [37] report on dramatic turnovers in ﬁsh assemblages for climate
changes well below 4◦C, particularly in the Arctic and Antarctic, potentially
disrupting ecosystem functioning and numerous local extinctions in the subpolar
regions, the tropics and semi-enclosed seas. Communities particularly at risk from
changing ﬁsheries resources are on small reef islands on the rim of atolls such as
the Maldives [25].
Important linkages between climate change impacts on ecosystems and
those upon agricultural and other systems are generally omitted from impacts
assessments. For example, as bioclimatic envelopes of pest and disease vectors
change, new pests and diseases may invade systems, requiring new disease-
resistant crop varieties to maintain agricultural productivity [38]. Wild crop
genotypes are an important resource yet climate change impacts upon these
have only recently been considered [31]. However, quantifying potential risks to
food production owing to loss of wild crop genotypes is not currently feasible.
Several recent studies consider crop damage owing to pests in future decades [21]
and highlight the importance of interactions between CO2 concentrations and
temperature, and precipitation in determining the size of these effects. It would
be useful and feasible to explore ways to combine such projections with global
agricultural models of climate change impacts on crops, which typically omit
impacts of pests.
While many of the world’s staple crops reproduce vegetatively, or via wind
pollination, many others rely on pollinators. Over 80 per cent of the 264 crops
grown in the EU depend on insect pollination [38]. However, few pollinator
distributions have been modelled in relation to climate change. Quantifying
potential risks is difﬁcult because limited information exists on the relationship
between crops, their pollinators and climate change. It is recommended to collect
such information and carry out bioclimatic or ecophysiological modelling of
species, or species groups, identiﬁed as the key pollinators in relation to their
crops. Much more severe and more difﬁcult to model are the potential interactions
between wild species and pollinators.
(b) Interactions mediated by human adaptation to climate change
A key interaction omitted from modelling approaches is that between
impacts in one sector and adaptation by humans to impacts in another
sector. For example, there are potential consequences to health and ecosystem
sectors resulting from human adaptation in agricultural, hydrological and
coastal sectors.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
227
Human adaptation to climate change-induced water stress can include anything
from local collection of rainwater on buildings through the building of dams
to unsustainable increases in groundwater abstraction. Dam construction can
damage wetlands, inundate forests and may encourage reproduction of disease
agents by concentrating them in lakes close to human habitation, as has occurred
in Burkina Faso, Sudan and Egypt for schistosomiasis and malaria [36].
Even for small amounts of climate change it will become infeasible to continue
to grow presently used crop varieties in tropical or desert areas where crops
are already grown close to their thermal limits. By 4◦C, crops in many regions
are projected to be affected and adaptation over potentially large parts of the
globe may be needed (table 3). This could include switching to new crop types,
installing irrigation systems, agricultural intensiﬁcation, shifting agricultural
lands to new areas and/or the use of genetically modiﬁed crops resistant to
future climates [1,4,17,20]. Changes to irrigation practices may exacerbate water
stress and may reduce water supplies to wetlands, which themselves provide
key ecosystem services. Agricultural intensiﬁcation can have negative impacts,
including increases in nutrient run-off into rivers and estuaries, where it may
cause local anoxia and contribute to greenhouse gas emissions of N2O [12].
The wholesale shifting of agricultural lands has profound implications, as
discussed below.
Human adaptation responses to sea-level rise range from managed retreat,
building of dykes and construction of ﬂood barriers [26]. It is widely reported to
be cost-effective to protect major cities against a sea-level rise of up to 2 m, but
this, as the authors acknowledge, is only a partial analysis. The coastal protection
considered only safeguards cities and does not protect coastal infrastructure away
from cities, which may be extensive, nor does it avoid large-scale loss of coastal
wetlands, mangroves and saltmarshes. Building of dykes to protect towns may
be to the detriment of associated natural ecosystems [39], such as mangroves
and saltmarshes where many marine ﬁsh species spawn. Such ecosystems also
protect coastlines against storm surge and tsunamis [40]. Hence, cost-effectiveness
analyses for coastal protection need to include losses of these ecosystems and the
consequences for ﬁsheries and coastal infrastructure.
This volume contains some of the few studies of climate change impacts
considering climate change as great as 4◦C. Table 3 collates some of the estimates
appearing in this volume and elsewhere and compares them with estimates of
impacts at 2◦C. Several of these estimates are taken from the AVOID project [27].
Considering the large impacts in the agricultural, hydrological and ecosystem
sectors expected in a 4◦C world, future use of land and water would need to
be carefully planned, taking into account the needs of humans, agriculture and
ecosystems and their services.
In this context, limits (physical or ﬁnancial) to simultaneous adaptation in
multiple sectors need to be considered. The global cost of adapting to climate
change from 2010 to 2050 (2◦C) has been estimated to be $75–100 billion each
year [41]. In the agricultural sector, Easterling et al. [21] estimated that climate
change damages to wheat, rice and maize could be avoided by adaptation up
to a limit of a temperature increase of 1.5–3◦C in tropical regions and 4.5–5◦C
in temperate regions. Temperature changes of between 4 and 8◦C are projected
in the summer across various temperate and tropical regions for a global 4◦C
temperature rise [42]. This suggests that these adaptive capacities might be
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
228
R. Warren
exceeded, especially in the areas with the larger temperate rises such as the
USA, the Mediterranean and many parts of Africa [42]. Many of these studies
do not include damage caused by concomitant increases in tropospheric ozone
and extreme weather events, and so the estimated adaptive capacities might be
over-optimistic. For ecosystems, while adaptation to a 2◦C world is considered
feasible, the options for adapting, either naturally or with human assistance, to
a 4◦C world are extremely limited, since at these temperatures few ecosystems
would be expected to be able to maintain their current functioning [43].
(c) Cross-regional interactions
The mechanism by which climate change impacts in one region affect another
can be direct, in which losses of human or natural capital in one region affect
human or natural capital in another region, or indirect, in which the mechanism
is via mitigation or adaptation practices taking place in one region having
consequences for another. Declining agricultural yields in a given region can result
in increased demand to import food from other areas. Such changes in supply and
demand affect food prices globally [1,4,20].
Migration is already occurring away from some areas in response to
desertiﬁcation (Egypt) and ﬂooding (Mozambique and Vietnam; [44]). Two
billion people live in arid, semi-arid and sub-humid regions that are extremely
vulnerable to water supply loss [45]. One-third of the world’s population live
in areas already under water stress, with the area of the planet subject to
drought at any one time projected to dramatically increase ([46]; table 3). Some
of these water-stressed areas are expected to become agriculturally or agro-
economically non-viable. Table 3 shows the large numbers of people (some 800
million) exposed to increasing water stress, and 50 per cent of global cropland
projected to become less suitable or unsuitable for cultivation in a 4◦C world. In
sub-Saharan Africa migration to highlands is a likely consequence [47]. Migration
may be inevitable in areas where climate change will have a detrimental effect
on already water-stressed agricultural areas such as northeastern Brazil [48].
Coastal systems currently hold some 40 per cent of the global population, and
there is increasing immigration into these areas [25]. However, sea-level rises of
0.5–2.0 m are expected in a 4◦C world (table 3). One estimate of climate change-
induced migration suggests that 1.4–6.7 million Mexicans could migrate to the
USA as a direct result of climate change-induced crop failure by the 2080s [49].
Estimates from empirical data about past climate variability and migration rates
showed that a 10 per cent reduction in Mexican crop yields would lead to 2
per cent of the Mexican population emigrating. With larger reductions in crop
yields projected for many parts of the world, notwithstanding the unique cross-
border circumstances, this raises the potential for substantial human migrations,
raising concerns about international stability [50]. Large-scale migration will also
have impacts such as demand for land and water in the regions into which they
move, not included in current assessments of impacts. This will be particularly
important in a 4◦C world. The synergy of these impacts shown in table 3 could
induce dramatic changes in where people live and practise agriculture. Hunger,
starvation, conﬂict and population movement may be widespread [51].
There has been little study of the potential mechanisms for cross-regional
interaction in modelling exercises and a process-based simulation of migration
is
almost
certainly
infeasible
owing
to
the
complex
nature
of
personal
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
229
migration-related decision-making [52]. Rather, a scenario-based approach to
possible future migration patterns is recommended, so that climate impact
projections, already dependent on future downscaled population projections
(e.g. [1]), can be made consistent with scenarios for population movement.
An estimated 50 per cent of the impacts on water stress and crop suitability
could be avoided by constraining climate change to 2◦C (table 3; [27]). In this
situation, the potential for large-scale migration and displacement agriculture
will therefore be less and potentially more likely to remain within the adaptive
capacity of the human and natural systems concerned.
(d) Climate change mitigation and land-use change
Changes in land use can have large impacts on the global and local climate.
For example, deforestation releases carbon from removed vegetation and soils,
and the surface albedo changes signiﬁcantly. Forests such as the Amazon ‘recycle’
their water and hence forest loss can contribute to drying [53]. Climate change
mitigation could involve signiﬁcant reductions in deforestation as this is regarded
as one of the most cost-effective methods of reducing emissions, and there is
widespread consideration of the introduction of a political mechanism for so-doing
(Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation; REDD).
However, human adaptation to climate change impacts might induce shifts of
agriculture away from drying areas and into areas currently covered by forests.
Hence, projections of impacts on ecosystems might be exacerbated by further
conversion of natural ecosystems to agricultural systems (table 2). This can have
additional implications for human health, by creating conditions under which
disease vectors thrive close to human habitation [36].
Afforestation can also contribute to climate change mitigation through
carbon sequestration, with positive or negative implications for biodiversity and
ecosystem services. Attempts to create forests in areas currently supporting high
non-forest biodiversity, or by using non-native tree species, can have a negative
impact on native biodiversity, and may not succeed since soils may not be suitable.
Planting of native trees in previously degraded or deforested areas is beneﬁcial
to biodiversity and ecosystem services, and can enhance connectivity in forest
ecosystems, aiding in adaptation [43]. Beneﬁts of afforestation accrue slowly over
the long time scales required to recapture the carbon lost from an area that has
originally been deforested [54]. For this reason, 1 ha of afforestation does not
effectively compensate for 1 ha of deforestation and this is an important factor in
the interaction of climate change mitigation and land-use planning.
A 4◦C world would induce changes in the distribution of the human population,
its diet, its agricultural systems and its ecosystems, concentrating all three in
areas remaining sufﬁciently wet. The study of these interactions is still in its
infancy. IMAGE has been used to explore agricultural trade liberalization in
the context of climate change, showing how it would encourage expansion of
agricultural land in Latin America and southern Africa, increasing pressure
on ecosystems [4]. The cost of reaching 2050 emissions reduction goals (80%
lower than 2000 levels) could be cut by 50 per cent if agricultural production
transitioned from meat-based to plant-based diets, based on the abandonment of
2700 Mha of pastureland and also from reductions in greenhouse gas emissions
from agriculture [55]. Efforts to assist natural ecosystems to adapt to climate
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
230
R. Warren
change include enhancing connectivity between areas. Spatial planning issues
connected with planned adaptation in agricultural and human systems will need
to be integrated with adaptation of ecosystems and ecosystem services.
Stringent mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions will require large-scale
deployment of renewable energy generation and/or biomass cropping. Both of
these have signiﬁcant interactions with land use. For biofuel or biomass cropping,
the land required for this must displace either agricultural land, marginal land or
natural ecosystems [56]. This displacement of agricultural land may be increased
by the negative climate change impacts on sugarcane yields [57]. Displacement
of agricultural land will inﬂuence world food supply and prices, as has already
occurred during the food price crisis of 2007/2008 [58], and will have impacts
for risks of malnutrition. Holistic management of both fossil fuel emissions and
the terrestrial biosphere through expansion of forests and unmanaged ecosystems
would lower mitigation costs [59], but food prices could rise owing to the pressure
on agricultural land. If, instead, shifting (adapting) agricultural systems causes
deforestation or unmanaged ecosystem loss, this will reduce the resilience of
ecosystems to climate change. Similarly, biofuel cropping, nuclear power plants
and carbon capture and storage plants all require large amounts of water.
Thus, mitigation efforts have potential complex interactions with climate change
impacts on agriculture and ecosystems.
Key interactions also occur between climate change and the operation of
renewable energy in the future, and between land-use planning and the siting
of renewable energy plants. A major beneﬁt of mitigation is the protection
of vulnerable people and ecosystems from climate change, and unintentional
negative impacts of renewable energy schemes can be prevented by careful siting
of plant. Deployment of renewable energy, nuclear power, and carbon capture and
storage schemes needs to be planned around future climates, rather than making
an assumption that current wind, water or solar resources will be available for
some decades in the same location in the future. Careful assessment can avoid
potential ‘mal-mitigation’ where mitigation efforts could either fail entirely or
produce largely avoidable local negative side effects.
(e) Regionally coincident impacts
Spatially coincident impacts in different sectors could have a disproportionate
effect on the human population and ecosystems of a given region. Many climate
change projections refer to large regions, while on the ground a diverse pattern
of gains and losses may exist within an overall picture of regional loss. However,
impacts that occur in the same region, even if not precisely spatially coincident,
may have a disproportionate effect on a region’s economy owing to multiple
stresses placed upon the system. The IPCC [46] reports on coincident hunger, sea-
level rise and water resource scarcity impacts in Asia; and coincident water stress
and malnutrition in Africa. Since most of the literature assessed by the IPCC [46]
refers to global temperature rises of less than 4◦C, such coincident impacts would
be expected to be much more widespread and severe in a 4◦C world.
(f ) Extreme weather events
In the coming decades, one of the most serious impacts of climate change
is projected to be the consequences of the projected increases in extreme
weather events. For example, climate change-induced changes in precipitation
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
231
patterns and changes in climate variability would increase the area of the globe
experiencing drought at any one time from today’s 1 per cent to a future 30
per cent by the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century [46]. An increasing number of
studies now project global trends in how extremes will change in the future
using GCM and/or regional climate model (RCM) output (e.g. [60,61]). However,
uncertainties in these projections are large, particularly for precipitation, with
some changes of opposite sign. Some studies have focused on the regional
uncertainties of projecting extremes, in particular for projection of increased
European drought (e.g. [62,63] and references therein). Limited work exists for
other continents.
Few studies examine the potential consequences of these increases in extreme
weather upon individual sectors and/or regions, but these could be signiﬁcant.
Only a few days of high temperatures near ﬂowering in wheat, groundnut and
soybean can drastically reduce yield [64], while maize losses could potentially
double owing to ﬂoods in the USA [65]; and the AVOID study [27] estimated
that, in a 4◦C world, 50 per cent of ﬂuvial ﬂood-prone people would be exposed
to increased ﬂood risk compared with approximately 25 per cent in a 2◦C world.
Biophysical IAMs and other regionally and sectorally speciﬁc climate change
impact models can simulate changes in the frequency and the intensity of extreme
weather events if:
— the impact model is formulated to take account of, for example, the effect
of continuous periods of dry days or dry months (for long-term drought), or
the number of days over which temperatures exceed a particular threshold
(for heatwaves), or daily time series of rainfall (for heavy precipitation
events). Many process-based physical impact models require climate inputs
in the form of a daily time series. Simple IAMs are not capable of
representing such processes in detail, although PAGE attempts to provide
a scenario that accounts for increases in extremes. Cumulative distribution
functions might be constructed from statistical relationships between
extremes and predictor variables used in these simple IAMs [3], enabling
them to better represent the impacts of extremes.
— the climate change projections provided to the model are at the
appropriate temporal resolution (monthly for droughts, and daily for
most other extreme weather events), and include projected increases
in extremes. Considering probability distributions (pdf) of climatic
parameters, extreme events may increase for: a shift in the mean climate; a
shift in the variance; or an increase in its skewness. For example, monthly
future climates can be produced by pattern-scaling GCM outputs as in
SCENGEN [66], after which a weather generator derives a daily time series.
In these studies, changes in the frequency of extreme weather events can
only occur as a result of changes in mean climate and as a result of changes
in variability or skewness. However, the approach can capture long-term
droughts since the monthly changes in precipitation derived from the
GCM patterns are incorporated in the analyses [63]. New approaches in
ClimGEN and/or the further development of weather generators may allow
representation of changes in variability and/or skewness in biophysical
IAMs [3,66,67].
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
232
R. Warren
(g) Interactions within sectors generally not combined within analyses
Dynamic global vegetation models (DGVMs) and bioclimate envelope models
are commonly used to project climate change impacts on ecosystems. DGVMs
consider the cycling of biomass, carbon, nutrients and water between ecosystems
and the atmosphere, using detailed land-surface schemes that capture interactions
in detail [68]. However, they model ecosystems as plant functional types and
do not consider responses of individual species. In contrast, bioclimatic models
use empirical statistical correlations between meteorological variables and species
presence [69,70] to derive predictors for species distributions. Such predictors
appear to work well at large scales—with precipitation and temperature variables
being tied to direct and indirect processes.
However, DGVMs treat ecosystems simply as a functional type, so that impacts
on biodiversity are not adequately assessed, while the bioclimatic envelope
approach is generally applied to one species at a time and interactions between
species are not considered. A few studies examine the combined effects of climate
change on plants and their pollinators [71] or on predators and their prey, or on
how the spread of disease might induce extinction of some species (e.g. [72]).
Attempts by one species to survive a changed climate by moving to higher
latitudes and altitudes might result in that species becoming invasive in the
new environment it has colonized. However, for the majority of species, the
effects of climate change on such interactions have not been considered, and
this is potentially signiﬁcant in terms of unforeseen disruption to ecosystem
functioning [73].
Climate change impacts to forest trees have been estimated by both DGVMs
and bioclimatic models (e.g. [67,74,75]), while at the same time other models are
used to project future incidence of forest ﬁre (e.g. [76–78]), while still others
simulate outbreaks of pests [79]. In a 4◦C world, soil carbon cycle feedback
processes are projected to lead to widespread forest loss, especially in the Amazon
(e.g. [78,79]). These simultaneous effects have not yet been combined in any
quantitative analysis, but overall must lead to a more pessimistic view.
Climate change impacts on species have been widely calculated (Warren
et al. [80] present a meta-analysis), but there are only limited studies on keystone
species that affect overall ecosystem functioning. For example, potential declines
in krill, a keystone species in the Southern Ocean, have been identiﬁed [81] and
this will have impacts on many other species. Ocean acidiﬁcation threatens the
potential for coral reefs, coccolithiphores, molluscs and other shell-forming ocean
inhabitants to survive [82,83]. Only for coral reefs has this research been combined
with impacts of increases in sea surface temperature in projecting thresholds for
survival [84]. Changes in marine productivity might well be expected as the ocean
acidiﬁes, and the consequences of this are unknown [46]. Similarly, projected
climate change impacts on ﬁsh [37] include climate change impacts on larval
dispersal but omit loss of nursery habitat.
In agricultural systems, the wide range of studies reviewed by the IPCC [46]
variously include CO2 fertilization effects (in some cases with appropriate
treatment of uncertainty therein), methods of adaptation, the potential for
agriculture to move to new areas and global trade in crops. However, no single
approach incorporates all of these features. As mentioned earlier, it would be
useful to explore how climate change-induced projected increases in outbreaks
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
233
of agricultural pests and diseases could be incorporated in agricultural models.
Increases in fossil fuel burning also lead to increases in tropospheric ozone
levels that damage crops and trees—also not generally included in models
assessing climate change impacts on agriculture or ecosystems [1,20,85]. However,
increases in tropospheric ozone and their impacts on crops and trees have
been projected independently (Felzer et al. [86] review recent studies) and it
would not be difﬁcult to combine such models. Tropospheric ozone also damages
human health, highlighting the need to combine assessments of climate change
damage with those of the air pollution resulting from the emission of the
same pollutants.
(h) Feedback processes in the Earth system
While many feedback processes are represented in global climate change models
and thus indirectly in the simple models emulating them, recent observations are
showing that some processes, in particular the melting of Greenland and West
Antarctic Ice Sheets and the Arctic sea ice, are proceeding more rapidly than
in models [87,88]. This indicates that the Earth may be more sensitive to the
current levels of warming than GCMs are projecting. A more signiﬁcant potential
feedback is the release of marine methane hydrates. This could result in a
progressive release, over a 1000–100 000 year time scale, of about twice the amount
of fossil fuel carbon emitted [89]. The potential release rate on shorter time scales
has not been estimated but could exacerbate warming, as could the currently
increasing release of methane from permafrost [90]. Other feedback processes
such as changes in albedo as a result of climate change-induced forest dieback, or
increased desertiﬁcation, are included in some GCMs [53]. However, some climate
change impacts such as losses of forest owing to pine-bark or spruce-budworm
attack, in combination with increased incidence of ﬁre, might alter albedo in
some areas. Such an interaction could usefully be modelled. As knowledge about
the processes underlying feedbacks in the Earth system improves, they can be
included in GCMs and thus be reﬂected also in projections of climate change
impacts. Finally, climate change impacts are projected to cause reductions in
economic growth, with estimated losses depending on the assumed discount rate,
and rising as high as 5–20% of GDP [91]. Such losses might reduce anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions: an effect potentially much larger than any increase
in emissions caused by additional demand for air conditioning. However, models
that provide integrated assessment of climate change impacts and the economy [1]
generally represent climate change impacts poorly and usually omit Earth system
feedback effects entirely [6].
3. Discussion
Table 3 shows that a 4◦C world would be facing enormous adaptation challenges
in the agricultural sector, with large areas of cropland becoming unsuitable for
cultivation, and declining agricultural yields. This world would also rapidly be
losing its ecosystem services, owing to large losses in biodiversity, forests, coastal
wetlands, mangroves and saltmarshes, and terrestrial carbon stores, supported
by an acidiﬁed and potentially dysfunctional marine ecosystem. Drought and
desertiﬁcation would be widespread, with large numbers of people experiencing
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
234
R. Warren
increased water stress, and others experiencing changes in seasonality of water
supply. There would be a need to shift agricultural cropping to new areas,
impinging on unmanaged ecosystems and decreasing their resilience; and large-
scale adaptation to sea-level rise would be necessary. Human and natural systems
would be subject to increasing levels of agricultural pests and diseases, and
increases in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events.
In such a 4◦C world, the limits for human adaptation are likely to be exceeded
in many parts of the world, while the limits for adaptation for natural systems
would largely be exceeded throughout the world. Hence, the ecosystem services
upon which human livelihoods depend would not be preserved. Even though
some studies have suggested that adaptation in some areas might still be feasible
for human systems, such assessments have generally not taken into account
lost ecosystem services. Climate change impacts, especially drought and sea-
level rise, are likely to lead to human migration as people attempt to seek
livelihoods elsewhere.
This paper has highlighted the further challenges presented by the interactions
between climate change impacts, in which coincident or interacting impacts
within and between sectors and regions may present a greater challenge than
the sum of the challenge of adapting to each impact in each region if these
were independent. It has drawn attention to the interaction between human
adaptation processes and impacts in various sectors. Importantly, it has also
highlighted the interaction between climate change impacts upon terrestrial and
coastal ecosystems and human sectors such as agriculture and human health.
These interaction processes will increase as their drivers increase, and will be
much more signiﬁcant in a 4◦C world than in a 2◦C world.
Were global average temperatures to rise by 2◦C and not increase further,
some 50 per cent of the impacts to human systems could potentially be prevented
(table 3 and [27]), and ecosystem services would, in large part, be expected to be
generally preserved (table 3). While some areas would experience drying, as table
3 shows the impacts on agriculture and hydrology, and sea-level rise, would be
expected to be much lower than in the 4◦C case, and similarly the challenge to
adaptation to these effects and their interactions would also be much lower. Local-
scale damage to some ecosystems, including extinctions, and disruption to coral
reef and ice-based ecosystems would still be expected, but the worst losses might
be prevented. Conservation planning might be able to assist with the adaptation
of natural ecosystems to this level of temperature rise.
The role of land-use change at the nexus between climate change mitigation
and adaptation and agricultural and natural ecosystems has been highlighted,
with particular reference to biofuel cropping, agricultural intensiﬁcation and
diet. The spatial planning of land use when attempting to simultaneously adapt
agricultural, human, coastal and natural ecosystems to a changing climate, with
or without signiﬁcant mitigation, has been highlighted as very important. This
will be particularly important for mitigation planning when aiming for a 2◦C
world. Such an approach might be termed ‘ecosystem-based mitigation’.
Only a limited proportion of these interactions is currently captured by
modelling processes, in particular the simple IAMs commonly used for cost–
beneﬁt analysis. While some interactions appear too uncertain to capture within
models (e.g. with human migration), there is a need to represent others, especially
the possible consequences of large-scale adaptation. Process-based IAMs such as
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
235
IMAGE, CIAS and GCAM are best prepared to assess these interactions and
IMAGE and GCAM have already been applied to examine some of the links
between land-use change, climate change and agricultural systems.
As climate changes, the drier regions of the planet are projected to become
less and less habitable owing to increases in drought and desertiﬁcation. Many
humans and ecosystems would be expected to be forced to adapt by attempting
to move into areas remaining sufﬁciently wet and not inundated by sea-level
rise. This would result in a concentration of the human population, agriculture
and remaining biodiversity in a contracting land area, leading to increasing
competition for land and water. Integrated models could usefully be applied to
determine when land and water supplies may become insufﬁcient to satisfy the
needs of human systems and the ecosystem services (such as wetlands, forests
and biodiversity in general) supporting livelihoods.
4. Conclusion
This paper has highlighted the complexity of a 4◦C world and the wide-ranging
consequences of direct and indirect human and natural impacts and adaptation
to climate change. Only a limited number of these interactions has so far been
captured by models.
Any attempt to debate an acceptable level of mitigation for global greenhouse
gas emissions needs to take into account not only the projected climate change
impacts but also the considered limits to adaptation in each sector and region;
the potential for interactions between the impacts; the potential consequences of
adaptation in one sector on other sectors and regions; whether there is sufﬁcient
land and water to deliver the required combination of adaptation and mitigation;
and how land use, agricultural and climate policies are inextricably linked.
This highlights the need for ecosystem-based mitigation as well as ecosystem-
based adaptation. Lack of consideration of such key linkages risks a signiﬁcant
underestimation of the challenge that simultaneous adaptation in multiple sectors
and regions at multiple scales, while subject to ever-increasing extreme weather,
presents. Consideration of such linkages thus adds signiﬁcantly to the incentive
to avoid a 4◦C world.
While the impacts of climate change are projected to be smaller and
less widespread for global mean temperature rises of 2◦C as opposed to
4◦C, interactions between mitigation processes and adaptation and climate
change impacts, and the resultant demands for land and water, will be of
great importance.
Issues of land-use change and human migration are currently inadequately
addressed in most studies, and there is a fundamental lack of incorporation of the
role of ecosystem services. This review has suggested how modelling approaches
might be improved to cover interactions more fully, while recommending that
processes such as migration need to be handled using a scenario approach. Other
omitted interactions are too difﬁcult to quantify or to combine with mainstream
sectoral studies and need to be combined qualitatively with modelling approaches.
The context of the potential for large-scale feedbacks in the Earth system to
exacerbate climate change and consequent impacts and interactions for any given
future emission scenario beyond levels currently estimated by state-of-the-art
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
236
R. Warren
modelling approaches needs to be taken into account. Such feedbacks are
much more likely to operate in a 4◦C world, potentially increasing global
mean temperature rise still further. These risks would be much reduced in
a 2◦C world.
Table 3’s synthesis of impacts in a 2◦C and 4◦C world includes results produced by the AVOID
project (www.avoid.uk.net), which is funded by the UK Department of the Environment, Food
and Rural Affairs.
References
1 Parry, M. (ed.) 2004 An assessment of the global effects of climate change under SRES
emissions and socioeconomic conditions. Glob. Environ. Change 14.
2 Nakicenovic, N. & Swart, R. 2000 Special report on emissions scenarios. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
3 Goodess, C. M., Hanson, C., Hulme, M. & Osborn, T. J. 2003 Representing climate and
extreme weather events in integrated assessment models: a review of existing methods and
options for development. Integr. Assess. 4, 145–171. (doi:10.1076/iaij.4.3.145.23772)
4 MNP. 2006 An overview of IMAGE 2.4. In Integrated modelling of global environmental change.
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (MNP) (eds A. F. Bouwman, T. Kram &
K. Klein Goldewijk). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Bilthoven.
5 Warren, R. et al. 2008 Development of the community integrated assessment system
(CIAS), a multi-institutional modular integrated assessment approach for modelling climate
change, and of SoftIAM, its supporting software. Environ. Model. Soft. 23, 592–610.
(doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2007.09.015)
6 Mastrandrea, M. D. 2009 Calculating the beneﬁts of climate policy: examining the assumptions
of integrated assessment models. Pew Center for Climate Change Report. See http://www.
pewclimate.org/beneﬁts-workshop/mastrandrea-calculating-beneﬁts-of-climate-policy.
7 Tol, R. S. J. 1999 Safe policies in an uncertain climate: an application of FUND. Glob. Environ.
Change 9, 221–232. (doi:10.1016/S0959-3780(99)00011-4)
8 Hope, C. 2006 The marginal impact of CO2 from PAGE2002: an integrated assessment model
incorporating the IPCC’s ﬁve reasons for concern. Integr. Assess. 6, 19–56.
9 Nordhaus, W. D & Boyer, M. 2000 Warming the world: economic models of global warming.
Cambridge: MIT.
10 Manne, A., Mendelsohn, R. & Richels, R. 1995 A model for evaluating regional and
global effects of greenhouse policies. Energy Policy 23, 17–24. (doi:10.1016/0301-4215(95)
90763-W)
11 Warren, R., Mastrandrea, M., Hope, C. & Hof, A. 2010 Variation in the climatic response of
integrated models. Clim. Change 102, 671–685. (doi:10.1007/s10584-009-9769-x)
12 IPCC. 2007 Climate change 2007: the physical science basis. In Contribution of Working Group
I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC (eds S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, M.
Marquis, K. Averyt, M. M. B. Tignor, H. Le Roy Miller Jr & Z. Chen). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
13 Anthoff, D. & Tol, R. S. J. 2009 Fund technical description. See http://www.fnu.zmaw.de/
ﬁleadmin/fnu-ﬁles/staff/tol/FundTechnicalDescription.pdf.
14 Hope, C. 2009 How deep should the deep cuts be? Optimal CO2 emissions over time under
uncertainty. Clim. Policy 9, 3–8. (doi:10.3763/cpol.2008.0544)
15 Ritchie, J. T. & Otter, S. 1995 Description and performance of CERESWheat: a user oriented
wheat-yield model. In ARS Wheat Yield Project (ed. W. O. Willis), pp. 159–175. ARS-38.
Washington, DC: Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service.
16 Mearns, L. (ed.) 2003 Issues in the impacts of climate variability and change on agriculture.
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
237
17 Mendelsohn, R. & Neumann, J. (eds) 1999 The impact of climate change on the United States
economy. Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.
18 Darwin, R. 2004 Effects of greenhouse gas emissions on world agriculture, food consumption,
and
economic
welfare.
Clim.
Change
66,
191–238.
(doi:10.1023/B:CLIM.0000043138.
67784.27)
19 Schneider, S. 1997 Integrated assessment modelling of global climate change: transparent
rational tool for policy making or opaque screen for hiding value-laden assumptions? Environ.
Model. Assess. 2, 229–249. (doi:10.1023/A:1019090117643)
20 Fischer, G., Shah, M., van Velthiuzen, H. & Nachtergaele, F. O. 2001 Global agroecological
assessment for agriculture in the 21st century. IIASA Research Report 02-02. International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria.
21 Easterling, W. E. et al. 2007 Food, ﬁbre and forest products. In Climate change 2007: impacts,
adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (eds. M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani,
J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der Linden & C. E. Hanson), pp. 273–313. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
22 Goulden, M., Conway, D. & Pereschino, A. 2009 Adaptation to climate change in international
river basins in Africa: a review. Hydrol. Sci. 54, 805–828. (doi:10.1623/hysj.54.5.805)
23 Parry, M. 2001 Millions at risk: deﬁning critical climate change threats and targets. Glob.
Environ. Change 11, 1–3. (doi:10.1016/S0959-3780(01)00011-5)
24 Parry, M., Rosenzweig, C. & Livermore, M. 2005 Climate change, global food supply and risk
of hunger. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 360, 2125–2136. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1751)
25 Nicholls, R. J., Wong, P. P., Burkett, V. R., Codignotto, J. O., Hay, J. E., McLean, R. F.,
Ragoonaden, S. & Woodroffe, C. D. 2007 Coastal systems and low-lying areas. In Climate
change 2007: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (eds M. L.
Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der Linden & C. E. Hanson), pp. 315–356.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
26 Nicholls, R. J., Hoozemans, F. M. J. & Marchand, M. 1999 Increasing ﬂood risk and wetland
losses due to global sea-level rise: regional and global analyses. Glob. Environ. Change 9,
S69–S87. (doi:10.1016/S0959-3780(99)00019-9)
27 Warren, R. et al. 2010 The economics and climate change impacts of various greenhouse gas
emission pathways: a comparison between baseline and policy emission scenarios. London:
DEFRA. See www.avoid.uk.net.
28 Hoozemans, F. M. J., Marchand, M. & Pennkamp, H. A. 1993 A global vulnerability analysis:
vulnerability assessment for population, coastal wetlands, and rice production on a global scale,
2nd edn. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Delft Hydraulics.
29 Wassman, R., Nguyen, T. H., Chu, T. H. & To, P. T. 2004 Sea level rise affecting the
Vietnamese Mekong Delta: water elevation in the ﬂood season and implications for rice
production. Clim. Change 66, 89–107. (doi:10.1023/B:CLIM.0000043144.69736.b7)
30 Nicholls, R. J., Marinova, N., Lowe, J.A., Brown, S., Vellinga, P., de Gusmão, D., Hinkel, J.
& Tol, R. S. J. 2011 Sea-level rise and its possible impacts given a ‘beyond 4◦C world’ in the
twenty-ﬁrst century. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 369, 161–181. (doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0291)
31 Jarvis, A., Lane, A. & Hijmans, R. 2008 The effect of climate change on crop wild relatives.
Agr. Ecosyst. Environ. 126, 13–23. (doi:10.1016/j.agee.2008.01.013)
32 Fischlin, A. et al. 2007 Ecosystems, their properties, goods and services. In Climate change
2007: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change (eds M. L. Parry et al.),
pp. 211–272. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
33 Chivian, E. & Bernstein, A. (eds) 2008 Sustaining life: how human health depends on
biodiversity. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
34 Newman, D. J., Kilama, J., Bernstein, A. & Chivian, E. 2008 Medicines from nature. In
Sustaining life: how human health depends on biodiversity (eds E. Chivian & A. Bernstein),
pp. 117–162. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
238
R. Warren
35 Olson, S. H., Gangnon, R., Silveira, G. A. & Patz, J. A. 2010 Deforestation and
malaria in Mancio Lima County, Brazil. Emerging Infect. Dis. 16, 1108–1115. (doi:10.3201/
eid1607.091785)
36 Molyneux, D. H., Ostﬁeld, R. S., Bernstein, A. & Chivian, E. 2008 Ecosystem disturbance,
biodiversity loss, and human infectious disease. In Sustaining life: how human health depends on
biodiversity (eds E. Chivian & A. Bernstein), pp. 287–324. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
37 Cheung, W. W. L., Lam, V. W. Y., Sarmiento, J. L., Kearney, K., Watson, R. & Pauly, D. 2009
Projecting global marine biodiversity impacts under climate change scenarios. Fish Fisheries
10, 235–251. (doi:10.1111/j.1467-2979.2008.00315.x)
38 Hillel, D. & Rosenzweig, C. 2008 Biodiversity and food production. In Sustaining life: how
human health depends on biodiversity (eds E. Chivian & A. Bernstein), pp. 325–381. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
39 Knogge, T., Schirmer, M. & Schuchardt, B. 2004 Landscape-scale socio-economics of sea-level
rise. Ibis 146, 11–17.
40 Danielsen, F. et al. 2005 The Asian Tsunami: a protective role for coastal vegetation. Science
310, 643. (doi:10.1126/science.1118387)
41 Margulis, S., Narain, U., Pandey, K., Cretegny, L., Bucher, A., Schneider, R., Hughes,
G., Essam, T. & Mearns, R. 2010 The costs of developing countries adapting to
climate change. New methods and estimates. The Global Report of the Economics of
Adaptation to Climate Change Study, Consultation Draft. World Bank, Washington,
DC.
See
http://beta.worldbank.org/climatechange/content/economics-adaptation-climate-
change-study-homepage.
42 Sanderson, M. G., Hemming, D. L. & Betts, R. A. 2011 Regional temperature and
precipitation changes under high-end (≥4◦C) warming. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 369, 85–98.
(doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0283)
43 CBD (Convention on Biological Diversity). 2009 Connecting biodiversity and climate change
mitigation and adaptation. Report of the Second Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group on
Biodiversity and Climate change. CBD Technical Series no. 41. Secretariat of the Convention
on Biological Diversity, Montreal, Canada.
44 Warner, K., Hamza, M., Oliver-Smith, A., Renaud, F. & Julca, A. 2010 Climate change,
environmental degradation and migration. Nat. Hazards (doi:10.1007/s11069-009-9419-7).
45 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005 Ecosystems and human well-being: synthesis.
Washington, DC: Island Press.
46 IPCC 2007 Climate change 2007 impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. In Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC (eds M. Parry, O. Cansiani,
J. Palutikof, P. Van der Linden & C. Hanson). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
47 Thornton, P. K., Jones, P. G., Ericksen, P. J. & Challinor, A. J. 2011 Agriculture and
food systems in sub-Saharan Africa in a 4◦C+ world. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 369, 117–136.
(doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0246)
48 Mendelsohn, R., Kurukulasuriya, P. & Dinar, A. 2007 Climate and rural income. Clim. Change
81, 101–118. (doi:10.1007/s10584-005-9010-5)
49 Feng, S., Krueger, A. B. & Oppenheimer, M. 2010 Linkages among climate change, crop
yields and Mexico-US cross-border migration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 14 257–14 262.
(doi:10.1073/pnas.1002632107)
50 Burke, M. B., Miguel, E., Satyanath, S., Dykema, J. A. & Lobell, D. B. 2009 Warming
increases the risk of civil war in Africa. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 20 670–20 674.
(doi:10.1073/pnas.0907998106)
51 Hales, S. 2009 Estimating human population health impacts in a 4+◦C world. See
http://www.eci.ox.ac.uk/4degrees/programme.php.
52 Cox, P. M., Betts, R. A., Collins, M., Harris, P. P., Huntingford, C. & Jones, C. D. 2004
Amazonian forest dieback under climate-carbon cycle projections for the 21st century. Theor.
Appl. Climatol. 78, 137–156. (doi:10.1007/S00704-004-0049-4)
53 Renaud, F. G., Dun, O., Warner, K. & Bogardi, J. In press. A decision framework for
environmentally induced migration. Int. Migr. Theor. Appl. Climatol. 78, 137–156.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
239
54 Keith, H., Mackey, B. G. & Lindenmayer, D. B. 2010 Re-evaluation of forest biomass carbon
stocks and lessons from the world’s most carbon-dense forests. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
106, 11 635–11 640. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0901970106)
55 Stehfest, E., Bouwman, A. F., Vuuren, D. P., den Elzen, M. G. J., Eickhout, B. &
Kabat, P. 2009 Climate beneﬁts of changing diet. Clim. Change 95, 83–102. (doi:10.1007/
s10584-008-9534-6)
56 Righelato, R. & Spracklen, D. V. 2007 Carbon mitigation by biofuels or by saving and restoring
forests? Science 317, 902. (doi:10.1126/science.1141361)
57 Nayamuth, R. 2009 4+◦C: A drastic reduction in the renewable energy potential of sugarcane.
See http://www.eci.ox.ac.uk/4degrees/programme.php.
58 Pimentel, D. 2009 Biofuel food disasters and cellulosic ethanol problems. Bull. Sci. Technol.
Soc. 29, 205–212. (doi:10.1177/0270467609333732)
59 Wise, M., Calvin, C., Thompson, A., Clarke, L., Bond-Lamberty, B., Sands, R., Smith, S. J.,
Janetos, A. & Edmonds, J. 2009 Implications of limiting CO2 concentrations for land use and
energy. Science 324, 1183–1187. (doi:10.1126/science.1168475).
60 Tebaldi, C., Hayhoe, K., Arblaster, J. M. & Meehl, G. A. 2006 Going to the extremes: an
intercomparison of model-simulated historical and future changes in extreme events. Clim.
Change 79, 185–211. (doi:10.1007/s10584-006-9051-4)
61 Hirabayashi, Y., Kanae, S., Emori, S., Oki, T. & Kimoto, M. 2008 Global projections of
changing risks of ﬂoods and droughts in a changing climate. Hydrol. Sci. 53, 754–772.
(doi:10.1623/hysj.53.4.754)
62 Blenkinsop, S. & Fowler, H. J. 2007 Changes in European drought characteristics projected
by the PRUDENCE regional climate models. Int. J. Climatol. 27, 1595–1610.
63 Warren, R., Yu, R., Osborn, T. & Santos, S. Submitted. Future European drought regimes
under mitigated and unmitigated climate change: applications of the community integrated
assessment system.
64 Challinor, A. J., Wheeler, T. R., Osborne, T. M. & Slingo, J. M. 2006 Assessing the
vulnerability of crop productivity to climate change thresholds using an integrated crop-
climate model. In Avoiding dangerous climate change (eds H. J. Shellnhuber et al.),
pp. 187–194. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
65 Rosenzweig, C. E., Tubiello, F., Goldberg, R. & Bloomﬁeld, J. 2002 Increased crop damage in
the US from excess precipitation under climate change. Glob. Environ. Change 12, 197–202.
(doi:10.1016/S0959-3780(02)00008-0)
66 Hulme,
M.,
Jiang,
T.
&
Wigley,
T.
M.
L.
1995
SCENGEN:
a
climate
change
SCENario GENerator. Software User Manual, Version 1.0. Climatic Research Unit, UEA,
Norwich.
67 Kilsby, C. G., Jones, P. D., Burton, A., Ford, A. C., Fowler, H. J., Harpham, C., James, P.,
Smith, A. & Wilby, R. L. 2007 A daily weather generator for use in climate change studies.
Environ. Model. Softw. 22, 1705–1719. (doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2007.02.005)
68 Lucht, W., Schaphoff, S., Erbrecht, T., Heyder, U. & Cramer, W. 2006 Terrestrial vegetation
redistribution and carbon balance under climate change. Carbon Balance Manage. 1, 6.
(doi:10.1186/1750-0680-1-6)
69 Elith, J. et al. 2006 Novel methods improve prediction of species’ distributions from occurrence
data. Ecography 29, 129–151. (doi:10.1111/j.2006.0906-7590.04596.x)
70 Phillips, S. J., Anderson, R. P. & Schapine, R. E. 2006 Maximum entropy modeling of species
geographic distributions. Ecol. Model. 190, 231–259. (doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2005.03.026)
71 Memmott, J., Craze, P. G., Waser, N. M. & Price, M. V. 2007 Global warming and
the disruption of plant-pollinator interactions. Ecol. Lett. 10, 710–717. (doi:10.1111/
j.1461-0248.2007.01061.x)
72 Benning, T. L., Lapointe, D., Atkinson, C. T. & Vitousek, P. M. 2002 Interactions of climate
change with biological invasions and land use in the Hawaiian Islands: modeling the fate of
endemic birds using a geographic information system. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 14 246–
14 249. (doi:10.1073/pnas.162372399)
73 Burkett, V. R. et al. 2005 Nonlinear dynamics in ecosystem response to climatic change:
case studies and policy implications. Ecol. Complex. 2, 357–394. (doi:10.1016/j.ecocom.
2005.04.010)
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
240
R. Warren
74 Hughes, L., Cawsey, E. M. & Westoby, M. 1996 Climatic range size of Eucalyptus species
in relation to future climate change. Global Ecol. Biogeogr. Lett. 5, 23–29. (doi:10.2307/
2997467)
75 Kaplan, J. O. et al. 2003 Climate change and Arctic ecosystems. 2. Modelling, paleodata-
model comparisons and future projections. J. Geophys. Res. D 108, 8171. (doi:10.1029/
2002JD002559)
76 Mouillot, F., Rambal, S. & Joffre, J. M. 2002 Simulating climate change impacts on ﬁre
frequency and vegetation dynamics in a Mediterranean-type ecosystem. Glob. Change Biol.
12, 441–449.
77 Scholze, M., Knorr, W., Arnell, N. W. & Prentice, I. C. 2006 A climate change risk
analysis for world ecosystems. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 13 116–13 120. (doi:10.1073/
pnas.0601816103)
78 Flannigan, M., Stocks, B., Turetsky, M. & Wotton, M. 2009 Impacts of climate change on
ﬁre activity and ﬁre management in the circumboreal forest. Glob. Change Biol. 15, 549–560.
(doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01660.x)
79 Crozier, L. & Dwyer, G. 2006 Combining population-dynamic and eco-physiological models
to predict climate-change induced insect range shifts. Am. Nat. 167, 853–866. (doi:10.1086/
504848)
80 Warren, R., Price, J., de la Nava Santos, S., Fischlin, A. & Midgley, G. In press. Increasing
impacts of climate change upon ecosystems with increasing global mean temperature rise.
Clim. Change. (doi:10.1007/s10584-010-9923-5)
81 Koeller, P. et al. 2009 Basin-scale coherence in phenology of shrimps and phytoplankton in
the North Atlantic Ocean. Science 324, 791–793. (doi:10.1126/science.1170987)
82 Turley, C., Blackford, J. C., Widdicombe, S., Lowe, D., Nightingale, P. D. & Rees, A. P. 2006
Reviewing the impact of increased atmospheric CO2 on oceanic pH and the marine ecosystem.
In Avoiding dangerous climate change (eds H. J. Schellnhuber, N. Nakicenovic, T. Wigley &
G. Yohe), pp. 93–131. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
83 Zeebe, R. E., Zachos, J. C., Caldeira, K. & Tyrell, T. 2008 Oceans: carbon emissions and
acidiﬁcation. Science 321, 51–52. (doi:10.1126/science.1159124)
84 Anthony, K. R. N., Kline, D. I., Diaz-Pulido, G., Dove, S. & Hoegh-Guldberg, O. 2008 Ocean
acidiﬁcation causes bleaching and productivity loss in coral reef builders. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 105, 17 442–17 446. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0804478105)
85 Long, S. P., Ainsworth, E. A., Leakey, A. D. B. & Morgan, P. B. 2005 Global food insecurity:
treatment of major food crops with elevated carbon dioxide or ozone under large-scale fully
open-air conditions suggests recent models may have overestimated future yields. Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. B 360, 2011–2020. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1749)
86 Felzer, B. S., Cronin, T. & Reilly, J. M. 2007 Impacts of ozone on trees and crops. C. R.
Geosci. 339, 784–798. (doi:10.1016/j.crte.2007.08.008)
87 Velicogna, I. 2009 Increasing rates of ice mass loss from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets
revealed by GRACE. J. Geophys. Res. 36, L19503. (doi:10.1029/2009GL040222)
88 Stroeve, J., Holland, M. M., Meier, W., Scambos, T. & Serreze, M. 2007 Arctic sea ice decline:
faster than forecast. Geophys. Res. Lett. 34, L09501. (doi:10.1029/2007GL029703)
89 Lenton, T. M., Held, H., Elmar Kriegler, E., Hall, J. W., Lucht, W., Rahmstorf, S. &
Schellnhuber, H. J. 2008 Tipping elements in the earth system. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
105, 1786–1793. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0705414105)
90 Zimov, S. A., Schurr, E. A. G. & Chapin, F. S. 2006 Permafrost and the global carbon budget.
Science 312, 1612–1613. (doi:10.1126/science.1128908)
91 Stern, N. et al. 2006 Stern review: the economics of climate change. London, UK: HM Treasury.
92 Fung, F., Lopez, A. & New, M. 2011 Water availability in +2◦C and +4◦C Worlds. Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. A 369, 99–116. (doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0293)
93 Zelazowski, P., Malhi, Y., Huntingford, C., Sitch, S. & Fisher, J. B. 2011 Changes in the
potential distribution of humid tropical forests on a warmer planet. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A
369, 137–160. (doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0238)
94 Bernie, D., Lowe, J., Tyrrell, T. & Legge, O. 2010 Inﬂuence of mitigation policy on ocean
acidiﬁcation. Geophys. Res. Lett. 37, L15704. (doi:10.1029/2010GL043181)
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
Review. Interactions in a 4◦C world
241
95 Orr, J. C. et al. 2005 Anthropogenic ocean acidiﬁcation over the 21st century and its impacts
on calcifying organisms. Nature 437, 681–686. (doi:10.1038/nature04095)
96 Kundzewicz, Z. W., Hirabayashi, Y. & Kanae, S. 2010 River ﬂoods in the changing climate:
observations and projections. Water Resour. Manage. 24, 2633–2646. (doi:10.1007/s11269-
009-9571-6)
97 Betts, R. A., Collins, M., Hemming, D. L., Jones, C. D., Lowe, J. A. & Sanderson, M. G.
2011 When could global warming reach 4◦C? Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 369, 67–84. (doi:10.1098/
rsta.2010.0292)
98 Cramer, W. 2009 Changing climate, land use and ﬁre in Amazonia under high warming
scenarios. See http://www.eci.ox.ac.uk/4degrees/programme.php.
99 Karoly, K. 2010 Wildﬁre in a 4+◦C world. See http://www.eci.ox.ac.uk/4degrees/programme.
php.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A (2011)
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 26 August 2024 
