a
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
a
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
About the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is an applied research centre at the University of Waterloo. The 
Intact Centre was founded in 2015 with a gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s largest property and casualty 
insurer. The Intact Centre helps homeowners, communities and businesses to reduce risks associated with climate 
change and extreme weather events. For more about the Intact Centre, please visit:
www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca
About the University of Waterloo
University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation university. With more than 36,000 students, the university is home 
to the world’s largest co-operative education system of its kind. The university’s unmatched entrepreneurial culture, 
combined with an intensive focus on research, powers one of the top innovation hubs in the world. For more about the 
University of Waterloo, please visit: www.uwaterloo.ca
The Intact Centre would like to acknowledge the following groups for their contributions:
	
	
	
Credit Valley Conservation (CVC) is a community-based environmental organization, dedicated
	
	
	
to protecting, restoring and managing the natural resources of the Credit River Watershed
	
	
	
Established by the provincial government in 1954, CVC is one of 36 conservation authorities in
	
	
	
Ontario. CVC provided hydrologic and hydraulic modelling support for this project.
	
	
	
The Grand River Conservation Authority (GRCA) manages water and other natural resources
	
	
	
on behalf of 39 municipalities and close to one million residents of the Grand River watershed. 	
	
	
	
The watershed is the largest in Southern Ontario. GRCA provided hydrologic and hydraulic
	
	
	
modelling support for this project.
	
	
	
IBI Group is a globally integrated architecture, planning, engineering and technology firm. IBI
	
	
	
Group’s team in Calgary, Alberta (Stephen Shawcross and David Sol) supported this project by
	
	
	
leveraging their Rapid Flood Damage Assessment Model (RFDAM) to automate flood damage
	
	
	
calculations and analysis.
The Intact Centre thanks sponsors of the project for their generous support:
The Intact Centre also thanks Markus Wieland of the University of Waterloo for his assistance with geographic 
information system modelling for this project.
For information about this report, contact Natalia Moudrak, Director, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation:
nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca
Citation
Moudrak, N.; Hutter, A.M.; Feltmate, B. 2017. When the Big Storms Hit: The Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and
Rural Flood Damage. Prepared for the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry.
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo.
Disclaimer 
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible. The Intact Centre cannot make any guarantees of 
any kind, as to the completeness, accuracy, suitability or reliability of the data provided in the report. This report has been prepared for informational purposes on matters of 
interest only and does not constitute professional advice. You should not act upon the information contained in this publication without obtaining specific professional advice. 
Nothing in this report constitutes legal advice. No representation or warranty (expressed or implied) is given as to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained 
in this publication, and Intact Centre employees and affiliates do not accept or assume any liability, responsibility or duty of care for any consequences to you or anyone else 
acting, or refraining to act, in reliance on the information contained in this report or for any decision based on it.
i
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Executive Summary  ..........................................................................................................................	
ii
Chapter 1. Introduction  ....................................................................................................................	 1
Chapter 2. Method  ...........................................................................................................................	
3
	
2.1 	 Assessing Financial Value of Wetlands Conservation for Flood Damage Reduction:
	
	
A Generally Applicable Overview  ........................................................................................	
4
	
2.2 	 Assessing Financial Value of Wetlands Conservation for Flood Damage Reduction:
	
	
Detailed Discussion  .............................................................................................................	
6
Chapter 3. Results  ............................................................................................................................	
10
	
3.1 	 Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval  ............................................................	
10
	
3.2 	 Uptown Waterloo  ................................................................................................................	 12
	
3.3 	 Discussion of Flood Damage Estimation Methods  ..............................................................	
13
Chapter 4. Discussion & Conclusion  .................................................................................................	 15
Appendix A: Background Information on the Credit Valley and Laurel Creek Watersheds  ............	 16
	
	
Credit Valley Watershed  ......................................................................................................	
16
	
	
Laurel Creek Watershed  ......................................................................................................	
18
	
	
Notes: Hydrologic and Hydraulic Modelling  ........................................................................	 20
Appendix B: IBI Group’s Rapid Flood Damage Assessment Model (RFDAM)  .................................	
22
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s Provincial Flood Damage
Assessment Study (2014)  ..................................................................................................................	 26
Appendix D: Greenland Consulting Engineers’ Estimation Method for Municipal
Infrastructure Upgrades Avoided  ....................................................................................................	
39
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for Ontario’s
Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007) ...........................................................................................	 42
Endnotes  ...........................................................................................................................................	 52
Contents
ii
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
This report assesses the potential for wetlands to 
affect the financial impacts associated with rural 
and urban flooding. Working with the Grand River 
Conservation Authority (Ontario), Credit Valley 
Conservation (Ontario) and Ducks Unlimited Canada, 
the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact 
Centre) determined that wetlands, if maintained in 
their natural state, can substantially reduce flood 
damage costs to buildings (ranging from residential 
homes and apartment buildings, to industrial, 
commercial and institutional structures).
These findings have national applicability, albeit the 
research focused on two Southern Ontario pilot sites, 
one rural and one urban. For both sites, computer 
models simulated a major Fall flood, to compare 
flood damages under conditions where wetlands 
were maintained in their natural state and where 
they were replaced with agricultural land use. The 
researchers found that flood damages were lower if 
wetlands were maintained in their natural state, with 
financial cost savings of 29 and 38 per cent in rural 
and urban areas, respectively.
The rural pilot site was located near the City of 
Mississauga (Ontario) and the urban pilot site was 
located within the City of Waterloo (Ontario). The 
magnitude of the modelled flood was based on 
a severe, yet realistic, flood event (i.e., Hurricane 
Hazel, 1954, approximately equivalent to a 1-in-500 
year flood), that had historically caused substantial 
property damage and loss of life in the Greater 
Toronto Area (Ontario).
At the rural pilot site, if wetlands were maintained in 
their natural state, flood damages would have been 
$8.9 million. This was $3.5 million, or 29 per cent, 
lower than the $12.4 million cost that would have 
been realized if wetlands had been replaced with 
agricultural development.
Executive Summary
Residential Wetlands @DUC
For the urban pilot site, if wetlands were maintained 
in their natural state, the cost of flood damages would 
be $84.5 million, which was $51.1 million, or 38 per 
cent, lower than $135.6 million cost that would have 
occurred had wetlands been replaced with agricultural 
development.
If the modeling assumed that wetlands were 
replaced by urban, largely impervious surfaces 
(such as buildings, roads and parking lots), rather 
than agricultural development, the value of flood 
damages avoided would have exceeded 29 - 38 per 
cent. Accordingly, the additive value of wetlands to 
reduce flood damage, as profiled in this report, is 
conservative.
This report demonstrates quantitatively that wetlands 
conservation is a cost-effective means to reduce flood 
risk in Canada. As such, the findings are consistent 
with, and reinforcing of, directives outlined in the 
Wetland Conservation Strategy for Ontario, the 
Province of Ontario’s Climate Change Action Plan, and 
the Government of Canada’s Pan-Canadian Framework 
on Clean Growth and Climate Change.
In summary, maintaining wetlands in their natural state 
offers a broadly-applicable and cost-effective means to 
reduce the financially and socially pervasive impacts of 
flooding that are increasingly affecting all Canadians. 
1
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 1. Introduction
This report assesses the value of wetlands 
conservation to reduce flood damages associated 
with riverine flooding, based on modelling of 
two watersheds in Southern Ontario. The value is 
outlined in terms of flood damages avoided and 
average insurable claims foregone for properties 
located in the rural communities of Glen Williams, 
Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval (north of the City 
of Mississauga) and within the urban setting of the 
City of Waterloo.
Before turning to the utility of wetlands to mitigate 
costs, it is first necessary to quantify the growing 
impacts of flooding realized across Canada following 
extreme precipitation events.i  
Figure 1:	 Catastrophic Insured Losses* from Natural Disasters in Canada (1983 to 2016), 	
	
	
Values in 2016 CAN$
*Insured losses for a given disaster are deemed catastrophic when they total $25 million or more.
Catastrophic losses for a year are the sum total of insured losses from these natural disasters. 
Source: Insurance Bureau of Canada (April 2017), PCS, CatIQ, Swiss Re, Munich Re & Deloitte
As documented by the Insurance Bureau of Canada, 
“property and casualty insurance payouts from 
extreme weather have more than doubled every five 
to 10 years since the 1980s.”ii   As shown in Figure 1, 
for seven out of eight years (2009 – 2016), extreme 
weather-related insurance payouts have exceeded $1 
billion in Canada, which is atypical relative to pre-2009 
insurable losses. The primary cause of claims during 
the seven-year period up to 2016 was flooding.
Reflecting insurable losses, disaster recovery payments 
through Canada’s federal Disaster Financial Assistance 
Arrangements (DFAA) have also greatly increased 
during this program’s 45-year history. As noted by the 
Office of the Auditor General of Canada, “over the past 
2
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
six fiscal years, the federal government spent more 
on recovering from large-scale natural disasters than 
in the previous 39 fiscal years combined.”iii  DFAA 
spending on floods was foremost, representing 75 per 
cent of all weather-related expenditures.iv 
To improve resilience against future disasters, 
including floods, all levels of government in Canada 
have begun to prepare for severe weather. This 
effort is consistent with the Paris Agreement, signed 
in December 2016, which committed Canada to 
addressing current and future climate change impacts 
through enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening 
resilience and reducing vulnerability.v 
In 2017, the Government of Canada released the Pan 
Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate 
Change, which further emphasized the need to adapt 
to a changing climate and build resilience. One of the 
climate adaptation focus areas noted, under the Pan 
Canadian Framework, was to consider climate change 
in long-lived infrastructure investments, which 
include both “traditional and natural adaptation 
solutions to build resilience, reduce disaster risks, and 
save costs over the long term.”vi  
In addition to the increased frequency and severity 
of rainfall events, growth in urban development 
has also altered drainage characteristics of natural 
catchments by increasing the volume and rate of 
surface runoff.vii  This can produce higher peak-flows 
in drainage channels due to an overall growth in the 
extent of impervious surface coverage. Moreover, 
“the effects of development in urban basins are 
most pronounced for moderate storms following dry 
periods.”viii  Therefore, even in the absence of severe 
storms, growth in urbanization can cause rivers and 
streams to exceed their carrying capacity and lead to 
overland and sewer flooding. This is a prevalent issue 
for Canada, where urbanization is a continuing trend, 
with peripheral municipalities showing the highest 
population growth across the country.ix  
Accordingly, land use planning policies that promote 
natural infrastructure preservation (and limit increased 
imperviousness in urban watersheds) are advocated 
by multiple groups in Canada to reduce flood risk.x,xi  
This has also been, and remains, a central component 
of natural hazard management promoted in Ontario 
through the Provincial Policy Statement,xii  as supported 
by the province’s Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Forestry.xiii  
In addition to limiting flood risk, studies describe a 
range of ecosystem services that wetlands  provide,  
including groundwater recharge and discharge; flood 
and drought attenuation; erosion control and sediment 
stabilization; water quality improvements and nutrient 
cycling; habitat provision; recreational and cultural 
uses; as well as carbon sequestration.xiv 
Specific to flood mitigation, there is growing awareness 
that wetlands can play an instrumental role.xv,xvi,xvii  
Researchers note that wetlands do reduce the 
rate of overland water transport, while enhancing 
groundwater infiltration and desynchronizing water 
delivery to streams during storms. This function 
helps to reduce the frequency and magnitude of 
flooding, particularly when soils in the watershed 
are not saturated.xviii  Similarly, floodplain wetlands 
(i.e., wetlands that adjoin rivers) are effective in flood 
attenuation, as they slow the speed of flood waves and 
they can store large quantities of surface water.xix
Notwithstanding their pervasive utility, over 70 per cent 
of Southern Ontario’s pre-settlement wetlands have 
been lost through agricultural drainage, development, 
encroachment, land clearance, filling and road 
construction.xx  Similar losses have been noted in 
other provinces. To help curtail this trend, this report 
quantifies the utility of wetlands to limit flood costs 
borne by all Canadians – simply put, “leaving natural 
wetlands natural” is a prudent choice for Canada.
Chapter 1. Introduction
3
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Wetlands @DUC
Chapter 2. Method
This Chapter provides an outline of the process that 
municipalities, conservation authorities and watershed 
management practitioners can follow to assess the 
financial value of wetlands conservation for flood 
damage reduction (Section 2.1). It also contains an in-
depth discussion on how this process was executed at 
the two sites for the purposes of this study
(Section 2.2).
Two sites that were analyzed included rural areas of 
Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval, 
located in the Credit River Watershed (north of the City 
of Mississauga, Ontario) and an urban area of Uptown 
Waterloo, located in the Laurel Creek Watershed, 
upstream of the City of Waterloo, Ontario.
The two sites were selected based on four criteria: 
1) representation of both a rural and an urban 
community, 2) wetland area and hydrologic diversity, 
3) proximity to populated centers, and 4) availability of 
high quality hydrologic and hydraulic modelling:
1.	 Representation of rural and urban communities: 
Both rural and urban communities were selected 
to ensure the findings had a broad range of 
geographic applicability. While the majority of 
Ontario’s population resides in urban centres, 
according to the State of Rural Canada report, 
Ontario has more rural residents than other 
provinces in Canada.xxi   Furthermore, while both 
rural and urban communities are facing increased 
climate hazards (such as floods), the opportunity 
for natural infrastructure use and wetlands 
conservation is higher for rural communities.
2.	 Wetland area and hydrologic diversity: The 
total wetlands area included in the Credit 
River Watershed pilot study analysis was 72.9 
hectares. The total wetlands area included in 
the pilot study analysis for the Laurel Creek 
Watershed was 540 hectares. Whereas the 
majority of wetlands analyzed for the Credit 
River Watershed pilot site were headwater 
wetlands, the majority of wetlands in the Laurel 
Creek Watershed were floodplain wetlands. 
For additional detail in reference to these 
watersheds, see Appendix A.
3.	 Proximity to populated centres: The benefit 
of wetlands for flood attenuation is likely to 
be greater if wetlands are in close proximity to 
developed areas. For both pilot sites, wetlands 
were in close proximity to populated areas, thus 
helping to ensure that the benefits, if any, of 
flood attenuation afforded by wetlands, could be 
quantified.
4.	 Availability of high quality hydrologic 
and hydraulic modelling: Both Credit 
Valley Conservation (CVC) and Grand River 
Conservation Authority (GRCA) have undertaken 
significant work to model wetlands in their 
respective watersheds as part of floodplain 
modelling. Therefore, both CVC and GRCA were 
able to share the outputs of their hydrologic and 
hydraulic modelling to support the project.
4
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 2. Method
Key steps pertaining to the process of assessing financial value of wetlands conservation for flood damage 
reduction are profiled in Figure 2.
2.1 Assessing Financial Value of Wetlands Conservation for Flood Damage Reduction:
A Generally Applicable Overview
Phase 1: Obtain Hydrologic and Hydraulic Modelling 
Results
During this phase, hydrologic and hydraulic modelling 
of wetland loss is carried out by third party experts 
to obtain flood extents and depths data “with and 
without” wetlands. In Ontario, floodplain modelling 
carried out by conservation authorities (under the 
direction of the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources 
and Forestryxxii) can be used for this analysis. The 
hydrologic and hydraulic modelling should at least 
include the return periods for a 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, 
25-year, 50-year, 100-year and Regulatory Storm (e.g., 
Timmins or Hurricane Hazel). Key output of Phase 1 is 
raster dataxxiii (or shapefilesxxiv) showing flood extents 
and flood depths for a range of precipitation events 
and wetland loss scenarios.
Figure 2:	 Assessing Financial Value of Wetlands Conservation for Flood Damage Reduction
	
(Process Flow)
*Information requirements differ based on the method of flood damage estimation chosen. For example, the inputs required for flood 
damage estimation using Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007) differ from the inputs required for flood damage estimation 
using Alberta’s Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014).
5
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Phase 2: Obtain Land Use and Building Footprints 
Data
During this phase, land use data and building footprints 
data is collected for the study area. This data is 
typically available through local government websites 
and open data portals. Geographic Information System 
(GIS) software (i.e., ArcMap GIS) is then used to 
combine information from Phase 1 with land use and 
building footprints data to identify inundated buildings 
“with and without” wetlands.
Phase 3: Classify Inundated Buildings
Inundated buildings are then classified according 
to their use (e.g., residential, office, institutional, 
industrial, retail), structural type (e.g., single-family 
home, apartment building, etc.) main floor elevation 
relative to grade, as well as presence of underground 
parking and basements. Building information can be 
recorded manually or through specialized software 
(e.g., IBI Group’s Google Earth Pro). This information 
is used for flood damage estimation (Phase 4).
Phase 4: Complete Flood Damage Estimation
To estimate flood damages for buildings, the 
recommended approach is to use the most recent 
flood depth-damage functions from the Government 
of Alberta, Provincial Flood Damage Assessment 
Study adjusted for inflation and regional context 
(Appendices B and C). If the scope of analysis 
includes an estimation of flood damages for 
municipal infrastructure, the process outlined in 
Appendix D can be followed. Once the total value of 
annual flood damages for each wetland loss scenario 
is estimated, one can compare the estimated 
flood damage costs “with and without” wetlands 
conserved. The value of flood damages avoided 
because of wetlands conservation is the economic 
benefit of wetlands for flood attenuation. 
Chapter 2. Method
Shutterstock_636580526
6
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
2.2 Assessing Financial Value of Wetlands Conservation for Flood Damage Reduction: 
Detailed Discussion
Chapter 2. Method
This section describes how the process outlined 
above was followed to assess the value of wetlands 
conservation for the two pilot sites.
Phase 1: Obtain Hydrologic and Hydraulic Modelling 
Results
Credit Valley Conservation (CVC) and Grand River 
Conservation Authority (GRCA) oversaw all aspects 
of hydrologic and hydraulic modelling for the Glen 
Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval area 
and Uptown Waterloo, respectively. Table 1 outlines 
wetland loss and rainfall event scenarios modelled by 
CVC and GRCA for the two pilot sites.
For Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and 
Norval area, CVC used GAWSER hydrologic model 
and HEC-RAS 1D hydraulic model to derive flood flow 
depths and extents. For Uptown Waterloo, GRCA 
used GAWSER and PC-SWMM hydrologic models, 
and HEC-RAS 2D hydraulic model. As noted by CVC 
and GRCA, these models were used for floodplain 
mapping and were previously calibrated and verified 
against observed gauge and reservoir flow data. For 
more detail on hydrologic and hydraulic modelling, 
see Appendix A, Notes: Hydrologic and Hydraulic 
Modelling.
Table 1:	 Wetland Loss and Rainfall Events: Modelled Scenarios
For Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval 
area, only the loss of headwater wetlands in the 
Credit River Watershed was modelled, whereas for 
Uptown Waterloo, loss of all wetlands in the Laurel 
Creek Watershed was modelled. The difference in 
modeling parameters was due to the fact that for the 
Credit River Watershed analysis, the hamlets of Glen 
Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval were 
selected to estimate flood damages. As these hamlets 
are located upstream in the watershed, the impacts of 
modelling wetlands loss for the entire watershed (i.e., 
downstream of the hamlets) would bear no relevance 
to the upstream reaches. Within the Laurel Creek 
Watershed, the Uptown Waterloo area was located
downstream of the wetlands area of the watershed.
The wetland-loss scenarios selected for the study
reflect the “best case” and the “worst case” scenarios
for wetlands conservation. The “best case” scenario 
is the baseline, where all existing wetlands are 
maintained in their current state. The “worst case” 
scenario reflects total replacement of wetlands 
with agricultural land use. An additional scenario 
(hummocky terrain loss) was included, to illustrate 
the broader benefits of natural infrastructure 
preservation for flood attenuation. Hummocky terrain 
has depression features, which may result in wetland 
development and offer substantial water storage, 
especially if connected to a river network.xxv 
7
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 2. Method
For both watersheds, flooding was modelled for 
the Fall season, which is typically characterized by 
high precipitation events. The Spring, which is also 
flood prone, was not addressed due to challenges 
associated with modelling snowmelt.
Hydrologic and hydraulic modeling for Uptown 
Waterloo showed that only a Hurricane Hazel level 
event would result in riverine flooding that would 
damage buildings. Modelling for all other rainfall 
events (i.e., 1-in-2 year; 1-in-5 year; 1-in- 10 year; 
1-in-25 year; 1-in-50 year and 1-in-100 year) predicted 
no flood damage to buildings. 
Similarly, for Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood 
and Norval, modelling indicated that only a Hurricane 
Hazel level event would result in flood damages 
to buildings. Under other rainfall events modelled 
(i.e., 1-in-2 year; 1-in-5 year; 1-in-10 year; 1-in-25 
year; 1-in-50 year and 1-in-100 year), there were no 
property flood damages in the Glen Williams and 
Norval areas. However, in the Cheltenham-Inglewood 
portion of the Credit River Watershed, flooding for 
three out of 316 buildings was predicted. This was 
deemed inconsequential, as the three properties 
represent less than one percent of the total building 
count and real estate value for Cheltenham-
Inglewood. 
A major rainfall, sensu Hurricane Hazel, was therefore 
the only level event for which the economic cost of 
flood damages was calculated for this study. Under 
conditions of a changing climate, whereby extreme 
weather will be more intense, Hurricane Hazel level 
events will be increasingly common. For example, in 
June 2004, northwest of the Laurel Creek Watershed, 
a severe localized storm generated 160 mm of rainfall 
in four hours and 202 mm of rainfall in 24 hours. This 
storm, modeled over the Laurel Creek Watershed, 
would have resulted in Hurricane Hazel level flows 
in Laurel Creek through the Uptown Waterloo area. 
Therefore, examining the role of wetlands in flood 
attenuation for a Hurricane Hazel level storm is a well-
founded model parameter.
Phase 2: Obtain Land Use and Building Footprints Data
The Intact Centre obtained Digital Elevation Models 
(DEM) from CVC and GRCA. The CVC elevation data was 
provided with 0.5-meter resolution from the Greater 
Toronto Area DEM (2002), updated on July 7, 2015. 
The GRCA elevation data was provided with 10 cm 
resolution from LiDAR acquired by Stantec.
For Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval 
area, the Intact Centre obtained land use data (2014) 
and building footprints data (2016) from the Region 
of Peel and DTMI Spatial, respectively. For Uptown 
Waterloo, the Intact Centre obtained land use data 
(2015) and building footprints (2016) from DMTI Spatial 
and the City of Waterloo, respectively.
Overlaying this information in GIS with hydrologic and 
hydraulic model outputs from CVC and GRCA enabled 
the Intact Centre to understand the depths and extent 
of flooding for each inundated building within the two 
pilot sites. Based on the modelling of Hurricane Hazel, 
the projected count of flooded buildings was 47 for 
Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval area 
and 371 buildings for Uptown Waterloo.
Phase 3: Classify Inundated Buildings
The IBI Group’s Google Earth Pro View tool was used 
to virtually examine all buildings projected to be 
inundated. The tool allowed for the buildings to be 
classified and for the information to be recorded (see 
Appendix B for details regarding the Earth Pro View 
tool).
8
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 2. Method
Fifty properties were also visited by Intact Centre staff 
in the Uptown Waterloo area to ensure accuracy of 
building classification completed using IBI Group’s 
Google Earth Pro View tool. No corrections were 
required. IBI Group’s Google Earth Pro View tool was 
then used to classify all buildings located in Glen 
Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval area.
Phase 4: Complete Flood Damage Estimation
Three methods were used to estimate the cost of flood 
damages, and to determine if one method might prove 
to be more rigorous to use in flood valuation relative to 
the other two going forward:
Method 1: Flood damage estimates with/without 
wetlands, determined utilizing average insurable 
claims data from a July 8, 2013, Greater Toronto Area 
flood event
Average insurance claims estimates associated with 
the July 8, 2013 storm in the Greater Toronto Area 
(GTA) were obtained. The Insurance Bureau of Canada 
confirmed the average insurance claim value for a 
low-rise residential basement flood for this event 
was $40,000.1  Using the Bank of Canada inflation 
calculator, this value is equivalent to $41,813 in 2016 
dollars. This number was applied to low-density 
residential properties affected by riverine flooding for 
the two pilot sites. Average insurance claims for all 
other property types, including medium- and high-
density residential properties, commercial, industrial 
1This figure applies to owner-occupied claims; it is rounded; includes ex gratia payments; excludes claims denied or closed without payment; 
and pertains to building, contents, and allocated loss adjustment expenses.
2The Intact Centre uncovered that the flood damages values reported in Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007) are expressed 
in $/sq.ft. and in $/m2, whereas they should be expressed in $/structure. This was confirmed through examination of the original Flood 
Damage Estimation Guide (1989) and subsequent e-mail communication with one of the authors of the Flood Damage Estimation Guide 
(1989). The Intact Centre reported this finding to Ontario’s Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry and maintained flood-damage values 
as $/structure in this report.
and institutional buildings, were based on estimates 
from the July 8, 2013 GTA flood, provided by Intact 
Financial Corporation.  
Method 2: Flood damage estimates with/without 
wetlands, determined utilizing Ontario’s Flood 
Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
The flood depth-damage curves used in Ontario were 
originally developed for Ontario’s Ministry of Natural 
Resources by Paragon Engineering Limited and 
Ecologistics Limited in 1984 and 1985. In 2007, these 
flood depth-damage curves were updated by Water’s 
Edge Environmental Solutions Team LTD., W.F. Baird 
& Associates Coastal Engineers Limited and Planning 
Solutions Inc. who used Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
adjustments to account for inflation. With assistance 
from Statistics Canada, the Intact Centre used CPI data 
to further adjust the flood depth-damage curves to 
2016 dollars (Appendix E).  This approach, therefore, 
considered key guidance offered by the province’s 
Flood Damage Estimation Guide.
In the course of preparing these estimates, an error 
was noted in the Ontario flood depth-damage curves 
that may exaggerate flood damages by at least one 
order of magnitude.  The extent to which this error 
has been carried forward into modelling programs 
and the resultant impact on planning decisions is not 
known at this time.  The error remains present in the 
text of the Ontario Flood Damage Estimation Guide 
(2007) at the time of publishing.2 
9
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 2. Method
@Shutterstock_636100307
Method 3: Flood damage estimates with/without 
wetlands, determined utilizing the depth-damage 
functions from Alberta’s Provincial Flood Damage 
Assessment Study (2014)
In 2014, IBI Group (i.e., a global architecture, 
planning, engineering and technology firm) 
developed flood-depth-damage functions for the 
Government of Alberta, Provincial Flood Damage 
Assessment Study. To do so, IBI Group surveyed 
residential, industrial, commercial and institutional 
(IC&I) properties to quantify structural and contents 
damages.xxvi,xxvii IBI Group also developed a Rapid 
Flood Damage Assessment Model (RFDAM) to 
automate flood damage calculations, based on 
building elevation, flood elevation and depth-damage 
functions. See Appendix B for a description of the 
RFDAM and for adjustment factors applied by IBI 
Group to support flood estimation for this study. 
See Appendix C for the original flood depth-damage 
functions developed for Alberta’s Provincial Flood 
Damage Assessment Study (2014).
Note: the economic value of riverine flood damages 
avoided through keeping wetlands intact could also 
be quantified in terms of municipal stormwater 
management infrastructure upgrades required to 
achieve the minimum level of service for a municipality 
(Appendix D). Since the municipal infrastructure for 
both pilot sites had sufficient capacity to attenuate 
flooding for all rainfall events, as per the minimum 
municipal and provincial design standards (i.e., no 
property flooding was projected to occur for frequent 
rain events), no management infrastructure upgrades 
were deemed necessary – and the economic evaluation 
was not performed.
10
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 3. Results
In this Chapter, Sections 3.1 and 3.2 profile estimated 
financial benefits of wetlands conservation for rural 
areas of Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood 
and Norval, as well as the urban area of Uptown 
Waterloo, respectively. The Chapter concludes with 
a discussion of the three-flood damage estimation 
methods, highlighting the advantages of using Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014) for 
similar future analyses.
3.1 Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood
and Norval
As shown in Table 2, the agricultural conversion of all 
headwater wetlands in the Credit River Watershed 
Table 2:	Number of Building Structures Flooded in Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and 
	
Norval for a Modelled Hurricane Hazel (Fall Season)
would result in a 55 percent increase in the number 
of flooded buildings in Glen Williams, Cheltenham-
Inglewood and Norval area for a Hurricane Hazel 
level event occurring in the Fall. Table 3 summarizes 
the estimated value of resulting flood damages.
As shown, the cost of flood damages to building 
structures in Glen Williams, Cheltenham-
Inglewood and Norval is expected to be lower if 
wetlands are maintained in their current state. 
The absolute value and the scale of this cost 
avoidance differs based on the methods chosen, 
ranging from a 46 percent reduction in average 
insurable claims, to 17 and 29 per cent reduction 
11
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 3. Results
Table 3:	 Estimated Value of Flood Damages for Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and 
	
Norval, Modelled Hurricane Hazel (Fall Season) 2016 CAN$
on flood damages to building structures, using 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide and 
Alberta’s Provincial Flood Damage Assessment 
Study, respectively.  
Lastly, if the impact of hummocky terrain was 
included in the evaluation of flood damages, 
it would lead to a further reduction in flood 
damages.
12
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 3. Results
3.2 Uptown Waterloo
The Uptown Waterloo area is more densely populated 
than Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and
Norval.3 Accordingly, the total number of buildings 
3Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval are low-density rural communities, with the total population under 3,000 and the 
total building count under 1,000. In contrast, the Uptown Waterloo area is densely populated, with a population of 14,938 and a total 
building count of 2,145.
Table 4:	 Number of Building Structures Flooded in Uptown Waterloo for a Modelled Hurricane 	 	
	
Hazel (Fall Season)
structures flooded would be significantly higher for 
Uptown Waterloo, should a flood event occur (see 
Table 4). Table 5 summarizes the associated value of 
flood damages for this pilot site.
13
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 3. Results
Table 5:	 Estimated Value of Flood Damages for Uptown Waterloo for a Modelled Hurricane Hazel 	
	
(Fall Season) 2016 CAN$
As illustrated, the cost of flood damages to building 
structures in Uptown Waterloo is expected to be lower 
if wetlands are maintained in their current state. The 
absolute value and the scale of this cost avoidance, 
again, differs based on the methods chosen - ranging 
from 18 per cent reduction in average insurable claims, 
to 51 and 38 per cent reduction on flood damages 
to building structures, using Ontario’s Flood Damage 
Estimation Guide and Alberta’s Provincial Flood 
Damage Assessment Study, respectively.  
Preserving hummocky terrain leads to a further 
reduction in flood damages in the study area.
3.3 Discussion of Flood Damage 
Estimation Methods
As illustrated in sections 3.1 and 3.2 above, method 
three, or flood damages estimates using inputs 
from Alberta’s Provincial Flood Damage Assessment 
Study (2014), predict the highest absolute benefit of 
wetlands conservation. The discussion below outlines 
why this method is arguably the most accurate of the 
three valuation techniques, or by corollary, why the 
other two methods may underestimate the value of 
flood damage.
14
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 3. Results
Method 1: Flood damage estimates with/without 
wetlands, determined utilizing average insurable 
claims data from a July 8, 2013, Greater Toronto Area 
flood event
This method may underestimate the value of flood 
damages for the following three reasons:
1.	 For every dollar of insured losses in Canada, there 
are $3 to $4 of uninsured losses that are borne by 
governments and individuals. 
2.	 Flood damage estimates determined using average 
insurable claims data from the July 8, 2013 GTA 
flood likely underestimate flood damage from the 
more severe, Hurricane Hazel level event, analysed 
in this study.
3.	 Overland flood damages were not historically 
covered through personal property insurance. 
Personal property overland flood insurance 
became more widely available in Canada following 
the 2013 floods in Alberta and Ontario. Therefore, 
the cost of overland flood damages may not be 
fully accounted for when using this method of 
analysis.
Method 2: Flood damage estimates with/without 
wetlands, determined utilizing Ontario’s Flood 
Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
This method may underestimate the value of flood
damages for the following three reasons:
1.	 Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide is based 
on a survey of residential buildings in Ontario 
dating back to the 1980s. Since the 1980s, both 
building use and construction approaches have 
changed. For example, compared to the 1980s, 
residential basements are now more frequently 
used as living spaces, with more electronics and 
equipment (e.g., furnace and heating, ventilation 
and air conditioning systems) stored below 
grade. Such changes, along with the changes in 
construction approaches since the 1980s, are not 
fully captured through CPI adjustments. Therefore, 
the 2007 Flood Damage Estimation Guide for 
Ontario likely understates the values of flood 
damages that can be expected for residential 
buildings in the province.
2.	 Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide does 
not provide values for estimating flood damage for 
apartment buildings.
3.	 For residential buildings, Ontario’s Flood Damage 
Estimation Guide provides flood damage values per 
property, implying that the larger the inundated 
structure, the lower flood damage is per unit area. 
The opposite tends to occur during flood events 
(the larger the structure, the more significant 
damages that are typically incurred).
In conclusion, out of the three methods employed, 
Alberta’s Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study 
(2014) provides the most recent, and by extension, 
most applicable, data set for estimating structural 
and contents damage for residential, industrial and 
commercial buildings in Canada. This allows for a more 
accurate estimation of flood damage than the other 
two methods – accordingly, it is the recommended 
method for flood damage estimations going forward.
Wetlands @DUC
15
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Chapter 4. Discussion & Conclusion
This study confirms that wetlands conservation can 
be a powerful means to reduce flood damages related 
to riverine flooding. As illustrated, simply maintaining 
wetlands in their natural state can result in financial 
cost saving of 29 and 38 per cent in rural and urban 
settings, respectively, under conditions of severe 
precipitation.
These finding are conservative - if the report 
considered wetlands conversion to urban, largely 
impervious surfaces (such as buildings, roads 
and parking lots), rather than agricultural land 
development - the financial value of cost savings would 
have exceeded 29 and 38 per cent.
Moreover, further quantification of benefits associated 
with wetlands conservation, including habitat 
protection, biodiversity improvements, water quality 
enhancement, drought attenuation and carbon 
sequestration, amplifies the message that maintaining 
wetlands in their natural state is a financially 
prudent and a socially desired outcome for Canadian 
communities.
This report underscores the role that natural 
infrastructure, such as wetlands, plays in flood 
mitigation and provides impetus for communities to 
view natural infrastructure as a climate adaptation 
solution.
The report provides the financial argument for 
wetlands conservation, supporting the directives 
outlined in the Wetland Conservation Strategy for 
Ontario, the proposed Naturally Resilient: Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Forestry’s Natural Resource 
Climate Adaptation Strategy and in the Government of 
Canada’s Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth 
and Climate Change.
Thames River Wetland @DUC
16
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix A: Background Information on the Credit 
Valley and Laurel Creek Watersheds
Credit Valley Watershed
Depicted in Figure 3 below, are the locations of the populated areas where flood damages were analyzed for the 
Credit River Watershed.
Figure 3:	 Glen Williams, Cheltenham-Inglewood and Norval, Credit River Watershed, Ontario
17
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix A: Background Information on the Credit 
Valley and Laurel Creek Watersheds
See notes on Hydrologic and Hydraulic Modelling for more details
Table 6:	 Population and Building Count within the Credit River Watershed
Table 7:	 Wetland and Hummocky Terrain Modelling Assumptions within the Credit River 		
	
Watershed
The following tables provide population, building count and wetlands modelling assumptions for the Credit River 
Watershed.
18
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix A: Background Information on the Credit 
Valley and Laurel Creek Watersheds
Laurel Creek Watershed
Figure 4:	 Uptown Waterloo, Laurel Creek Watershed Ontario
Depicted below (Figure 4) are the populated areas where flood damages were analyzed for the Laurel Creek 
Watershed.
19
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
The following tables provide population, building count and wetlands modelling assumptions for the Laurel Creek 
Watershed pilot site.
Appendix A: Background Information on the Credit 
Valley and Laurel Creek Watersheds
See notes on Hydrologic and Hydraulic Modelling for more details.
Table 8:	Population and Building Count within Laurel Creek Watershed
Table 9:	 Wetland and Hummocky Terrain Modelling Assumptions with Laurel Creek Watershed
20
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix A: Background Information on the Credit 
Valley and Laurel Creek Watersheds
Notes: Hydrologic and Hydraulic 
Modelling
Credit Valley Conservation (CVC) and Grand River 
Conservation Authority (GRCA) oversaw all aspects of 
hydrologic and hydraulic modelling for the purposes of 
this study. The Intact Centre obtained the flood depths 
and extents from CVC and GRCA, based on the outputs 
of their respective modelling. The conservation 
authorities provided the following explanations about 
the hydrologic and hydraulic modeling, respectively.
Credit River Watershed
For Credit River Watershed, CVC used the GAWSER* 
hydrologic and HEC-RAS 1D hydraulic models to derive 
flood flow depths and extents. These models were 
calibrated and verified against observed gauge and 
reservoir flow data.
Stormwater management facilities, such as ponds, 
were included in the GAWSER model used for the 
economic analysis. Culverts, bridges and dams were 
included in the HEC-RAS model only, to estimate 
flood elevations. The flows were routed through the 
Island Lake Dam located in Orangeville. The dam is a 
passive structure used for low flow augmentation and 
recreation. It has some minor attenuation capacity that 
may reduce flow rates immediately downstream of the 
structure. However, it has little or no impact on flood 
risk in the flood vulnerable areas along the Credit River.
To account for wetlands storage capacity, Hydrologic 
Response Unit (HRU) was the main input variable in 
the GAWSER model that governed the potential for 
downstream flood attenuation.4   Since the maximum 
storage depth could vary according to plant growth 
4 Wetlands are one type of HRU in the model. Other HRUs include urban lands, crop lands on sandy soils, forest, etc. Although all wetlands 
are, by definition, the same HRU, there are some parameters such as depression storage that can vary from wetland to wetland. For this 
study, all wetlands were modelled assuming the same HRU, as the data did not exist to treat them individually.
and surface covers (depending on the time of year), 
the HRU was specified as a maximum depression 
depth, varying between 75 and 115 percent. In an 
event mode, the wetlands would start with zero water 
depth, such that the entire maximum depression 
storage depth was available to reduce downstream 
flooding. In a continuous mode, the depression depth 
would fill up quickly, and then it would fluctuate 
throughout the year due to precipitation, evaporation 
and some infiltration. 
 
In addition to modelling the storage directly associated 
with the surface areas of the wetlands, the GAWSER 
model also accounted for storage associated with 
hummocky terrain. The extent of the hummocky 
terrain was calculated and then modelled at the 
sub-catchment level. For the area draining to the 
hummocky terrain, there is sufficient storage area 
within the existing topography to contain the runoff 
generated by a Hurricane Hazel type event.
To simulate the removal of wetlands, the depression 
storage values were modelled as a typical agricultural 
HRU with the soil types set the same as the soil that is 
dominant in that sub-catchment.
Matchdash @DUC
21
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Laurel Creek Watershed
For the Laurel Creek Watershed, GRCA hired Stantec 
to execute GAWSER* and PC-SWMM hydrologic 
modelling and HEC-RAS 2D hydraulic modelling.  
Storm water management facilities, dams, bridges 
and culverts were left in both the hydrologic and the 
hydraulic models. These models were calibrated and 
verified against observed gauge and reservoir flow 
data.
To model wetland storage capacity, elevation-storage 
area curves were estimated from a high resolution 
1 metre by 1 metre Digital Elevation Model. The 
outflows from the large depressions were estimated 
using the HEC-RAS model. If the HEC-RAS model did 
not exist for a particular area, a crude HEC-RAS model 
was created to estimate the discharge curve from a 
large depression. Large depressions were physically 
modelled/represented as reservoirs. The reservoirs 
were modelled to spill, once the elevation in the 
depression or wetland reached the spillage point. 
Appendix A: Background Information on the Credit 
Valley and Laurel Creek Watersheds
Where there were many small wetlands, their volume 
in any given catchment was estimated from the Digital 
Elevation Model. The volume of the wetland storage 
was divided by the catchment area, to convert the 
volume of storage to a depth of storage over the entire 
catchment. The depth of storage associated with 
wetlands or dry depressions increased the depression 
storage for the catchment. 
To simulate the removal of wetlands, the depression 
storage values were reduced to lower storage values 
for agricultural areas. 
This modelling approach could be improved in the 
future, with consideration given to modelling of 
overland flow and peak flows timing. The reduction in 
peak flow is expected to further increase the economic 
value of wetlands from a flood reduction perspective.
*The GAWSER model is not an integrated ground 
and surface model and, therefore, may significantly 
underestimate the influence of wetlands on flood 
attenuation.
Public Domain @Liquid Library
22
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix B: IBI Group Rapid Flood Damage
Assessment Model (RFDAM)
Building Inventory
IBI Group’s flood damage assessment model inputs 
details about each building in the flood hazard area 
into flood-damage calculations (details are outlined 
below). Where field verification of building details 
is not feasible, Internet-based resources can be 
employed to construct the building inventory. Google 
Earth Pro’s Street View is the primary method of 
remotely determining main floor use and elevation. 
If incorporating data from tax assessment records, 
municipal map viewers can be used to reconcile 
parcel and address information to match records with 
polygons. Finally, Internet searches can help identify 
IBI Group’s Rapid Flood Damage Assessment Model (RFDAM) works with three input tables: (1) the GIS inventory 
table of residential and commercial/retail buildings in the study area; (2) the specific depth-damage curves for 
contents and structures indexed to that community; and (3) the hydraulic flood-frequency-elevation table derived 
from the HEC-RAS model.
Figure 5:	 IBI Group Rapid Flood Damage Assessment Model
uses that are not clear from the street view or other 
data sources. 
To facilitate the entry of building classification and 
estimated main floor elevation, IBI Group developed 
an application for use within Google Earth Pro. A 
shapefile of all properties is created with one of the 
attribute fields containing HTML code. When imported 
into Google Earth Pro, this code creates a dynamic 
window that allows the user to enter a building’s 
characteristics right from the Google Earth application. 
This drastically increases the speed at which the 
inventory can be completed. Figure 6 illustrates a 
screenshot of this tool in use.
23
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix B: IBI Group Rapid Flood Damage
Assessment Model (RFDAM)
Figure 6:	IBI Group Google Earth Pro View
The following is a list of required building attributes 
for the RFDAM model, as well as a brief description of 
desktop collection methods. 
•	
Location (x,y coordinates)                                            
A centroid point is created from each of the 
building polygons within the study area (detached 
garages and other small accessory buildings are 
omitted).
•	
Size (main floor area)                                                
The main floor area is based on the GIS building 
polygon. For houses (single family, duplex, 
townhouse, etc.), the area is adjusted to account 
for eave overhangs when the polygon is generated 
by aerial imagery. Additionally, the area of any 
attached garages and carports is deducted from 
the shape area. Such deduction can either be 
recorded as a percentage in the Google Earth 
input tool, or noted as being a standard single- or 
double-car garage for calculation purposes. 
•	
Structure class and type                                          
The class and type are determined visually, 
generally through Google Street View. Where 
multiple uses are present, the predominant use 
is selected, or in the case of retail, the general 
merchandise class may be the most appropriate. 
•	
Elevation at grade                                                    
The ground elevation is obtained by sampling the 
LiDAR layer at the building centroid. 
•	
Main floor elevation (from grade)                      
Main floor elevation is generally not recorded in 
the available municipal data sets. The elevation 
can be estimated using Google Street View 
imagery. The number of risers at the entrance of 
a building is a good guide for estimating elevation 
from grade. For buildings with primary use or 
suite below grade, a negative main floor elevation 
is used rather than a basement. 
24
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix B:  IBI Group Rapid Flood Damage
Assessment Model (RFDAM)
•	
Below-grade development                                       
The presence of a below-grade development 
is recorded as a yes or no. For houses, the 
assumption that all basements have finished 
spaces is made. For apartments and non-
residential buildings, this refers to underground 
parking.
HEC-RAS Table
The HEC-RAS or flood elevation table contains the 
water surface elevation at each building location for all 
return periods studied. This information is obtained by 
sampling each flood raster for every building centroid. 
For the purposes of this project, flood elevations for 
each building were provided to IBI Group based on the 
modelling provided by Credit Valley Conservation and 
Grand River Conservation Authority.
Damage Table
The damage tables contain all the stage-damage 
functions for the various classifications and building 
types in the inventory. These curves were developed 
by IBI Group in 2014 based on detailed surveys of 
Alberta households and first-principle repair estimates. 
Specifically, IBI Group completed 83 residential 
dwelling unit surveys in Calgary and Edmonton, 
Alberta. The updated flood damage functions for the 
non-residential buildings were based on previous 
studies and verified through sampling (12 industrial, 
commercial and institutional buildings were sampled 
to validate previous study results).
The following adjustment factors were applied by IBI 
Group to support flood estimation for this project.
Adjustment Factors - Contents Damages
The Survey of Household Spending (SHS) was 
used to measure the change in household content 
value between the provinces. Average household 
expenditures are measured annually in categories 
similar to the CPI and are available at the provincial 
level. If average household spending on televisions, for 
example, is the same between provinces, it is assumed 
that there will be the same dollar value of television 
equipment in the household, even if the CPI of an 
unchanging television set falls. This index can therefore 
be used to adjust values between years and provinces. 
Accordingly, weighted categories of spending can 
be derived from the residential contents survey to 
represent goods damaged by floodwaters. Adjusting 
the Alberta household content values to Ontario values 
can be performed using the following formula: 
ON damages = AB damages * (Weighted 
ON spending/Weighted AB spending)
Table 10:	 Residential Content Damages Adjustment: Alberta to Ontario, 2014 CAN$
25
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix B:  IBI Group Rapid Flood Damage
Assessment Model (RFDAM)
The 2014 SHS was the latest available release at 
the time of reporting; thus, no adjustments from 
2014 to 2016 values were made. 
Adjustment Factors - Structures Damages
The cost of labour and materials for construction 
and restoration varies across the country and 
over time. Two sources of data were employed 
to adjust the Alberta structural damages 
amounts for use in Ontario: the 2014 Altus 
Construction Cost Guide and Statistics Canada’s 
Construction Price Indexes. The construction 
cost guide accounts for geographic differences, 
and the price indexes allow for adjustments 
from 2014 to 2016 dollars. 
Specifically, 2014 GTA construction costs per 
square foot for each class of building were 
divided by the 2014 Calgary costs to provide 
a 2014 ratio. A second ratio was obtained by 
dividing the 2016 GTA construction price index 
for each class of building by the 2014 GTA 
construction price index. The product of these 
two ratios provides an index to adjust structurals.
Notably, Ontario flood damage values for 
residential properties were reported in Ontario’s 
Flood Damage Estimation Guide in terms of 
dollars per depth of flooding, per building 
structure. Accordingly, IBI Group set up a special 
run of the RFDAM (the RFDAM was designed 
to calculate flood damages per square metre) 
so that the Ontario flood damages values could 
be easily processed. This was done by setting 
the value of the residential building area to 
one for each single-family structure and to the 
number of units for each attached structure 
(townhouses and duplexes). The flood damages 
for non-residential buildings were calculated on 
a square metre basis, as Ontario’s Flood Damage 
Estimation Guide provides flood damage values 
for non-residential buildings on a square metre 
basis.
26
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
The flood damage values noted below were used as an input into IBI Group’s Rapid Flood Damage Assessment 
Model (RFDAM). 
All values reported in this Appendix are expressed in $/m2 (2014).
Adjustment indices to translate content and structural damage values for use in Ontario (2016 dollars) are 
provided in Appendix B
1 - Distance between floors is variable in model; 2.7 metres is illustrated.
2 - Not all structures have basements, and it is a separate calculation in the model.
27
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
1 - Distance between floors is variable in model; 2.7 metres is illustrated.
2 - Not all structures have basements, and it is a separate calculation in the model.
28
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
1 - Distance between floors is variable in model; 2.7 metres is illustrated.
2 - Not all structures have basements, and it is a separate calculation in the model.
29
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
1 - Distance between floors is variable in model; 2.7 metres is illustrated.
2 - Not all structures have basements, and it is a separate calculation in the model.
30
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
1 - Distance between floors is variable in model; 2.7 metres is illustrated.
2 - Not all structures have basements, and it is a separate calculation in the model.
31
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
1 - Distance between floors is variable in model; 2.7 metres is illustrated.
2 - Not all structures have basements, and it is a separate calculation in the model.
32
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
1 - Distance between floors is variable in model; 2.7 metres is illustrated.
2 - Not all structures have basements, and it is a separate calculation in the model.
33
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
1 - Distance between floors is variable in model; 2.7 metres is illustrated.
2 - Not all structures have basements, and it is a separate calculation in the model.
34
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
35
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
For underground parking, damages are assumed at $215/m2.
36
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
For underground parking, damages are assumed at $215/m2.
37
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
38
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix C: Flood Damage Values from Alberta’s 
Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study (2014)
39
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix D: Greenland Consulting Engineers’ Estimation 
Method for Municipal Infrastructure Upgrades Avoided
The Intact Centre engaged Greenland Consulting 
Engineers to develop a five-step approach to assess 
the value of municipal stormwater management 
infrastructure upgrades avoided as a result of 
preserving wetlands. This methodology, documented 
below, is expected to be used in instances where 
the loss of wetlands results in a significant reduction 
in the level of service below municipal stormwater 
management design requirements.
Step 1: Drainage Watercourse Hydrology
Step 1 involves obtaining the existing hydrology 
model for the relevant watercourses (e.g. PCSWMM, 
Visual OTTHYMO, GAWSER or any model accepted by 
the province/conservation authority for floodplain 
delineation).  The hydrology model should be updated 
with the most recent information including, but not 
limited to, Digital Elevation Model (DEM), watershed 
attributes and land use classifications. The hydrology 
model used to assess municipal damages should be the 
same hydrology model used to assess private sector 
damages.
Step 2: Hydraulic Model
 Using the watercourse flow data, watercourse 
crossing data, updated DEM, and channel/floodplain 
conditions from Step 1, a watercourse hydraulic model 
should be executed for the existing conditions for the 
various return period storm events (e.g., HEC-RAS or 
any model accepted by the province/conservation 
authority for floodplain delineation). In Ontario, the 
standard design storm return periods are 2-year, 
5-year, 25-year, 50-year, 100-year and Regulatory 
Storm (e.g., Timmins, or Hurricane Hazel). 
Step 3: Determine Design Return Period for 
Watercourse Crossing 
Using the hydraulic model in Step 2, starting at the 
furthest downstream end of the watercourse and 
working upstream, determine whether the first 
downstream municipally owned infrastructure asset 
(e.g., culvert, bridge, swale) meets the minimum 
standards for the design storm. Since some 
municipalities have storm design standards and some 
do not, relevant municipal standards (if available), 
or Ontario’s Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR) 
flood hazard criteriaxxxiv (in absence of such standards) 
would govern this analysis. For example, if the first 
watercourse crossing starting at the downstream end 
was a culvert under a rural arterial road spanning 
greater than 6.0 metres, is that culvert able to 
convey the 50-year storm event (as per Table B-3 of 
the MNR Technical Guide, River & Stream Systems: 
Flooding Hazard Limit)? If yes, then the culvert is 
sized appropriately, a desired level of protection is 
achieved and the municipality accepts the damages 
for repair under larger magnitude storm events. If no, 
then a determination of what steps need to be taken 
to enable the culvert to convey the 50-year storm is 
carried out (Step 4).
Step 4: What Improvements Are Required to Ensure 
an Appropriate Level of Protection?
Based on the appropriate design return period 
information obtained in Step 3, Step 4 addresses 
improvements to infrastructure required to meet 
the applicable standards for the design storm return 
period. If, in the previous example, a culvert under 
a rural arterial road could not convey the 50-year 
40
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
storm, then the following questions need to be asked. 
First, does the culvert meet the minimum size, as 
outlined in the relevant municipal standards? If the 
culvert is less than the minimum size, it needs to be 
replaced with at least the minimum size per municipal 
standard. If the culvert is greater than the minimum 
size and cannot convey the design storm, the culvert 
will need to be increased in size so that it can convey 
the storm. Engineering calculations (or modelling) are 
required to determine the appropriate culvert size. The 
costs to upgrade the culvert to the appropriate size 
represent the cost of damage avoidance. Hydrology 
and associated peak flows should be determined for all 
relevant return events.
Step 5: Update Hydraulic Model with New 
Infrastructure 
Using the newly upgraded municipal infrastructure 
from Step 4, the newly-sized culvert should be used to 
re-run the model from Step 2 to determine the extent 
of flooding, if any, following the upgrade. The following 
questions would be asked: while still moving upstream, 
does all the municipally owned infrastructure meet 
the standards? If yes, then the process is complete and 
Appendix D: Greenland Consulting Engineers Estimation 
Method for Municipal Infrastructure Upgrades Avoided
the new hydraulic model can be used to assess private 
sector damages. If not, then Steps 3 to 5 need to be 
repeated until all municipally owned infrastructure 
meets the minimum design storm criteria, as set by 
the municipality or by the MNR flood hazard criteria. 
This may take several iterations with multiple design 
storms, depending on the watercourse crossing. 
The total municipal damages due to flooding for 
the subject watercourse would be the sum of all 
the required costs to improve the crossings to the 
municipal and/or provincial standards with respect to 
the storm flow conveyance capacity. 
As detailed in key findings (Chapter 4), flooding for 
both pilot sites did not exceed the levels of service 
guaranteed by the municipality. Accordingly, for the 
two pilot sites, the analysis of municipal infrastructure 
upgrades was not carried out, as existing municipal 
stormwater management infrastructure had sufficient 
capacity to handle stormwater for their respective 
levels of service.
Please refer to the flow chart diagram below for a 
summary of these steps.
@shutterstock_636424937
41
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix D: Greenland Consulting Engineers Estimation 
Method for Municipal Infrastructure Upgrades Avoided
42
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
To calculate required Consumer Price Index (CPI) adjustments for Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide 
(2007), relevant index groups were selected. For the Flood Damage Estimation Guide Groups 1 through 7, 
“Household Operations, Furnishings and Equipment,” Ontario values of CPI Table 326-0021 were used. The 
calculation entailed taking the price index from the year of interest (2015) and subtracting the price index of the 
base year from it (2005).  The result is then divided by the base year. Please refer to the tables below for final 
2016 values.
43
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
44
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
45
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
46
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
47
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
48
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
49
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
50
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
51
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Appendix E: Consumer Price Index Adjustments for 
Ontario’s Flood Damage Estimation Guide (2007)
52
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Endnotes
i	
Office of Audit General of Canada. Reports of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development. 	 	
	
	
REPORT 2: Mitigating the Impacts of Severe Weather, 2016. Print. Accessible at:
	
http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/docs/parl_cesd_201605_02_e.pdf
ii	
Insurance Bureau of Canada. Facts of the Property and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada 2016, 2016. Web. Accessible 	
	
	
at: http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2016/Facts-Book-2016.pdf
  
iii	
Office of Audit General of Canada. Reports of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development. 	 	
	
	
REPORT 2: Mitigating the Impacts of Severe Weather, 2016. Web. Accessible at:
	
http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/docs/parl_cesd_201605_02_e.pdf
  
iv	
Government of Canada. Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster 	
	
	
Financial Assistance Arrangements due to Weather Events, 2016. Accessible at:
	
http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf
  
v	
Government of Canada. “Canada’s Way Forward on Climate Change: The Paris Agreement.” Government of Canada, 06 J	
	
	
an. 2016. Web. Accessible at: http://www.climatechange.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=24700154-1
  
vi	
Government of Canada. Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change. Adaptation and climate resilience. 	 	
	
2017. Accessible at: https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/climatechange/pan-canadian-framework/	
	
	
adaptation-climate-resilience.html 
vii	
Environment and Climate Change Canada. Causes of Flooding. Accessible at: https://ec.gc.ca/eau-water/default.	
	
	
	
asp?lang=En&n=E7EF8E56-1 
viii	
Konrad, C. P. U.S. Geological Survey. 2003. Effects of Urban Development on Floods. Accessible at:
	
https://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/fs07603/
ix	
Statistics Canada. Census of Population, 2011 and 2016, 2017. Accessible at: http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-	
	
	
	
recensement/2016/as-sa/98-200-x/2016001/98-200-x2016001-eng.cfm  
x	
David Suzuki Foundation. “Natural infrastructure is good for the climate and communities.” 15 Jan. 2015. Web. Accessible at: 		
	
http://www.davidsuzuki.org/blogs/science-matters/2015/11/natural-infrastructure-is-good-for-the-climate-and-communities/  
xi	
Green Infrastructure Ontario Coalition. Benefits of Green Infrastructure, 2016. Web. Accessible at:
	
http://www.greeninfrastructureontario.org/benefits  
xii	
Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. The Provincial Policy Statement, 2014. Accessible at: http://www.mah.gov.		
	
on.ca/AssetFactory.aspx?did=10463 
xiii	
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources. 2002. Technical Guide - River and Stream Systems: Flooding Hazard Limit. Accessible at: 	
	
http://www.renaud.ca/public/Environmental-Regulations/MNR%20Technical%20Guide%20Flooding%20Hazard%20Limit.pdf
xiv	
Daigneault, C. V., Nichols, K., & Hall, M.. The Importance of Wetlands in Ecosystem Services: With Special Attention on Flood 	 	
	
Attenuation, Carbon Sequestration, Hydrogeology, Water Quality, Biodiversity and Social and Local Values. ERSC 3160H-Wetl. 		
	
Final Report, 2012, pp. 1-55. Print. http://www.muskokawatershed.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/ValuingWetlands1.pdf
xv	
O2 Planning + Design Inc.. Ecosystem Service Approach Pilot on Wetlands: Assessment of Water Storage and Flood Control 	
	
	
Ecosystem Services, 2011. Print. Accessible at: https://extranet.gov.ab.ca/env/infocentre/info/library/8687.pdf
xvi	
Barbier et al. The Value of Wetlands in Protecting Southeast Louisiana from Hurricane Storm Surges, 2013. Web. Accessible at: 	
	
http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0058715
53
Role of Wetlands to Limit Urban and Rural Flood Damage
Endnotes
xvii	
Narayan, S. et al., Coastal Wetlands and Flood Damage Reduction: Using Risk Industry-based Models to Assess Natural Defenses 	
	
in the Northeastern USA. Lloyd’s Tercentenary Research Foundation, London, 2016. Print. Accessible at:https://www.lloyds.	
	
	
com/~/media/files/lloyds/corporate%20responsibility/ltrf/coastal_wetlands_and_flood_damage_reduction.pdf
xviii	
Turner et al., The values of wetlands: landscape and institutional perspectives. Ecological Economics, 35(3), 7-23, 2000. Print
xvix	
Acreman, M. and Holden, J. Society of Wetland Scientists. 2013 “How Wetlands Affect Floods.” Accessible at: http://dec.	
	
	
vermont.gov/sites/dec/files/wsm/wetlands/docs/wl_How_Wetlands_Prevent_Floods.pdf
xx	
Ontario Biodiversity Council. State of Ontario’s Biodiversity 2010 - Highlights Report. Accessible at: http://sobr.ca/_biosite/wp-	
	
content/uploads/SOBR-2010_Highlights-Report_E.pdf 
xxi	
The Canadian Rural Revitalization Foundation (CRRF). 2015. The State of Rural Canada. Accessible at: http://sorc.crrf.ca/ 
xxii	
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry. 2002. Technical Guide. River & Stream Systems: Flooding Hazard Limit. 	
	
	
Accessible at: http://www.renaud.ca/public/Environmental-Regulations/MNR%20Technical%20Guide%20Flooding%20	
	
	
Hazard%20Limit.pdf 
xxiii	
Environmental Systems Research Institute. ArcGIS 9.2 Desktop Help, What is raster data?, 2008. Web. Accessible at: http://	
	
	
webhelp.esri.com/arcgisdesktop/9.2/index.cfm?TopicName=What_is_raster_data%3F
xxiv	
Environmental Systems Research Institute. ESRI Shapefile Technical Description, 1998. Print. Accessible at:
	
https://www.esri.com/library/whitepapers/pdfs/shapefile.pdf
xxv	
Acreman, M. and Holden, J. Society of Wetland Scientists. 2013 “How Wetlands Affect Floods.” Accessible at:
	
http://dec.vermont.gov/sites/dec/files/wsm/wetlands/docs/wl_How_Wetlands_Prevent_Floods.pdf
xxvi	
McBean, Fortin, Gorrie. A Critical Analysis of Residential Flood Damage Estimation Curves, Canadian Journal of Civil 	 	
	
	
Engineering, 1986. Print
xxvii	
Alberta’s Provincial Flood Damage Assessment Study. Prepared for Government of Alberta ESRD - Resilience and Mitigation by 	
	
IBI Group, 015. Print. Accessible at: http://aep.alberta.ca/water/programs-and-services/flood-mitigation/documents/
	
pfdas-alberta-main.pdf
xxviii	 Town of Caledon. Finance & Infrastructure Services. 21 March 2017. Web. Accessible at:
	
https://www.caledon.ca/en/townhall/departments.asp
xxvix	 Town of Halton Hills. Policy and Planning and Infrastructure, 21 March 2017. Web. Access at:
	
http://www.haltonhills.ca/planning/
xxx	
DTMI Spatial. Halton Hills Building Outlines. University of Waterloo, 2017.
xxxi	
Region of Peel. Caledon Building Footprints, 2015. Web. Accessible at: http://opendata.peelregion.ca/
	
data-categories/facilities-and-structures/caledon-building-footprints.aspx
xxxii	
Statistics Canada. GeoSearch 2016. 2016 Census. Ottawa, Ontario, 2017. Web. Accessible at:
	
http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/geo/geosearch-georecherche/index-eng.cfm
xxxiii	
City of Waterloo Open Data. Building Outlines. City of Waterloo, 2017. Web. Accessible at:
	
http://opendata-city-of-waterloo.opendata.arcgis.com/datasets/building-outlines
xxxiv	 Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources. 2002. Technical Guide, River & Stream Systems: Flooding Hazard Limit. Accessible at: 	 	
	
http://www.renaud.ca/public/Environmental-Regulations/MNR%20Technical%20Guide%20Flooding%20Hazard%20Limit.pdf  
For further information about the report, please contact:
Natalia Moudrak, Director, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
EV3 4334 - 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3G1
nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca
