Perspective
What cannot be mitigated or adapted to, will be suffered. Loss and
damage in health and humanitarian terms
Patricia Nayna Schwerdtlea,b,d,*, Carol Devineb, Maria Guevarab, Stephen Cornishb,
Christos Christoub, Arthur Wynsc, Max Jungmanna,d, Rainer Sauerbornd, Caroline Vo^uteb
a Heidelberg Center for the Environment. Heidelberg University, Germany
b Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), Doctors without Borders, Geneva, Switzerland
c Melbourne Climate Futures, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
d Heidelberg Institute of Global Health (HIGH), Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article history:
Received 17 February 2023
Accepted 24 August 2023
Available online 9 September 2023
Keywords:
Climate change
Health
Loss and damage
Humanitarian assistance
What cannot be mitigated or adapted to, will be suffered. This suf-
fering will be concentrated amongst the poorest and most vulnerable
populations [1]. In this context, the UN climate negotiations play a
pivotal role. Their objectives encompass establishing agreements,
frameworks, and commitments to mitigate greenhouse gas emis-
sions, adapting to the impacts of climate change, coordinating efforts
to deal with loss and damage and promoting global cooperation on
climate action. The UN climate negotiations approach loss and dam-
age from climate change in three distinct ways: (I) Averting loss and
damage by reducing greenhouse gas emissions; (II) Minimising loss
and damage by assisting people and communities to adapt and build
resilience; and (III) Addressing loss and damage by dealing with and
recovering from the consequences of climate impacts.
In this perspective paper, we deﬁne loss and damage broadly as
the harm from observed impacts and projected risks of climate
change [2,3]. Loss and damage can take various forms, including
physical, ecological, economic, and social impacts, and can be both
tangible and intangible, including damage to health. Losses and dam-
ages are context-speciﬁc, inﬂuenced by socio-economic conditions,
geographic location, and governance structures amongst other fac-
tors. There is a need to acknowledge the multi-dimensional nature of
losses and damages and for a nuanced understanding, including local
perspectives, to inform effective policy responses, including adapta-
tion and compensation [4]. The concept of loss and damage pertains
to realities that health and humanitarian actors currently witness
and respond to in the context of climate change; this includes loss of
access to food and water, loss of income and livelihoods, and loss of
future outlooks and opportunities. Health impacts are placed in the
category of non-economic loss and damage and include the loss of
life and healthy years, psychological impacts from displacement, or
loss of sense of place or identity [5,6].
As climate change continues unabated and as the limits of adapta-
tion are reached, the health and humanitarian community, including
organizations like Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), increasingly
address loss and damage in the form of complex emergencies. This
perspective paper aims to place loss and damage science and policy
in a humanitarian and public health context. We translate the con-
cept of loss and damage for the health and humanitarian community
in an effort to inform and engage humanitarians in the research, pol-
icy response, and public debate on loss and damage.
Why is loss and damage relevant in health and humanitarianism?
The work of health and humanitarian actors is to save lives,
reduce suffering, restore dignity, and protect health. However,
beyond advocacy, there is ultimately little these actors can do to
address the erosion of the life support systems upon which human
health and the stability of societies depend. As humanitarian needs
Special Issue - Impacts of Climate Change and Health Inequity: Colliding Crises
VSI: Health Disparities and Climate Change
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: patricia.schwerdtle@uni-heidelberg.de (P. Nayna Schwerdtle).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2023.100270
2667-2782/© 2023 Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 13 (2023) 100270
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
grow alongside emissions, there are limits as to what humanitarians
can reasonably take on and achieve.
The toll of climate change experienced at current levels of warm-
ing is intolerable for many. Further, if humanity fails to limit global
warming to 1.5°, tipping points will be crossed, which could make
large areas in the world uninhabitable, in which case both adaptation
and loss and damage costs will skyrocket. In human terms, lives,
health, homes, and livelihoods will be lost, and millions more people
will be displaced [7,8]. Concretely, massive loss and damage could
look like the evacuation of mega-cities due to extreme heat, whole
island nations being submerged, and desertiﬁcation leading to the
collapse of food systems.
The health and humanitarian community will not be able to plan
and deliver a meaningful response to loss and damage at this scale.
Even at current levels of loss and damage, health systems and
humanitarian support are unprepared. The lack of preparedness
within the humanitarian sector primarily stems from two key factors.
Firstly, it results from a combination of inadequate resources, a lack
of comprehensive understanding of the intersection of climate
change and health, and a failure to effectively incorporate climate-
related considerations into existing emergency and relief policies and
practices. Secondly, the gap between humanitarian needs and the
actual assistance provided is substantial [9]. Furthermore, this dis-
crepancy is anticipated to rise because, without immediate and deci-
sive climate action, the annual number of people in need of
humanitarian assistance due to the climate crisis could double by
2050 [10].
Count your losses
The science has advanced. The health costs of climate change are
quantiﬁable, and attribution studies can more accurately determine
the climate ﬁngerprint of health impacts. This raises the question of
liability, which is related to climate justice. For example, in Burkina
Faso, a signiﬁcant proportion of child mortality is related to low crop
yields in the year of birth, 72% of low crop yield is attributed to
weather conditions and the burden of child mortality could increase
two-fold in Sub-Saharan Africa with 1.5° of warming [11]. Further,
climate-related displacement is projected to rise, with up to 32 mil-
lion people in West Africa potentially compelled to move within their
countries by 2050 as a consequence of slow-onset climate impacts
[12]. However, when engaging in the Loss and Damage discourse, the
health and humanitarian community also needs to recognise the
nuances and uncertainties involved in attribution science, and the
need for a broader approach that incorporates a range of disciplines
and perspectives to address the complexities of climate-related losses
and damages [13]. Loss and damage science goes beyond attribution
studies and forecasting models to involve various scientiﬁc disci-
plines, some of which are familiar to the health and humanitarian
community, such as epidemiology and social science, and others that
the sector needs to work more closely with, including climatology
and ecology.
Indeed, accurately estimating loss and damage is complicated, as
it does not just pertain to calculating the impacts of climate change
but also aims to capture those impacts that have not been mitigated
and/or adapted to. While current attempts tend to focus on loss and
damage in terms of emergencies and responses, more attention is
needed on slow-onset climate change events, and the long-term
health effects of climate change, including in terms of effects on
health equity and social cohesion [8]. Improved understanding,
detection, quantiﬁcation, and attribution of loss and damage could
help inform humanitarian action. In addition to existing vulnerability
assessments that help identify ’climate hot spots’, where high vulner-
ability overlays low adaptive capacity, new attribution studies on
health-related loss and damage could help quantify risks and shift
responsibilities. Beyond assisting humanitarian agencies, this could
also inform adaptation ﬁnance, build health system resilience, estab-
lish weather-based insurance schemes, and strengthen early warning
systems.
A continuum of preventative action - for humans and the planet
In public health, addressing health issues ’upstream’ refers to
addressing the root causes and determinants of health, while
addressing health issues ’downstream’ focuses on the immediate
consequences and outcomes of those determinants on individuals or
populations. Relatedly, an enduring truism in public health is that the
best outcomes are produced for most people, by tackling the root
causes of health problems. Yet, despite our best prevention efforts,
harm will still occur. Further, the climate crisis is signiﬁcantly
advanced and some impacts are ‘locked in’ - they cannot be reversed
or mitigated in the near term. Consequently, we can infer that climate
change must be addressed on all fronts −by continuing to tackle
source issues ‘upstream’ whilst simultaneously addressing ’down-
stream’ impacts that were not prevented.
Many parallels can be drawn between human health and the
health of the planet’s climate, both in the prevention of ill health and
injury and in the responses to health issues. In public health, preven-
tative activities occur at three levels; primary, secondary, and tertiary
prevention,1 which is a useful analogy for the health of the planet.
Primary prevention is like mitigation −preventing illness, disease,
and injury. For humans, primary prevention includes the mass vacci-
nation programs MSF delivers for climate-sensitive diseases like
meningitis in South Sudan. For the planet, primary prevention is miti-
gating and eliminating greenhouse gases and other forms of pollu-
tion. Secondary prevention is synonymous with adaptation −
reducing risk in the disease’s early stages. For humans, secondary
prevention includes malnutrition screening and supplementary feed-
ing programs, which are becoming the norm in Somalia and other
countries in the Horn of Africa. For the planet, secondary prevention
is like adaptation, for example, reducing risk by developing early
warning and response systems. Tertiary prevention is activated when
an illness, disease, or injury is diagnosed, with activities aimed to
stop deterioration and avoid complications. For humans, in tradi-
tional terms, this would include rehabilitation and some forms of
chemotherapy, and in humanitarian terms, outbreak response to con-
trol the spread of climate-sensitive diseases to reduce the impact on
people and communities. For the planet, tertiary prevention can be
viewed as loss and damage because it addresses the ongoing and
long-term consequences of climate change impacts that were not
prevented or adaptable to, aiming to minimize their extent and pre-
vent further deterioration in the planet’s health and stability.
As health threats increase with climate change, attention, effort,
and investments slowly shift from primary prevention to tertiary pre-
vention. Interventions become costlier and deliver less beneﬁt forc-
ing more curative, treatment-based approaches, which pose different
costs, challenges, and risks. After more than 30 years of climate diplo-
macy, COP27 ended with a historic deal to create a new fund, in
which countries responsible for high carbon emissions will compen-
sate countries suffering from climate change impacts [14]. At COP28,
the size and practicalities of the loss and damage funding facility will
again assume a prominent role in the discussions. What is happening
is clear, time and options are running out. Moving further down the
line of climate actions, just like in public health, the cost to societies,
ecosystems, and economies increases, services become less accessible
to all, inequities increase, and health outcomes worsen.
1 Primary prevention involves interventions that aim to prevent the onset of a dis-
ease or health condition, secondary prevention focuses on early detection and treat-
ment to halt or slow the progression of a disease, and tertiary prevention involves
efforts to reduce the impact of an existing disease or condition and prevent complica-
tions or relapses.
P. Nayna Schwerdtle, C. Devine, M. Guevara et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 13 (2023) 100270
2
Loss and damage - a win and a loss
COP27 was declared ’the loss and damage COP’, based on a his-
toric agreement to provide ﬁnancial compensation for the most
severe impacts of climate change. Largely construed as a win, the out-
come is seen as a vital act of solidarity between high-emitting coun-
tries and climate-vulnerable countries. Some see the agreement as
representing immense progress for vulnerable nations, but there is
also a cynical side. Others hold that the commitments made at COP27
to address loss and damage are undermined by a lack of dedicated cli-
mate ﬁnance. Additionally, the lack of progress in 2023 to build con-
sensus on the sources and modalities of this ﬁnance leaves impacted
countries and communities without sufﬁcient resources to respond
to and recover from climate-related impacts.
The need to address loss and damage reﬂects the failure of the
international community to adequately mitigate emissions and of
nations to collectively assert control over polluting corporations,
who behave as supernational powers and push their negative exter-
nalities onto global populations. The COP27 outcome statement also
failed to strengthen the decision to include the phasedown of all fos-
sil fuels. Some are concerned that increased attention and funding to
loss and damage will detract from advancing ambitions upstream
and addressing root causes.
Not all loss and damage will be witnessed, measured, attributed,
or claimed, and lives, health, livelihoods, and cultural heritage are
inherently irreplaceable. To justly compensate affected populations
for loss and damage would be immeasurable and unaffordable. How-
ever, a fully functional loss and damage fund could reveal the true
cost of fossil fuels and force this cost back upon industry, govern-
ments, and multi-lateral institutions that continue to subsidise fossil
fuels. This might then provide a strong additional signal for states
and societies to accelerate the energy transition and reform the
global ﬁnancial system.
The role of health and humanitarian actors in addressing loss and
damage
In the era of loss and damage, maintaining hope and focussing on
solutions improves our chances of tackling the climate crisis. Health
and humanitarian actors can play an important role in averting loss
and damage by mitigating their own carbon footprint and environ-
mental impact, investing in anticipatory action and early warning
systems, and integrating disease surveillance with meteorological
data in highly vulnerable contexts. Health and humanitarian actors
can consider new indicators of vulnerability and draw attention to
and address the severe gaps between global and local service provi-
sion. Health and humanitarian actors can also play a role in minimis-
ing loss and damage by ensuring coherence across humanitarian,
disaster risk reduction, public health emergency, and sustainable
development. They can help provide a platform for the voices of
affected populations, particularly vulnerable communities that are
often overlooked by international coordination efforts. This, in turn,
helps to identify where ﬁnancial and other types of support are
needed, and how it can effectively improve the situation of those
dealing with the impact of climate change.
Health and humanitarian actors are well placed to contribute to
loss and damage science through data collection and analysis in
disaster-affected areas, and to contribute tothe political debate sur-
rounding loss and damage, by advocating for the recognition of loss
and damage as a critical issue. Also, through capacity building, with
the aim to support a collective understanding of the risks, impacts,
and potential adaptation measures, and thereby empower communi-
ties to take action and advocate for their needs. Health workers and
humanitarians can build collaborative partnerships with policy-
makers, researchers, and other stakeholders to bridge the gap
between research and policy, participating in interdisciplinary
research and sharing their experiences and lessons learned. Health
and humanitarian actors can also incorporate climate change adapta-
tion and resilience-building measures into their programs, to contrib-
ute to reducing future losses and damages. The expertise, proximity,
experience, and commitment to supporting at risk communities
make the health and humanitarian community valuable stakeholders
in addressing the challenges posed by loss and damage associated
with climate change.
Finally, as humanitarian agencies often operate in areas and with
communities that states fail or choose not to reach, and where devel-
opment agencies may not be equipped to work, they are in a unique
position to bear witness to the limits of adaptation (both hard and
soft). Humanitarian actors are at the frontlines of acute health
impacts and are well placed to give testimony, often in quantitative
but also in qualitative terms. Importantly, humanitarians can hold
governments to account and ensure that all forms of climate ﬁnance
transparently include new and additional resources and are not
redirected from already severely underfunded humanitarian and
development assistance.
In the lead-up to the COP28 UN climate conference, health and
humanitarian actors should reﬂect on their unique proximity to the
realities of loss and damage and the communities most affected. This
affords an important responsibility to keep a pulse on the global dis-
cussion and to maintain pressure on negotiating parties to ensure
that outcomes concretely respond to the needs of the world’s most
vulnerable people.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper
References
[1] Birkmann J., Liwenga E., Pandey R., Boyd E., Djalante R., Gemenne F., et al. Poverty,
livelihoods and sustainable development supplemental material. In: Oki T, Riv-
era-Ferre MG, Zatari T, eds. Climate change 2022: impacts, adaptation and vulner-
ability. International panel on climate change; 2022: chapter 8 supplementary
material.
Available
from:
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/
report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter08_SM.pdf.
[2] Mechler R, Bouwer LM, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J. Loss and dam-
age from climate change: concepts, methods and policy options. Springer Nature;
2019. p. 557.
[3] IPCC. Annex 1: glossary. In: Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, P€ortner HO, editors.
Global warming of 1.5C. an IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming
of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of cli-
mate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty. Cam-
bridge, UK, New York, USA: Cambridge University Press; 2018. p. 541–62. doi:
10.1017/9781009157940.008.
[4] Tschakert P, Ellis NR, Anderson C, Kelly A, Obeng J. One thousand ways to experi-
ence loss: a systematic analysis of climate-related intangible harm from around
the
world.
Glob
Environ
Change
2019;55:58–72.
doi:
10.1016/j.gloenv-
cha.2018.11.006.
[5] World Health Organization. WHO policy brief: loss and damage geneva. World
Health Organization; 2022. Available from www.who.int/publications/m/item/
who-policy-brief−loss-and-damage.
[6] Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre, Platform on disaster displacement, inter-
national organization for migration. ‘Fifteen observations on disaster displacement
as loss and damage’. In: Platform on disaster displacement. triple-d webinar series:
session 3 - Disaster Displacement as loss and damage. 2022. Available from:
https://environmentalmigration.iom.int/sites/g/ﬁles/tmzbdl1411/ﬁles/documents/
PDD-15_Observations-2022-ENG-screen_compressed.pdf
Geneva,
Switzerland.
2022.
[7] Lenton TM, Rockstr€om J, Gaffney O, Rahmstorf S, Richardson K, Steffen W, et al.
Climate tipping points—too risky to bet against. Nature 2019;575(7784):592–5.
doi: 10.1038/d41586-019-03595-0.
[8] Cisse G, McLeman R, Adams H, Aldunce P, Bowen K, Lendrum DC, et al. Health,
wellbeing, and the changing structure of communities. In: Oki T, Rivera-
Ferre MG, Zatari T, editors. Climate change 2022: impacts, adaptation and vulner-
ability international panel on climate change. Cambridge, UK, New York, USA:
Cambridge University Press; 2022 Chapter 7. doi: 10.1017/9781009325844.009..
[9] United national ofﬁce for the coordination of humanitarian affairs. Global
Humanitarian Overview 2022, https://2022.gho.unocha.org/; 2022.
P. Nayna Schwerdtle, C. Devine, M. Guevara et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 13 (2023) 100270
3
[10] Walsh B, Walton D, Hallegatte S, Arrighi J, Cochrane M, Freebairn A, et al. The cost
of doing nothing. International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Socie-
ties; 2019. Available from https://www.ifrc.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2021-07/2019-
IFRC-CODN-EN.pdf.
[11] Belesova K, Gornot C, Milner J, Sie A, Sauerborn R, Wilkinson P. Mortality impact
of low annual crop yields in a subsistence farming population of Burkina Faso
under the current and a 1.5°C warmer climate in 2100. Sci Total Environ
2019;691:538–48.
[12] Rigaud KK, de Sherbinin A, Jones B, Adamo S, Maleki D, et al. Groundswell Africa:
internal climate migration in West African countries. International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank; 2021. Available from https://open-
knowledge.worldbank.org/entities/publication/40244111-bcdd-57c9-a51f-
6d1bab9d9b37.
[13] King AD, Grose MR, Kimutai J, Pinto I, Harrington LJ. Event attribution is not ready
for a major role in loss and damage. Nat Clim Change 2023;13(5):1–3. doi:
10.1038/s41558-023-01651-2.
[14] Wyns A. COP27 establishes loss and damage fund to respond to human cost of cli-
mate change. Lancet Planet Health 2023;7(1):e21–2. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196
(22)00331-X.
P. Nayna Schwerdtle, C. Devine, M. Guevara et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 13 (2023) 100270
4
