Research article
“We can’t save the planet, we’re too busy saving lives”: Exploring beliefs
about decarbonizing the NHS
F Fylana,*, G Allisonb
a Leeds Sustainability Institute, Leeds Beckett University, Leeds LS1 3HE, UK
b Sustainability Research Institute, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 28 December 2022
Accepted 23 April 2023
Available online 30 April 2023
A B S T R A C T
Background: If health and social care delivery systems are to achieve net zero targets, fundamental changes
are required to how organizations deliver care, how individuals practice clinically, how people access care,
and how systems reduce the demand for healthcare. This paper explores how professionals, patients and citi-
zens respond to this need for change.
Methods: We conducted a mixed methods study, comprising 12 deliberative workshops (n = 35) and a survey
(n = 413) with health and social care staff, patients and citizens in the North of England.
Results: We found that while few people were aware of the net zero target, they supported it. Some, however,
questioned organizational commitment, highlighting potential conﬂicts between cost and sustainability. Staff
described a lack of agency to make changes to their practice, despite identifying many opportunities to do so.
Some believed that healthcare should be exempt from carbon reduction targets. The strongest messages we
found to interest, empower, and motivate people to make changes are: that individual actions matter; that
we have a responsibility to set a good example of tackling climate change; and that making changes saves
lives and should be a priority. We also found that people need to be reassured that the changes will not
adversely affect clinical outcomes. Finally, progress towards targets needs to be tracked and publicly
available.
Conclusion: Our results indicate a need for clear leadership which gives sustainability a higher priority, a need
for staff training to enable conversations about the environmental effects of treatment, and support for shift-
ing the focus from treating illness to promoting health.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate change
Lean healthcare
Social care
Behaviour change
Communication
1. Introduction
To address climate change, healthcare systems need to adapt by
streamlining processes, reducing waste and reducing demand [1−4].
As the largest publicly funded health system in the world contribut-
ing around 6% of national carbon emissions, [5] the UK’s National
Health Service (NHS) has a responsibility to lead on decarbonization
and has committed to reaching net zero by 2040 and achieving 80%
carbon reduction by 2032 [6]. While this will require all NHS stake-
holders to make changes, responsibility is often allocated to roles
involved in estates management [2]. Sustainability is then perceived
as the remit of a speciﬁc role, rather than a change to everybody’s
behavior [7]. Though the existence of such roles may have at one
time been a sign of progress, they have counterintuitively limited the
reach of sustainability efforts [8,9]. Instead, there is a need for all staff
to change their practice to reduce consumption and waste. Progress
has been made in some specialities, for example to identify the envi-
ronmental impact of different anesthetic gases and provide advice
for individual anesthetists to reduce their carbon footprint [10].
A global consensus statement has been produced by the World Fed-
eration of Societies of Anaesthesiologists [11]. This addresses individ-
ual practice, research, education, and the need to show leadership in
environmental sustainability. This provides agency for clinicians to
individually and collectively implement changes, such as using alter-
native anesthetic gases, and adapting their technique to utilize less
gas.
As two thirds of the NHS’s carbon footprint is associated with its
supply chain and procurement, with the remainder attributed to care
delivery, personal travel, and commissioned health services [5], other
disciplines and roles need to recognize the impact their practices
have, and identify and implement actions to increase environmental
sustainability. Reducing use is the most effective means of ensuring
healthcare sustainability but requires a shift from focusing on
* Corresponding author at: Leeds Beckett University, Leeds LS1 3HE, UK.
E-mail address: f.fylan@leedsbeckett.ac.uk (F. Fylan).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2023.100241
2667-2782/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100241
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
treating illness to promoting health [12] and preventing injury [13].
Changes in clinical practice will be required, including reducing tests
and procedures, and changing pathways [1]. Patient behavior will
also need to change yet there has been little research to explore how
to communicate with the public about decarbonizing healthcare and
their role in the process. This research aims to explore how health
and social care staff and the public respond to information about
decarbonizing the NHS and Social Care, the NHS commitment to net
zero, and beliefs about this process and their role in it.
2. Materials and methods
We conducted a mixed methods study using deliberative work-
shops and a survey with health and social care staff, patients, and citi-
zens in the North of England. The theoretical basis of the work was
the COM-B model [14] which focuses on the role of capability, oppor-
tunity and motivation on behavior. The study went through ethical
review, in line with the Code of Ethics of the World Medical Associa-
tion (Declaration of Helsinki) for experiments involving humans. All
participants gave informed consent to participate.
2.1. Deliberative workshops
Deliberative workshops are facilitated group discussions that
encourage participants to explore an issue in depth, challenge each
other’s views, and to consider evidence on the issue so that they can
reﬂect on it and reach an informed view. Twelve deliberative work-
shops with staff and the public explored their understanding of the
role of the health and care system in climate change, their response
to the NHS net zero commitment, how they could adapt their behav-
ior to meet it, and barriers to doing so. Each participant attended two
deliberative workshops (DW1 and DW2) and a total of 35 people
took part, including staff from nine different hospital trusts (Table 1).
Each workshop comprised a researcher, the participants, and a mem-
ber of the local NHS Climate Change team. In the ﬁrst of their two
workshops participants were read a brief statement about the NHS’s
commitment to decarbonising and the sort of changes that might be
required. After the workshop they were given a task to interview a
friend, colleague or family member about the topic. During the sec-
ond workshop they reported on their interview, how their inter-
viewee responded, and how the interview had affected their own
views. They also discussed what individuals can do to help tackle cli-
mate change, any changes to the workplace, infrastructure or facili-
ties that would support change, and any barriers to change and how
they could be overcome. Workshops were recorded, transcribed and
analyzed using thematic analysis [15]. Workshops took place in Janu-
ary and February 2021.
NHS staff were recruited via newsletter advertisments, and as
such, these participants were mainly those who already had an inter-
est in climate change. Social care staff and the public were recruited
through a ﬁeldwork agency and received a ﬁnancial incentive to take
part. We used a screening questionnaire to include people varying in
age, ethnic group, socioeconomic status, employment status, parental
status, caring responsibilities, and commitment to sustainable living.
For the public, we included people with long-term conditions who
are regular users of healthcare systems (patients) and also people
who are occasional users, such as to treat short-term conditions and
for screening and vaccination services (citizens).
2.2. Online survey
Respondents were told that: “The survey talks about climate
change, which is caused by carbon emissions. Tackling climate
change involves reducing carbon emissions” and that “The NHS has a
target to tackle climate change: 80% reduction in carbon emissions
between 2028 and 2032 and removing all carbon emissions - Net
Zero - by 2040.” The survey comprised questions about awareness of
the effect of the NHS on climate change, awareness of and support
for the NHS and Social Care net zero commitment, response to a
series of possible approaches to reduce carbon emissions identiﬁed
from the deliberative workshops, and the Attitudes to Climate
Change questionnaire [16]. The questionnaire has 15 questions that
form two scales that measure beliefs about climate change and inten-
tion to take action to tackle climate change. Data were analysed using
descriptive statistics and t-tests to compare responses between staff
and patients/citizens.
The survey was distributed online by the West Yorkshire Health
and Care Partnership to staff (n = 2000), and by a survey panel organi-
zation to patients and citizens. We received a total of 413 survey
responses: 173 (42%) worked in the NHS and Social Care; and the
remaining 240 (58%) were patients and citizens.
 39% (161) identiﬁed as male, 60% (248) as female, and 1% (4) as
non-binary
 7% (29) reported having a disability
 30% (124) reported having a long-term condition, impairment or
illness. Most commonly these were a long-term condition (10%,
41), a physical or mobility impairment (6%, 25), a mental health
condition (5%, 21), or a sensory impairment (4%, 16)
 87% (359) were White British with the most common ethnic groups
being Pakistani, Indian, Chinese, and mixed White and Asian.
The survey ran from March to May 2021.
3. Results
3.1. Deliberative workshops
Most participants were surprised by how much the NHS contrib-
utes to the UK’s carbon emissions but recognized a need to tackle
Table 1
Participants in the deliberative workshops.
Group
Roles
Participants
1: NHS staff
Managers, people with a strategic role, people working in procurement
Six participants: four males, two females; ﬁve White British, one British
Asian; age groups 25−44, 45−64.
2: NHS staff
People in clinical roles: GP, radiographer, physiotherapist, health visitor,
screening practitioner, paramedic
Eight participants: one male, seven females; eight White British; age
groups 25−44, 45−64.
3: NHS staff
People in clinical roles: GPs, emergency medicine, community nurse
Five participants: one male, four females; ﬁve White British; age groups
25−44, 45−64.
4: Social care staff
People working in social care: care homes; domiciliary care; day care,
management
Four participants: one male, three females; two White British, one Black
British; one Eastern European; age groups 18−24; 25−44, 45−64.
5. Patients
People with a long-term condition who receive regular NHS treatment,
e.g. for heart disease, lymphedema, and mental health problems.
Six participants: three males, three females; four White British, one Black
British, one Eastern European; age groups 18−24; 25−44, 45−64.
6. Citizens
People who are occasional users of NHS services, e.g., for GP appointments
to treat minor conditions, or for screening or vaccinations.
Six participants: two males, four females; ﬁve White British, one Black
British; age groups 18−24; 25−44, 45−64.
F. Fylan and G. Allison
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100241
2
climate change and supported the net zero target. Many staff talked
about feeling proud to work in an organization that has made this
commitment and several highlighted that making changes to work-
ing practices in order to cut carbon emissions is more motivating
than making changes to cut costs. However, they recognized that
reaching net zero would be a substantial challenge and some were
skeptical that the target could be met. The public also supported the
NHS and Social Care tackling climate change and talked about how
the NHS has a responsibility to protect people, and this includes not
causing climate change and pollution. We identiﬁed four themes in
discussions.
3.1.1. Are we really serious about net zero?
This theme is about concerns that the NHS and Social Care are not
serious about tackling climate change. Participants talked about there
being a potential conﬂict between cost and sustainability. Staff
highlighted a need for clear leadership to give sustainability higher
priority and discussed how it will be important for senior managers
to lead by example. Several described how all talk of sustainability
had disappeared during the COVID-19 pandemic, whereas if the NHS
were serious about reaching net zero, sustainability efforts would not
be put on hold for any reason. (Source of each comment, such as the
Deliberative Workshops, are indicated at the end of the statements.)
It is down to the leadership at the end of the day. If your leader sees it
as a nuisance it won’t happen. DW1.1
Participants discussed how there is a need for publicity about tar-
gets and the challenges and efforts to achieve them. Staff talked about
how sustainability needs to be something that every staff member
should consider in their daily work, and as a normal topic of conver-
sation, both between colleagues and with patients. They suggested
that
leaders
and
managers
should
initiate
and
expect
these
conversations.
It’s only grandstanding if the commitment doesn’t ﬁnd its way into
targets and ambitions and ways of assessing what we’re doing.
DW1.2
Participants also discussed the importance of organizations sup-
porting staff to make changes, for example providing e-bike loan
schemes and facilities for people who cycle or run to work, and
reducing incentives (e.g. mileage payments) for using a car while
increasing them for cycling.
3.1.2. Healthcare is an exception
Participants discussed whether the NHS and Social Care should be
exempt from moral or legal pressure to become more sustainable as
its function is to improve health and save lives. Some talked about
how this gives them carbon priority over other sectors. Similarly, sev-
eral staff participants noted that health and social care staff should
not be distracted from urgent activities in order to tackle long-term
problems such as sustainability.
I think [in the past] we’ve always given ourselves a bit of a free pass:
it’s people’s health and people’s lives so we have to do it. DW1.1
Many patients also held these views. They talked about how their
own ongoing healthcare needs are more important than protecting
others from the effects of climate change. They recognized that this
could be viewed as selﬁsh, but nevertheless wanted to feel conﬁdent
that their own care would not be compromised and they did not
want to be pressured into selecting a treatment that is less clinically
effective but better for the environment.
Although it would be wonderful for the NHS to be able to do this, the
focus should be on other companies that aren’t quite as important as
a lifesaving service. DW6.2
I want a treatment that’s best for me, not for the environment. When
you’re ill, I don’t want to [be made to] feel guilty that my treatment is
contributing more to climate change. DW5.1
Citizens who were not heavy users of the NHS felt differently, and
discussed how it is important to change practices — including treat-
ments — to reduce carbon emissions. They supported more social
prescribing and taking positive steps to stay healthy to reduce future
use of the NHS and Social Care. Participants’ discussions indicated a
difference between serious acute conditions, for which they would
not want to ask about the environmental side effects, and less urgent
long-term conditions, for which they would be more likely to explore
alternatives.
I have an EpiPen type thing that I’ve got to do every two weeks. But
instead of using an EpiPen, throwing it away, which is mainly plastic,
give me a reﬁll, train me how to properly do it so the needle’s clean,
the medication’s stored properly, rather than using a new one, more
plastic every two weeks. Something like that, I would go for more of
the environmentally friendly one because it’s a long-term, lifelong
condition. DW5.1
Staff talked about how they would ﬁnd it difﬁcult to have conver-
sations with patients that used environmental effects to frame treat-
ment options. For example, they discussed that social prescribing
needs to be presented as beneﬁting the patient rather than the envi-
ronment. However, many staff discussed how health and social care
professionals have a responsibility to set a good example to others by
talking about ways of reducing carbon emissions.
3.1.3. The need for agency
Participants discussed how organizational rules, processes and
procedures can shift responsibility away from individuals. Many
staff participants talked about feeling disempowered and unable to
make any meaningful changes or have any signiﬁcant impact. There
were discussions about how rules and directives come from the top
of the organization, or that managers make decisions rather than
individuals, and appear unwilling to engage in conversations about
changes to increase sustainability. They highlighted that this results
in individuals feeling that there is nothing they can or should do.
For example, there were discussions in all the groups (staff and
patients) about how people did not feel able to challenge the
amount of waste produced by COVID-19 infection control pro-
cesses. Inability to inﬂuence the supply chain was also discussed as
making people feel powerless.
Some people see a barrier at the supply chain level. So they say we’re
only allowed to buy certain things from certain suppliers. If we’re not
putting pressure on the suppliers to create things that are more
environmentally friendly, we can’t do anything because we have to
buy from them. DW3.2
Some, including those with a procurement role, talked about how
it can be difﬁcult to know which products are more sustainable, and
that a whole life-cycle assessment might be required.
Many staff participants talked about how the changes they could
potentially make are insigniﬁcant compared with the energy that is
wasted through inefﬁcient buildings. This led them to feel that there
is little point in them making individual changes. In contrast, they
discussed how it is important that every single member of the staff
feels a responsibility to identify ways of reducing carbon emissions in
their own individual workspace, and reporting problems like drafty
rooms so that the energy efﬁciency of buildings can be increased.
F. Fylan and G. Allison
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100241
3
[In my interview with colleagues] they were all very keen to be able
to participate in this and kind of be involved. DW1.2
A few staff participants talked about how some managers are dis-
cussing sustainability during annual appraisals. They highlighted that
this is valuable as it emphasizes the importance of sustainability,
makes it something that is relevant to that person’s role and perfor-
mance, and it motivates them to make changes.
While staff were positive about the need to empower themselves
and their colleagues, many were hesitant about empowering patients
to ask about the environmental side effects of their treatment
options. They were concerned that staff would not know the answers.
Some were skeptical that patients would feel conﬁdent enough to
query their prescribed medications.
I don’t think clinicians are really armed with that information. If
somebody came to ask which of their medicines could be changed to
have a lower environment impact in terms of climate change and
asked for advice about the risks in and the beneﬁts of that, I don’t I
don’t think many people are be able to do that. DW3.1
3.1.4. Opportunities
This theme is about the ideas that people had about changes.
Many suggestions were made, and people talked enthusiastically
about things they would like to try. Examples included a greater focus
on deprescribing, reﬁllable medication containers, and sourcing sup-
plies locally. Some participants talked about the need to shift the
focus from healthcare to preventative care, and staff talked about a
greater use of social prescribing.
We should be minimizing people’s need for health care and looking at
other options such as green and social prescribing. DW2.1
Participants from all groups talked about how people need to feel
that their changes make a difference and highlighted that when peo-
ple are both motivated and empowered to make changes, they will
ﬁnd ways of making the NHS more sustainable. Staff in clinical roles
suggested a radical review of processes would provide an opportu-
nity to redesign pathways in a way that considers sustainability as
well as patient outcomes.
There were many discussions about capitalizing on the changes
made in response to COVID-19. For example, patients now expect to
have telephone or video consultations instead of face-to-face ones.
People
discussed
how
this
should
continue
where
clinically
appropriate.
Sometimes there was a sense that patients were being dragged into
hospital, and it was really just to make sure the consultant had actu-
ally read the radiology report or the histology report. DW1.2
3.2. Survey
Few respondents (16%, 66) reported that they were already aware
that the NHS causes around 6% of the UK’s carbon emissions. Aware-
ness was higher in NHS and Social Care staff (26%, 45) than in the
public (9%, 22). Most respondents (84%, 347) reported that it is
important (27%, 112) or very important (57%, 235) to reduce climate
change caused by the NHS, and important (27%, 111) or very impor-
tant (57%, 235) to reduce climate change caused by social care. Only
5% (21) reported that it is not important to reduce climate change
caused by the NHS, and the same number (5%, 21) that it is not
important to reduce climate change caused by social care. Staff had
stronger beliefs that it is more important to tackle climate change
than the public (t (405) = 7.5, p < 0.001). While this is likely to be
because staff respondents were recruited using communication net-
works and the public by an online panel, it nevertheless shows that
there are NHS and Social Care staff who are engaged with tackling cli-
mate change and motivated to take action.
Respondents were told that the NHS has a target to tackle climate
change: an 80% reduction in carbon emissions between 2028 and
2032 and net zero by 2040. Again, more NHS and Social Care staff
(32%, 55) reported being already aware of this than the public (9%,
22). Most people agreed with this target (Fig. 1). Support was stron-
ger in staff (81%, 140) than the public (69%, 166). Very few people dis-
agreed: only 5% (9) of staff and 7% (17) of the public.
Respondents were asked which potential ideas for meeting the
net zero commitment should be implemented. The percentage who
selected each option is shown in Figs. 2 (staff) and 3 (the public).
There was strong support from staff for most ideas, particularly for:
arranging appointments that minimize the need for patients to
travel; showing patients and clients how to be more sustainable; a
website with carbon emissions targets and progress towards them;
taking carbon awareness training; and sustainability not being the
ﬁnal item on agendas. The ideas most supported by the public were:
appointments that minimize the need to travel; hospital websites
with carbon emission targets and progress; and staff showing people
how to be more sustainable.
The results from the Attitudes to Climate Change questionnaire
show no differences between staff (mean = 36.5) and the public
Fig. 1. Support for the Net Zero target.
F. Fylan and G. Allison
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100241
4
Fig. 2. The number of staff who thought each idea should be implemented.
Fig. 3. The number of the public who thought each idea should be implemented.
5
F. Fylan and G. Allison
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100241
(mean = 35.6) in the scale measuring attitudes towards climate
change (t = 0.82, p = 0.4). However, there is a difference between staff
(mean = 11.4) and the public (mean = 14.5, t = 6.15, p < 0.001) in
the scale measuring intentions, indicating that staff have greater
intentions to take action to tackle climate change.
4. Discussion
We found that while people recognize the need to tackle climate
change, support the NHS and Social Care doing so, and are prepared
to make changes, they are skeptical about achieving net zero. Themes
from the deliberative workshops explain why. First, there are con-
cerns about organizational commitment to sustainability. This goes
beyond suspecting greenwashing as a means of exaggerating the
progress made, to questioning whether leaders are willing to imple-
ment the scope and scale of changes required [1]. This suggests a
need to communicate a plan for what will change to achieve carbon
reduction, and also to be candid about how carbon offsetting is likely
to be one of the ways that Net Zero targets will be met. For example,
NHS Forests could be used in carbon calculations, and it is likely that
carbon capture and storage will also be required [6]. Second, people
think that health and social care should be exempt from carbon
reduction targets as the immediate task of saving lives should take
priority. Evidence of this “moral offset” has been discussed in previ-
ous research, and it creates additional barriers to change in the NHS
which is already hampered by focusing on how to cope with increas-
ing demand and solving immediate problems and crises [1]. Meeting
net zero commitments requires staff to accept an expanded notion of
the principle “ﬁrst do no harm” beyond care for individual patients to
a duty to protect the Earth’s natural system [12b].
Finally, people don’t feel empowered to make changes. Staff
lacked the agency to make decisions about their practice both in
terms of knowing what changes to make and having the autonomy
to make them. Staff were aware of the complexity of life-cycle assess-
ments [10] and felt reliant on procurement services to make deci-
sions on which products have a lower carbon footprint. However,
participants who worked in a procurement role often described lack-
ing the necessary information and expertise to reach these decisions.
Nevertheless, staff, patients and citizens generated many ideas about
making health and social care more sustainable. These included
changes that align with the NHS’s plan for carbon saving activities,
for example using video or telephone consultations rather than face-
to-face ones, and deprescribing. COVID-19 has had a mixed effect:
accelerating the move away from face-to-face consultations, while
increasing waste from infection control measures. Our results show a
desire for a more fundamental review of how to introduce safe and
sustainable practices, such as a review of clinical pathways, a shift of
focus to preventative care, and the use of social prescribing. This sup-
ports the recommendation to include environmental sustainability
when measuring the impact of quality improvement projects [17].
While healthcare professionals have been identiﬁed as being well
positioned to bring about such changes [4], our results indicate that
these changes will not happen without clear leadership which gives
sustainability a higher priority and recognizes the importance of
moving away from responsibility for sustainability lying with a single
person or department [8,9]. As a quarter of our survey respondents
(both staff and the public) were unsure about their support for net
zero goals, there is a need to communicate the urgency and extent of
changes required.
Our ﬁndings indicate that for many, climate change remains a dis-
tant, abstract concept, rather than a change that is currently
adversely affecting people’s health. Our participants accepted the
speed and extent of action to tackle COVID-19, but we did not ﬁnd
the same acceptance that tackling climate change will require
changes at a similar scale [1]. There was little discussion or acknowl-
edgement of the current health impacts of climate change, such as
increases in respiratory diseases [18]. Nor was there discussion of
how delivering healthcare contributes to climate change, or how cli-
mate change could impact on healthcare delivery. There is a need to
align actions with the United Nations Conference of the Parties (COP)
26 Health Programme which acknowledges the vulnerability of
health systems to climate change, and the impact of healthcare sys-
tems on the climate. Rather than seeing climate change as an abstract
and distant concept, healthcare professionals should recognize that
the climate crisis is a health crisis and therefore climate action is a
core part of professional responsibilities [9], as has been identiﬁed in
anesthetics [11].
Our results indicate that the NHS must adapt to a changing con-
text. We identiﬁed support for shifting the focus from illness to pro-
moting health [12,17] and that it is important to talk about how
decarbonization beneﬁts public health as well as planetary health [3].
However, staff will need support in changing their focus as many
reported they would not feel comfortable having discussions with
patients about the environmental effects of treatments. There is a
role for professional and regulatory healthcare organizations, such as
the UK Royal Colleges, in education and training, and in leading by
example. While some professional or healthcare organizations are
doing so [e.g. 11], others are not [19]. Patients are likely to resist any
suggestion that planetary health should take precedence over their
own and there is a role for patient support organizations in raising
awareness of sustainable choices.
Finally, our results indicate a rhetoric-reality gap, whereby sup-
port for sustainability is rarely dismissed, but at an organizational
level remains under-supported and under-resourced, with initiatives
or projects ultimately giving way under the strain of other priorities
[20]. The nature by which sustainability is viewed determines the
perceived opportunities and barriers for action; though power point-
ing - in which responsibility is perceived as the responsibility of a
more powerful individual or organization [21] - was evident within
our results. Changing the narrative and broadening understanding
of sustainability would engage and empower a wider selection of
stakeholders.
The strengths of this study are in exploring the views of a wide
range of participants that include staff in a variety of clinical and
managerial roles, patients and citizens. Because each participant
interviewed a colleague, friend or family member, we captured the
views of a wider range of people and insight into how making
the NHS more sustainable is discussed in workplaces and homes. The
limitations included the lack of diversity in the qualitative sample,
e.g. all were all from the same region in the UK, and they were mainly
White British. The number of participants in the workshops was
small, and there were more females than males, particularly for the
clinical staff. Furthermore, the staff who participated are likely to be
those with an existing interest in tackling climate change. Neverthe-
less, the barriers identiﬁed are likely to be even more pertinent for
staff across the NHS and Social Care sector who do not have this exist-
ing interest.
5. Conclusion
It is important for NHS and Social Care organizations to be clear
that net zero is a serious target that everybody needs to work
towards. Individuals need to be supported to make changes to their
working practices, and to see climate action as a core part of their
professional responsibilities. Progress towards targets needs to be
tracked and publicly available.
Funding
The study was funded by the West Yorkshire Health and Care
Partnership.
6
F. Fylan and G. Allison
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100241
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr Frank Swinton and the West Yorkshire
Health and Care Partnership for their support in this research.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found,
in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.joclim.2023.100241.
References
[1] McNally S, Phizacklea EC, Gibbs VN, Brown R, Wilcocks KV, O’Brien S, Burton HK,
Evans S, Vella-Baldacchino M, Khader A, Afzal I, Mehdian R, Power KM. Lean path-
ways in orthopaedics: multiple wins for sustainability. Orthop Trauma 2022;36
(5):265–73. doi: 10.1016/j.mporth.2022.07.003.
[2] Pencheon D. Making health care more sustainable: the case of the English NHS.
Public Health 2015;129:1335–43. doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2015.08.010.
[3] Pencheon D. Developing a sustainable health care system: the United Kingdom
experience. Med J Aust 2018;208:284–5. doi: 10.5694/mja17.01134.
[4] Sherman JD, McGain F, Lem M, Mortimer F, Jonas WB, MacNeill AJ. Net zero
healthcare: a call for clinician action. BMJ 2021;20(374):n1323. PMID: 34544732;
PMCID: PMC8450779. doi: 10.1136/bmj.n1323.
[5] Tennison I, Roschnik S, Ashby B, Boyd R, Hamilton I, Oreszczyn T. Health care’s
response to climate change: a carbon footprint assessment of the NHS in England.
Lancet Planetary Health 2021;5:e84–92. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196(20)30271-0.
[6] Delivering a ‘Net Zero’ National Health Service, NHS England. Accessed 13/2/23 at
https://www.england.nhs.uk/greenernhs/a-net-zero-nhs/
[7] Allison G. PhD thesis. University of Leeds; 2016.
[8] Krizek KJ, Newport D, White J, Townsend AR. Higher education’s sustainability
imperative: how to practically respond? Int J Sustain Higher Educ 2012;13:19–
33. doi: 10.1108/14676371211190281.
[9] Hoover E, Harder M. What lies beneath the surface? The hidden complexities of
organisational change for sustainability in higher education. J Clean Prod
2015;106:175–88. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.01.081.
[10] McGain F, Muret J, Lawson C, Sherman JD. Environmental sustainability in anaes-
thesia and critical care. Br J Anaesth 2020;125(5):680–92 Epub 2020 Aug 12.
PMID: 32798068; PMCID: PMC7421303. doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2020.06.055.
[11] White SM, Shelton CL, Gelb AW, Lawson C, McGain F, Muret J, Sherman JD.
representing the World Federation of Societies of Anaesthesiologists Global
Working Group on Environmental Sustainability in Anaesthesia. Principles of
environmentally-sustainable anaesthesia: a global consensus statement from
the World Federation of Societies of Anaesthesiologists. Anaesthesia 2022;77
(2):201–12 Epub 2021 Nov 1. PMID: 34724710; PMCID: PMC9298028. doi:
10.1111/anae.15598.
[12] Sherman JD, Thiel C, MacNeill A, Eckelman MJ, Dubrow R, Hopf H, et al. The Green
Print: advancement of environmental sustainability in healthcare. Resour, Con-
serv Recycl 2020;161. doi: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104882.
[13] Baid H, Holland J, Pirro F. Environmentally sustainable orthopaedics and trauma:
systems and behaviour change. Sustain Orthop Trauma 2022;36:256–64. doi:
10.1016/j.mporth.2022.07.002.
[14] Michie S, van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: a new method
for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions. Implement Sci
2011;23(6):42. PMID: 21513547; PMCID: PMC3096582. doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-
6-42.
[15] Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 2006;3
(2):77–101. doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
[16] Christensen R, Knezek G. The climate change attitude survey: measuring middle
school student beliefs and intentions to enact positive environmental change. Int
J Environ Sci Educ 2015;10(5):773–88. doi: 10.12973/ijese.2015.276a.
[17] Mortimer F, Isherwood J, Pearce M, Kenward C, Vaux E. Sustainability in quality
improvement: measuring impact. Fut Healthc J 2018;5(2):94–7 PMID: 31098541;
PMCID: PMC6502561. doi: 10.7861/futurehosp.5-2-94.
[18] World Health Organisation. Climate change and health.
Accessed 31/10/22 at
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/ambient-(outdoor)-air-qual-
ity-and-health.
[19] Cooke E, Cussans A, Clack A, Cornford C. Climate change and health scorecard:
what are UK professional and regulatory health organizations doing to tackle the
climate and ecological emergency? J Clim Change Health 2022;8:100164. doi:
10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100164.
[20] Bardati D. The integrative role of the campus environmental audit: experiences at
Bishops University, Canada. Int J Sustain Higher Educ 2006;7:57–68. doi:
10.1108/14676370610639245.
[21] Hoover E, Harder M. What lies beneath the surface? The hidden complexities of
organisational change for sustainability in higher education. J Clean Prod
2015;106:175–88. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.01.081.
F. Fylan and G. Allison
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100241
7
