Review
Health impacts of climate-change related natural disasters on persons
with disabilities in developing countries: A literature review
Taslim Uddin*,a, Anika Tasnimb, Md Redwanul Islamb, Mohammad Tariqul Islama,
A.K.M. Saleka, Md Moniruzzaman Khana, James Gosneyc, M Atiqul Haqueb
a Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University, Shahbag, Dhaka, 1000, Bangladesh
b Department of Public Health and Informatics, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University, Shahbag, Dhaka, 1000, Bangladesh
c Department of Health and Applied Programs, Patrick and Henry Community College, Martinsville, VA 24014, USA
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 10 December 2023
Accepted 28 June 2024
Available online 4 July 2024
A B S T R A C T
Background: Climate change is identiﬁed as the foremost health threat in the present era, resulting in a broad
range of negative health impacts on individuals, families, and communities. Marginalized populations in
developing countries are particularly affected. This literature review explored the health impacts of climate
change-related natural disasters on persons with pre-existing physical and mental disabilities in developing
countries.
Methods: The Joanna Briggs Institute [JBI] evidence synthesis guideline was applied and results were reported
following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses [PRISMA] guidelines.
PubMed, PsycINFO, Scopus, and Embase databases were searched using terms related to ‘persons with dis-
abilities’ (PWD), ‘climate change’, and “developing countries” and types of natural disasters considered to
result from climate change. Selected articles were reviewed and thematic analysis was performed.
Findings: Fourteen articles were included of which ﬁve generalized across multiple countries and nine pro-
ﬁled speciﬁc developing countries including Bangladesh, China, Haiti, India, Nepal, Philippines, South Africa,
Tuvalu, and Uganda. Five key themes were identiﬁed: [i] impact on PWD physical health, [ii] impact on PWD
mental health, [iii] resilience and coping strategies of PWD in disasters, [iv] PWD involvement in inclusive
disaster planning, and [v] climate-change related natural disasters on PWD in developing countries as a
human rights issue.
Interpretation: This review underscores the lack of literature related to negative health impacts of climate
change-related natural disasters on persons with pre-existing physical and mental disabilities in developing
countries. Additional research is required to better understand these impacts as well as contributing social
and economic factors and facilitative coping and resilience strategies in climate-related natural disasters.
Addressing these gaps can inform development of effective, disability-inclusive disaster management practi-
ces which contribute to more equitable climate-change related health and rights-based outcomes for PWD in
developing countries.
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-
ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Coping strategy
Critical environmental justice
Developing country
Environmental justice
Mental health
Persons with disability
Physical health
1. Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) has identiﬁed climate
change as the single largest health threat today and estimates that
climate change will result in an additional 250,000 deaths annually
between 2030 and 2050 [1]. The health effects of climate change
have been described at the individual, family, and community
levels [2]. Vulnerable populations including persons with disabilities
(PWD) in developing countries are among those most adversely
affected, experiencing severe health impacts and limited opportuni-
ties to implement coping and resilience strategies. PWD are at high
risk for both negative physical and mental health impacts due to cli-
mate change [3]. Developing countries are more severely impacted
than developed countries [4−6].
An estimated 16 % of the global population lives with a disability,
and 80 % of these people live in developing countries [7]. Developing
countries are those historically assigned to the World Bank low and
middle income classiﬁcation groups. Besides having smaller econo-
mies, developing countries generally have a lower average standard
* Correspondence authors at. Room no #500/B, Cabin Block (4th ﬂoor), Department
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical Univer-
sity, Shahbag, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh.
E-mail address: taslimpmr@bsmmu.edu.bd (T. Uddin).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2024.100332
2667-2782/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 19 (2024) 100332
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
of living, less functional governments, weaker health systems and
human rights protections, lower literacy rates, and lower life expec-
tancies than developed countries [8,9]. Disability refers to a state
wherein the body or mind experiences impairments, resulting in
challenges in performing speciﬁc tasks and engaging with the world.
WHO identiﬁes three dimensions of disability: ﬁrst, impairments
affecting body structure, function, or mental capacity, which
include examples such as limb loss, vision impairment, or mem-
ory decline; second, activity limitations including difﬁculty in
tasks such as seeing, hearing, walking, and problem-solving, and;
lastly, participation restrictions in routine engagement activities
such as work, social interaction, recreation, and healthcare and
preventive service access [10].
PWD are a disenfranchised minority in many countries and often
face signiﬁcant challenges in daily living due to their medical condi-
tions, which can be complicated further by the external environment.
Serious climate change-related threats to the health of PWD include
water-related illness, heat illness, mental health effects, injuries, and
deaths [11−14]. The effects of heat and cold waves, extreme temper-
atures, wildﬁres, and natural disasters, including ﬂoods, cyclones,
and landslides, on human health are more prevalent in PWD, espe-
cially those in developing countries. PWD suffer disproportionately
higher rates of morbidity and mortality in natural and man-made dis-
asters resulting from climate change [14]. They are also more prone
to worsening of pre-existing health vulnerabilities, especially given
the increasing frequency and intensity of global disasters [15].
Besides harm to physical health, negative life events due to
extreme weather events related to climate change can cause
unhealthy stress, grief, depression, and mental illness. Climate
change weather events also result in increased disruption of med-
ical care for PWD compared to the general population and a
higher prevalence of negative economic and social risk factors
including unemployment and poverty.
Despite the high vulnerability of PWD to extreme weather events,
their views and lived experiences are often not included in develop-
ment of climate change disaster management policies [14,16]. The
negative impacts of climate change on PWD, especially in developing
countries, are consequently less thoroughly documented in the litera-
ture compared to those of other vulnerable populations [17]. This lit-
erature review seeks to address the need for a greater understanding
of negative climate change-related natural disaster impacts on the
health of PWD in developing countries with the intention of helping
to reduce these impacts.
2. Methods
2.1. Search strategy
Search eligibility criteria were informed by the Joanna Briggs
Institute (JBI) evidence synthesis guideline [18]. The review concept
was deﬁned as the ‘intersection of climate change and health’, the
population as ’individuals with disabilities, and the review context as
’developing countries’. Multiple databases were searched including
PubMed, PsycINFO, Scopus, and Embase, 2005 to 2023 inclusive, to
more comprehensively identify the available, limited literature on
PWD and climate change. Additional studies were identiﬁed by
hand-searching article reference lists.
PubMed search terms for PWD and climate change (Box 1) were
applied to all database searches and the term “developing countries”
was searched for country-speciﬁc inclusion (supplementary material
Table 1 for each database search term). Primary keyword terms “per-
sons with disabilities”, “climate change”, and “developing countries”
were used as were types of natural disasters considered to result
from climate change. MeSH terms, truncation, double quotes, and
similar terms were employed to help ensure the inclusion of all avail-
able pertinent studies.
Box 1
PubMed search terms
((Disabled Person*[mh] OR rehabilitation*[mh] OR Spinal Cord
Injuries[mh] OR "People with Disabil*" or "PWD"[all] OR "Per-
son with Disabil*"[all] OR Physically Disabl*[all] OR "Physically
Challenged"[all] OR "Person with special needs"[all] OR Disabil-
ity-Adjusted Life Years[mh] OR "Disease related disabilit*"[all]
OR "Trauma related disabilit*"[all] OR "health impact"[all] OR
"Quality of Life"[mh] OR "health effect*"[all] OR "health conse-
quenc*"[all] OR "physical health"[all] OR "mental health"[mh])
AND (Climate Change*[mh] OR Natural Disaster*[mh] OR
Cyclonic Storm*[mh] OR Flood*[mh] OR Heatwave*[all] OR Hur-
ricanes[mh] OR Cyclones[mh] OR Drought*[mh] OR Wildﬁre*
[mh] OR Sea Level Rise[mh] OR "landslid*"[all] OR "Weather
variation"[all] OR "climate variabil*"[all] OR "climatic variatio-
n"[all] OR Intersection of climate change[all] OR interchange of
climate change[all]))
2.2. Article selection process
Article selection comprised four phases: identiﬁcation, screening, eli-
gibility, and inclusion. Potential articles were identiﬁed through data-
base searches (see detailed literature search strategy in Supplementary
Materials). Identiﬁed article titles and abstracts were screened for inclu-
sion criteria. A full-text review of qualifying screened articles was per-
formed for eligibility and non-qualifying articles were excluded.
Included articles were required to be: related to persons with pre-exist-
ing physical and/or mental disabilities impacted by climate change-
related extreme weather events; from developing countries; published
between 2005 and 2023, and; published in the English language. Fig. 1
diagrams the ﬂow for article selection.
2.3. Data extraction and management
The Joanna Briggs Institute Framework was adopted to ensure
methodological strength and evidence management for this review
[19]. In terms of the data extraction process, three authors (M.R.I., A.
T., and T.U.) independently conducted title/abstract and full-text
screening using an online research platform (Rayyan; https://rayyan.
ai/reviews/). Four authors (M.R.I., A.T., M.T.I., and T.U.) then indepen-
dently extracted data meeting inclusion criteria into a Google sheet;
data were exported to primary documents for further analysis. The
PRISMA extension for the scoping review framework (PRISMA-ScR)
was used to determine the review methodology (see PRISMA-ScR
Checklist in Supplementary Material) [20]. No critical appraisal was
done for this review. Mendeley reference management software was
used. Thematic analysis of the selected articles was performed by
joint author consultation (M.R.I., A.T., M.T.I., and T.U.).
3. Results
3.1. Article characteristics, key ﬁndings, and recommendations
The database search retrieved 406 articles. After the removal of
duplicates, of the 402 articles remaining for title and abstract screen-
ing, 360 were excluded for not meeting inclusion criteria. Forty-two
articles were eligible for full-text review and 14 met the inclusion cri-
terion. Based on methodological description, article studies com-
prised reviews (n = 5), cross-sectional studies (n = 5), a case report
(n = 1),a series of case reports (n = 1), a qualitative study (n = 1), and a
needs assessment (n = 1). Five articles generalized data from multiple
T. Uddin, A. Tasnim, M.R. Islam et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 19 (2024) 100332
2
developing countries and nine articles proﬁled speciﬁc countries
including Bangladesh, China, Haiti, India, Nepal, Philippines, South
Africa, Tuvalu, and Uganda. Included studies evaluated persons with
pre-existing physical and mental disabilities who were impacted by
climate-related disasters. Articles spanned from 2005 to 2023 and
were published in the English language. [See Table 3]. Table 4 high-
lights article key ﬁndings and recommendations.
3.2. Thematic analysis
Analysis of the included papers revealed ﬁve key themes related
to the impacts of climate-change related natural disasters on PWD in
developing countries: [i] impact on PWD physical health, [ii] impact
on PWD mental health, [iii] resilience and coping strategies of PWD
in disasters, [iv] PWD involvement in inclusive disaster planning, and
[v] climate-change related natural disasters on PWD in developing
countries as a human rights issue.
4. Discussion
4.1. Impacts of climate-change related natural disasters on the physical
health of PWD in developing countries
Most articles address impacts on the physical health of PWD, per-
sons with mobility impairments primarily, in climate change related
disasters. These persons may be unable to quickly evade a crisis
threat or be left behind during a hurried evacuation [21−27]. Sensory
disabilities including hearing impairment, visual impairment, deaf-
ness and deaf-blindness were highlighted in a study mapping the
susceptibility of PWD to landslides in eastern Uganda [21]. These per-
sons with sensory disabilities were lowly prioritized in rescue and
recovery efforts given the assumption their survivability was poor
and therefore did not merit limited available emergency resources
[22]. Persons with SCI suffering motor and sensory disabilities,
including
mobility
impairment
and
temperature
dysregulation,
respectively, were the focus of a cross-sectional study addressing the
educational needs of rehabilitation professionals regarding disaster
management and SCI [28]. The landmark WHO World Report on Dis-
ability indicated that persons with intellectual disabilities in Costa
Rica suffer disproportionate risks in disasters and are often excluded
from relief services due to lack of self-advocacy [29].
4.2. Impacts of climate-change related natural disasters on the mental
health of PWD in developing countries
The literature reports that PWD experience mood changes, specif-
ically heightened anxiety and depression, that lead to greater mor-
bidity due to extreme weather events driven by climate change
[28,30,31]. Beyond the immediate mental stresses of surviving an
acute event which can involve evacuation and relocation, lack of criti-
cal resources such as clean water and food can contribute to feelings
of powerlessness, fear, and depression among PWD. Healthcare ser-
vice disruption may compromise PWD medical conditions in the
short term and compound mental health symptoms over time
[28,31]. Altered daily routines and personal support networks can
also exacerbate existing mental health conditions [22]. Decreased
community participation due to a climate-related disaster increases
vulnerability, reduces resilience, and degrades the quality of life of
affected PWD, their caregivers and their families. Children with dis-
abilities are particularly vulnerable in disasters [25,26]. Separation of
children from caregivers in disasters can cause PTSD and depression,
for example [25]. Mental health sequelae for PWD due to climate-
Fig. 1. Flow diagram for impact of climate-related natural disasters on physical or mental health of persons with disabilities in developing countries.
T. Uddin, A. Tasnim, M.R. Islam et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 19 (2024) 100332
3
change related natural disasters underscore the critical need for men-
tal health support for this at-risk population.
4.3. Coping strategies of PWD in climate-change related natural
disasters in developing countries
Disaster resilience may be understood to mean the capacity of indi-
viduals, communities, public and private organizations, and countries to
adapt to the shocks and stresses associated with natural hazards and is
determined by the degree to which these entities are capable of orga-
nizing themselves to learn from past disasters and reduce their risks to
future ones [32]. Within the ﬁeld of disaster management, the concept
of resilience can be viewed as the ability of individuals and the commu-
nity to limit the effects of disasters and includes elements of effect miti-
gation, adaptation, and coping [32,33].
Coping strategies are generally understood to mean actions
taken
by
PWD,
caregivers
and
communities
during
and
immediately before and after a disaster to reduce its adverse
effects. Establishment of effective coping strategies for PWD in
disasters in developing countries is challenged by their impair-
ments and social circumstances [31]. Early electronic disaster
warning and alert systems are considered to be a critical pre-
disaster coping strategy [24,31]. Employment of organized com-
munity self-help groups to include early disaster warning groups
is viewed as an effective coping strategy [21]. Effective coping by
PWD, especially those living alone, requires access to technical
support including mobile phones and the internet for accessing
crisis information and emergency assistance. Effective coping also
requires access to sufﬁcient basic emergency supplies including
water, food, and shelter; lack of these essential items contributes
to poor health outcomes in disasters [23]. Access to personal
medical assistive devices such as eyeglasses, hearing aids, and
wheelchairs during a disaster can facilitate early warning and
timely evacuation [21].
Table 3
General characteristics of included articles.
#
Author(s) and
Year
Country
Journal name
Article title
Article type (study
design)
Study population
Sample size
Study Period
1
Alexander et al.,
2019
Multi-
countries
Spinal Cord Series
and Cases
A bellwether for climate change and
disability: educational needs of reha-
bilitation professionals regarding
disaster management and spinal
cord injuries
Research (cross-sec-
tional survey)
Rehabilitation
professionals
125 people
2019
2
Mann et al.,
2021
Multi-
countries
Current Psychiatry
Reports
Children and Adolescents with Disabil-
ities and Exposure to Disasters, Ter-
rorism, and the COVID-19 Pandemic:
a Scoping Review
Scoping review
Not mentioned
67 studies
2015−2017
3
Peek & Stough,
2010
Multi-
countries
Child Development
Children with disabilities in the context
of disaster: A social vulnerability
perspective
Critical review
Not mentioned
Not mentioned
2010
4
Levy & Patz,
2015
Multi-
countries
Annals of Global
Health
Climate Change, Human Rights, and
Social Justice
Review
Not mentioned
Not mentioned
2014
5
Elisala et al.,
2020
Tuvalu
PLoSONE
Exploring persons with disabilities’
preparedness, perceptions, and
experiences of disasters in Tuvalu
Research (qualitative;
grounded theory)
PWDs above age
21
24 people
2020
6
Ssennoga et al.,
2022
Uganda
Journal of Disaster
Risk Studies
Mapping the susceptibility of persons
with disabilities to landslides in a
highland landscape of Bushika Sub
County, Mount Elgon, Eastern
Uganda
Research (cross-sec-
tional survey)
PWDs above age
18
463 people
Not mentioned
7
Kisira et al.,
2023
Uganda
Environmental
Hazards
Persons with disabilities and resilience:
coping with environmental hazards
case of landslides in Mount Elgon
region, Uganda
Research (cross-sec-
tional survey)
PWDs above age
18
463 people
Not mentioned
8
Benigno et al.,
2015
Philippines
Western Paciﬁc sur-
veillance and
response journal:
WPSAR
Responding to the health and rehabili-
tation needs of people with disabil-
ities post-Haiyan.
Needs assessment
PWDs and acutely
traumatic
injured
2998 people
2013−2014
9
Pan, 2016
China
Environmental
Research
Study on mobility-disadvantage group’
risk perception and coping behaviors
of abrupt geological hazards in
coastal rural area of China.
Research (cross-sec-
tional survey)
Mobility-
disadvantaged
47 people
2014−2015
10
Khine & Lang-
kulsen, 2023
South Africa
International journal
of environmental
research and public
health
The Implications of Climate Change on
Health among Vulnerable Popula-
tions in South Africa: A Systematic
Review.
Systematic review
Not mentioned
24 studies
2014−22
11
Hiranandani,
2015
India
Strategic Disaster
Risk Management
in Asia
Where is disability in disaster manage-
ment in India?
Review (book chapter
extract)
Not mentioned
Not mentioned
2000−2010
12
Stough, 2015
Costa Rica
Journal of Policy and
Practice in Intellec-
tual Disabilities
World Report on Disability, Intellectual
Disabilities, and Disaster Prepared-
ness: Costa Rica as a Case Example
Report case study
Not mentioned
Not mentioned
Not mentioned
13
Engelman et al.,
2022
Multi-
countries
Health Affairs
Global Disability Justice In
Climate Disasters: Mobilizing
People with Disabilities As
Change Agents
Case studies
Persons with
disabilities
Not mentioned
Not mentioned
14
Ahmed et al.,
2020
Bangladesh
Climate and
Development
Effect of extreme weather events on
injury, disability, and death in
Bangladesh
Research (cross-sec-
tional survey)
Not mentioned
667,740 people
2009−2014
T. Uddin, A. Tasnim, M.R. Islam et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 19 (2024) 100332
4
Table 4
Key ﬁndings and recommendations of included papers.
#
Author(s) and
Year
Article title
Type of climate change
events
Type of disability
Key ﬁndings and recommendations
1
Alexander et al.,
2019
A bellweather for climate change
and disability: educational
needs of rehabilitation profes-
sionals regarding disaster
management and spinal cord
injuries
Extreme weather disasters
Physical and sensory related
to spinal cord injury
Rehabilitation professionals acknowledge signiﬁcant
negative impacts of climate change-related disas-
ters on persons with SCI Disability and climate
change are human rights issues
Perform comprehensive education of rehabilitation
professionals on disaster management and SCI
Conduct research on climate change and SCI
2
Mann et al.,
2021
Children and Adolescents with
Disabilities and Exposure to
Disasters, Terrorism, and the
COVID-19 Pandemic: a Scop-
ing Review
Disaster, Terrorism and
COVID19
Physical (mobility), sensory,
intellectual, and
psychological
Children with disabilities and their families have
increased vulnerability in disasters due to societal
discrimination and challenges related to trauma,
various medical conditions, mobility, sensory per-
ception, executive functioning, language, intellec-
tual abilities, and adaptive behavior
Conduct research to enhance disaster prepared-
ness, communication in disasters, and trauma-
informed treatments of COVID-19 pandemic
impacts
3
Peek & Stough,
2010
Children with disabilities in the
context of disaster: A social
vulnerability perspective
Natural disasters, hurri-
canes, ﬂoods
Physical and psychological
Children with disabilities are particularly vulnerable
in disasters Separation of children from caregivers
in disasters can cause trauma mental health symp-
toms resembling PTSD and depression Lack of
accessible post-disaster housing, healthcare, and
academic accommodations can impede impacted
childrens’ community integration
Establish a robust research framework investigate
vulnerabilities, risks, and resiliency factors of chil-
dren with disabilities in disaster contexts, integrat-
ing disability as a key l aspect of short- and long-
term impact assessments and intervention
strategies
4
Levy & Patz,
2015
Climate Change, Human Rights,
and Social Justice
Heal waves, extreme
weather events, air pollu-
tion, sea level rise
Not mentioned
Climate change-related extreme weather events dis-
proportionately affect low-income countries and
poor people in high-income countries, threatening
economic, social, cultural, and civil rights including
a standard of living adequate for health and well-
being
National governments should promote and protect
human rights to advance social justice in the face of
climate change through disaster adaptation and
mitigation measures
5
Elisala et al.,
2020
Exploring PWDs preparedness,
perceptions, and experiences
of disasters in Tuvalu
Cyclone, Surged storms,
Drought
Physical, sensory (blindness)
PWD experience barriers in preparing for disasters,
compounding negative impacts of these extreme
weather events
Include PWDs more fully in disaster management
processes
6
Ssennoga et al.,
2022
Mapping the susceptibility of
persons with disabilities to
landslides in a highland land-
scape of Bushika Sub County,
Mount Elgon, Eastern Uganda
Landslides
Physical, sensory (blindness,
deafness),
Most PWDs in the study area live in high-risk land-
slide zones Blind and deaf-blind individuals were
perceived as those most affected by landslides
Though highly susceptible to landslide hazards,
PWDs are lowly prioritized in rescue and recovery
efforts
Establish inclusive landslide management pro-
grams including disaster response training and
relocation/resettlement assistance to mitigate vul-
nerability and enhance disaster resilience of PWDs,
especially in high-risk areas
7
Kisira et al.,
2023
Persons with disabilities and
resilience: coping with envi-
ronmental hazards case of
landslides in Mount Elgon
region, Uganda
Landslides
Physical, sensory, intellec-
tual, and mental
PWDs face many challenges in coping with environ-
mental hazards and developed resilience enhance-
ment activities including self-help groups, income-
generating activities, livelihood adaptation, and
help-seeking from external agencies PWDs should
be more included in disaster management pro-
cesses
Solicit additional assistance and support from gov-
ernment authorities including more inclusive
disaster services
8
Benigno et al.,
2015
Responding to the health and
rehabilitation needs of people
with disabilities post-Haiyan
Typhoon Haiyan
Pre-existing disabilities and
those acute traumatic
injuries (primarily affect-
ing musculoskeletal sys-
tem involving mobility)
Available pre-disaster PWD data would strengthen
disaster response efforts Post-disaster rehabilita-
tion services decrease the burden of disease and
improve the quality of life of impacted PWDs
Include PWDs in initial post-disaster health assess-
ments to effectively meet their speciﬁc disability
and rehabilitation needs
(continued)
T. Uddin, A. Tasnim, M.R. Islam et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 19 (2024) 100332
5
4.4. Resilience strategies of PWD in climate-change related natural
disasters in developing countries
Regarding post-disaster health outcomes for PWD, telemedicine
has proved an effective resilience strategy. This health delivery tech-
nology has been employed globally to provide immediate and long-
care for persons with SCI [28]. Resilience for PWD in disasters in
developing countries is often achieved through a community model
whereby the community as a whole is engaged on behalf of PWD
[22,25]. Community health workers and government ofﬁcials play
key roles in disaster preparedness, for example, by educating PWD
about disasters and training them on how to respond during these
public health emergencies [21,30]. Individuals with cognitive disabil-
ities may require specialized alerts given inability to perceive disaster
severity and risks [26,29]. Public disaster education initiatives are
needed to dispel PWD misconceptions about disasters and to com-
municate appropriate coping and resilience strategies [29]. Rehabili-
tation clinicians and other medical service providers are also called
upon to help prepare their PWD clients for weather emergencies
[34]. Alexander et al. advocate for the training of rehabilitation pro-
fessionals on disaster management and SCI speciﬁcally [28]. The criti-
cal need for proactive disaster preparedness measures for children
with disabilities as well as the need for robust post-disaster support
and services for this especially vulnerable population has been
highlighted [25,26]. "Building Back Better", a recognized concept
which incorporates the themes of risk reduction, local recovery sys-
tems, and policy implementation to strengthen community infra-
structure following disasters, has been embraced as a general
strategy to enhance the resilience of PWD following natural disasters
[35].
4.5. Role for PWD involvement in inclusive disaster planning
The literature strongly afﬁrms the importance of inclusive disaster
planning wherein PWD actively participate in disaster management
processes, thereby considering and addressing the needs of PWD in
disasters,
including
through
disability-oriented
strategies
[22,24,29,36,37]. PWD are among marginalized populations now
highlighted in inclusive disaster planning in India in contrast with
their historic lack of inclusion [37]. PWD perception and experience
of environmental barriers negatively impacting disaster planning on
the disaster-prone eastern Paciﬁc island state of Tuvalu, beset with
cyclones, sea-level surges with ﬂooding, and droughts, has prompted
demand for fuller engagement of PWD in disaster planning processes
[24]. Inclusive management programs focused on disaster response
training and relocation/resettlement assistance have been called for
in Uganda to mitigate vulnerability and enhance resilience of PWD in
high-risk landslide areas [22]. In India, a specially trained rescue
team using sign language and other inclusive communication tools to
communicate effectively with PWD during rescue efforts has been
Table 4 (Continued)
#
Author(s) and
Year
Article title
Type of climate change
events
Type of disability
Key ﬁndings and recommendations
9
Pan, 2016
Study on mobility-disadvantage
group’ risk perception and
coping behaviors of abrupt
geological hazards in coastal
rural area of China
Typhoons, torrential rain,
debris ﬂoods, rock ava-
lanches, landslides, mud-
rock ﬂows, and strong
winds, intense rainfall,
earthquake shaking, water
level change, storm waves
or rapid stream erosion
Not mentioned
Mobility-disadvantaged groups have low awareness
and knowledge of disaster prevention and mitiga-
tion strategies
Implement public disaster education initiatives to
dispel PWD misconceptions about disasters and to
communicate appropriate coping and resilience
strategies
Establish mobility-disadvantaged group databases
to inform development of appropriate disaster risk
management and recovery strategies
10
Khine & Lang-
kulsen, 2023
The Implications of Climate
Change on Health among Vul-
nerable Populations in South
Africa: A Systematic Review
Storms, ﬂooding, and
droughts
Various functional domains
including walking, seeing,
hearing, remembering,
concentrating, communi-
cating, social interaction,
and self-care
Climate change related extreme weather events have
a negative impact on vulnerable populations
including PWDs
Establish a comprehensive national health moni-
toring and surveillance program to include stron-
ger disaster early warning systems Establish a
disaster ﬁnance coordination mechanism Generally
strengthen health systems and infrastructure
11
Hiranandani,
2015
Where is disability in disaster
management in India?
Not mentioned
Not mentioned
Mismanagement of previous disasters highlights the
importance of institutional learning from them His-
torically, marginalized populations including PWDs
have not actively participated in disaster manage-
ment processes
Include marginalized populations including PWDs
more fully in disaster management processes
12
Stough, 2015
World Report on Disability,
Intellectual Disabilities, and
Disaster Preparedness: Costa
Rica as a Case Example
Floods, droughts, earth-
quakes, storms, and vari-
ability in temperature and
precipitation patterns
Intellectual
Persons with intellectual disabilities suffer dispropor-
tionate risks in disasters and are often excluded
from relief services
Implement specialized communication strategies
to help persons with intellectual disabilities access
event information and services
13
Engelman et al.,
2022
Global Disability Justice In Cli-
mate Disasters: Mobilizing
People With Disabilities As
Change Agents
Bushﬁres, ﬂoods, heatwaves,
storms, and food- and
waterborne diseases
Physical
PWDsy in resource-poor nations face economic and
social marginalization exacerbated by climate
change-related disasters
Include PWDs more fully in disaster management
policy and processes
14
Ahmed et al.,
2020
Effect of extreme weather events
on injury, disability, and death
in Bangladesh
Drought, ﬂood, waterlog-
ging, cyclone, tornado,
storm/tidal surge, thun-
derstorm, river/coastal
erosion, landslides, and
hailstorm
Not mentioned
Socio-economic factors including age, education
level, asset quintiles, urban residency, and physical
disabilities c contribute signiﬁcantly to the sub-
stantial burden of disaster-related injuries, disabil-
ities, and fatalities in Bangladesh
T. Uddin, A. Tasnim, M.R. Islam et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 19 (2024) 100332
6
proposed [37]. Benigno et al. advocate for the availability of pre-
disaster data on PWD and the inclusion of PWD in initial post-disas-
ter health assessments to effectively meet their post-disaster rehabil-
itation need [36]. Given persons with intellectual disabilities notably
suffer disproportionate risks in disasters and are often excluded from
relief services, the need for use of specialized communication strate-
gies to aid these persons in accessing event information and services
has been recognized [29]. Inclusive disaster planning clearly and con-
vincingly invokes the ‘nothing about us without us’ call of the disabil-
ity rights movement to climate justice [38].
4.6. Climate-change related natural disasters on PWD in developing
countries as a human rights issue
The literature presents climate-change related natural disasters
on
PWD
in
developing
countries
as
a
human
rights
issue
[15,23,28,30,39,40]. Levy and Katz conclude that climate change-
related extreme weather events disproportionately affect low-
income countries, threatening economic, social, cultural, and civil
rights, including a standard of living adequate for health and well-
being [39]. This disproportionate effect is due in part to disparities in
demographic characteristics and socioeconomic factors including
age, gender, ethnicity, social acceptance, residency location, gender,
income, and physical disabilities [30,31]; poverty is the most signiﬁ-
cant factor [31]. Disadvantaged groups, including PWD, will continue
to be disproportionately impacted by climate change as these dispar-
ities limit access to existing disaster coping and resilience strategies,
increasing vulnerability of PWD to disasters and challenging individ-
ual and community recovery in developing countries. Moreover, the
increasing variety, frequency, and intensity of climate change-related
disasters compound PWD risk for negative disaster impacts as vul-
nerabilities, including health conditions, are exacerbated [15]. PWD
will predictably continue to experience an increasingly negative
health impact globally if exposure to mounting adverse weather
events is not mitigated [41]. Governments are entreated to promote
and protect human rights to advance social justice in the face of cli-
mate change through effective disaster management measures [39].
’Building resilience of persons with disabilities and reducing their
exposure to and impact from climate-related hazards and other
shocks and disasters’ is in fact a disability-speciﬁc focus of the United
Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its 17 Sus-
tainable Development Goals (notably Goal 3 −Good Health and
Well-Being, and Goal 13 −Climate Action) - which provide a frame-
work to guide local communities, countries and the international
community toward the achievement of disability-inclusive develop-
ment in order to ‘leave no one behind’ [40,42,43].
5. Future research
The low number of articles and limited ﬁndings resulted by this
review suggest a research gap in the physical and mental health
impacts of climate-change related disasters on PWD in developing
countries. Use of a broader review data synthesis methodology such
as a systematic or scoping review as well as changes in the search
strategy as indicated in the limitations section would yield additional
results. Conversely, more speciﬁc characterization of the demo-
graphic and physical characteristics of affected PWD populations
could be made in a more focused review. Also, the additional themes
of this review including resilience and coping strategies of PWD in
disasters, PWD involvement in inclusive disaster planning, and cli-
mate-change related natural disasters on PWD in developing coun-
tries as a human rights issue could be further investigated. For
example, a review identifying national disability-inclusive disaster
coping and resilience programs could be performed and developed
into a database to inform global disaster management. Future
research of the speciﬁc intersectional impacts of social factors on
PWD vulnerability and resilience can signiﬁcantly inform design and
development of more effective physical and mental health services in
disasters. Regarding mental health impacts of climate change-related
natural disasters, research and conduct of highly relevant, contextu-
alized (to include social and economic factors) climate change and
health vulnerability and adaptation assessments in order to inform
effective disaster management mental health policy and practice
should be continued [44]. Such research should also include the role
of family members and caregivers on PWD risk as well as disaster
impacts on these carer groups. Qualitative investigation of the disas-
ter experiences of speciﬁc individuals, including ﬁrst-hand accounts,
can also add valuable perspective and insight. Finally, topics for
future research can include those speciﬁcally called for by articles in
this review including enhanced disaster preparedness and communi-
cations [23].
6. Limitations
A more comprehensive synthetic review methodology such as a
systematic or scoping review would yield additional results, permit-
ting more substantial discussion of the topic and identiﬁcation of
research gaps. More results along with targeted recommendations
could also have been achieved by further specifying searches to
include: additional speciﬁc types of climate-related natural disasters;
speciﬁc disability types; more speciﬁc geographical terms to capture
additional relevant studies from developing regions within devel-
oped countries; and non-English papers. More rigorous hand-search-
ing would also have yielded additional papers including qualitative
ﬁrst-hand survivor perspectives. This literature review emphasizes
acute health impacts of disasters on PWD and does not address the
chronic health effects of longer-term environmental changes due to
disasters such as degradation in air quality on PWD. While not a limi-
tation of this review, it should be recognized that the extensive litera-
ture on the health impacts of earthquakes on PWD in developing
countries contains extensive highly relevant ﬁndings and recommen-
dations which can inform future research.
7. Conclusion
This literature review documents the existing literature on the
negative impact of climate-change related natural disasters on the
physical and mental health of PWD in developing countries. It also
elaborates on related themes in the literature including resilience
and coping strategies of PWD in disasters, PWD involvement in inclu-
sive disaster planning, and climate-change related natural disasters
on PWD in developing countries as a human rights issue. Review
ﬁndings reveal related gaps in the literature, indicating the need for
signiﬁcant additional future research to further advance understand-
ing of negative climate change-related natural disaster impacts on
the health and lives of PWD. This enhanced awareness can inform
development of effective disability-inclusive disaster management
programs, resulting in achievement of more equitable climate
change-related health and function outcomes for PWD in developing
countries.
Role of the funding source
No individual or institutional funding support was received for
this review.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
T. Uddin, A. Tasnim, M.R. Islam et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 19 (2024) 100332
7
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Taslim Uddin: Writing −review & editing, Writing −original
draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Concep-
tualization. Anika Tasnim: Writing −original draft, Visualization,
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization. Md Redwanul Islam: Writing −
original draft, Visualization, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.
Mohammad Tariqul Islam: Writing −review & editing, Writing −
original draft, Supervision, Data curation, Conceptualization. A.K.M.
Salek: Writing −review & editing, Validation, Supervision. Md Mon-
iruzzaman Khan: Writing −review & editing, Validation, Supervi-
sion. James Gosney: Writing −review & editing, Visualization,
Supervision. M Atiqul Haque: Writing −review & editing, Visualiza-
tion, Supervision.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found,
in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.joclim.2024.100332.
References
[1] World Health Organization. Climate change, https://www.who.int/news-room/
fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health; 2023 [accessed 2023 Oct 30].
[2] Sheehan MC, Fox MA, Kaye C, Resnick B. Integrating health into local climate
response: lessons from the US CDC climate-ready states and cities initiative. Envi-
ron Health Perspect 2017 Sep 1;125(9) Available from https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/
doi/abs/10.1289/EHP1838.
[3] Kosanic A, Petzold J, Martín-Lopez B, Razanajatovo M. An inclusive future: dis-
abled populations in the context of climate and environmental change. Curr Opin
Environ Sustain 2022;55(101159) Available from https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1877343522000112.
[4] Gross J. The severe impact of climate change on developing countries. Med Glob
Surviv 2002;7(2):96–100 Available from https://www.ippnw.org/wp-content/
uploads/2023/03/MGSV7N2Gross.pdf.
[5] Halsnæs K, Larsen MAD, Kaspersen PS. Climate change risks for severe storms in
developing countries in the context of poverty and inequality in Cambodia. Nat
Hazar
2018;94(1):261–78
Available
from
https://link.springer.com/article/
10.1007/s11069-018-3387-8.
[6] McGuigan C, Reynolds R, Wiedmer D. Poverty and climate change: assessing
impacts in developing countries and the initiatives of the international commu-
nity. London Sch Econ Consult Proj Overseas Dev Inst 2002:1–40 Available from
https://odi.org/documents/2557/3449.pdf.
[7] World Health Organization, World bank. World report on disability; 2011. Avail-
able
from:
https://www.who.int/teams/noncommunicable-diseases/sensory-
functions-disability-and-rehabilitation/world-report-on-disability;
[Accessed
August 27, 2023].
TagedAPTARAListItem TagedAPTARAListLabel[8]TagedAPTARAEnd Worldbank. Should we continue to use the term “developing world”?, https://blogs.
worldbank.org/en/opendata/should-we-continue-use-term-developing-world; 2015
[Accessed March 25, 2024].
[9] Britannica
Money. Developing country, https://www.britannica.com/money/
developing-country; 2024 [Accessed March 25, 2024].
[10] World Health Organization. International classiﬁcation of functioning, disability
and health (ICF), https://www.who.int/standards/classiﬁcations/international-
classiﬁcation-of-functioning-disability-and-health; 2001 [Accessed October 30,
2023].
[11] Gamble JL, Balbus J, Berger M, Bouye K, Campbell V, Chief K, et al. Ch. 9: popula-
tions of concern editors. In: Crimmins A, Balbus J, Gamble JL, Beard CB, Bell JE,
Dodgen D, Eisen RJ, Fann N, Hawkins MD, Herring SC, Jantarasami L, Mills DM,
Saha S, Saroﬁm MC, Trtanj J, Ziska L, editors. The impacts of climate change on
human health in the united states: a scientiﬁc assessment. Washington, DC:U.S:
Global Change Research Program; 2016. Available from https://health2016.glob-
alchange.gov/populations-concern.
[12] Dodgen D, Donato D, Kelly N, La Greca A, Morganstein J, Reser J. Ch. 8: mental
health and well-being editors. In: Crimmins A, Balbus J, Gamble JL, Beard CB,
Bell JE, Dodgen D, Eisen RJ, Fann N, Hawkins MD, Herring SC, Jantarasami L,
Mills DM, Saha S, Saroﬁm MC, Trtanj J, Ziska L, editors. The impacts of climate
change on human health in the united states: a scientiﬁc assessment. Washing-
ton, DC:U.S: Global Change Research Program; 2016. Available from https://
health2016.globalchange.gov/mental-health-and-well-being.
[13] Trtanj J, Jantarasami L, Brunkard J, Collier T, Jacobs J, Lipp E, et al. Ch. 6: climate
impacts on water-related illness editors. In: Crimmins A, Balbus J, Gamble JL,
Beard CB, Bell JE, Dodgen D, Eisen RJ, Fann N, Hawkins MD, Herring SC,
Jantarasami L, Mills DM, Saha S, Saroﬁm MC, Trtanj J, Ziska L, editors. The impacts
of climate change on human health in the united states: a scientiﬁc assessment.
Washington, DC:U.S: Global Change Research Program; 2016. Available from
https://health2016.globalchange.gov/mental-health-and-well-being.
[14] United States Environmental Protection Agency. Climate change and the health of
people with disabilities, https://www.epa.gov/climateimpacts/climate-change-
and-health-people-disabilities#3foot; 2022 [Accessed October 10, 2023].
[15] World Health Organization. Persons with disabilities and climate change in
Nepal: humanitarian impacts and pathways for inclusive climate action −Nepal,
https://reliefweb.int/report/nepal/persons-disabilities-and-climate-change-
nepal-humanitarian-impacts-and-pathways-inclusive-climate-action;
2023
[Accessed September 22, 2023].
[16] Abbott D, Porter S. Environmental hazard and disabled people: from vulnerable to
expert to interconnected. Disabil Soc 2013 Sep;28(6):839–52.
[17] Crimmins A, Balbus J, Gamble JL, Beard CB, Bell JE, Dodgen D, et al. The impacts of
climate change on human health in the United States. U.S. Global Change
Research Program 2016.
[18] Pollock D, Peters MDJ, Khalil H, McInerney P, Alexander L, Tricco AC, et al. Recom-
mendations for the extraction, analysis, and presentation of results in scoping
reviews. JBI Evid Synth 2023 Mar 1;21(3):520–32 Available from https://journals.
lww.com/jbisrir/fulltext/2023/03000/recommendations_for_the_extraction,
_analysis,_and.7.aspx.
[19] Aromataris E, Lockwood C, Porritt K, Pilla B, Jordan Z. JBI manual for evidence syn-
thesis. JBI 2020 Available from https://synthesismanual.jbi.global.
[20] Tricco AC, Lillie E, Zarin W, O’Brien KK, Colquhoun H, Levac D, et al. PRISMA
extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation. Ann
Intern Med 2018 Oct 2;169(7):467–73.
[21] Kisira Y, Ssennoga M, Mugagga F, Nadhomi D. Persons with disabilities and resil-
ience: coping with environmental hazards case of landslides in Mount Elgon
region.
Uganda.
Environ
Hazards
2023;22(4):349–66.
doi:
10.1080/
17477891.2022.2149454.
[22] Ssennoga M, Mugagga F, Nadhomi DL, Kisira Y. Mapping the susceptibility of
persons with disabilities to landslides in a highland landscape of Bushika
Sub County, Mount Elgon, Eastern Uganda. Jamba J Disaster Risk Stud
2022;14(1):1–9.
[23] Engelman A, Craig L, Iles A. Global disability justice in climate disasters: mobiliz-
ing people with disabilities as change agents. Health Aff 2022;41(10):1496–504.
[24] Elisala N, Turagabeci A, Mohammadnezhad M, Mangum T. Exploring persons with
disabilities preparedness, perceptions and experiences of disasters in Tuvalu.
PLoS ONE 2020;15:1–19. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241180.
[25] Peek L, Stough LM. Children with disabilities in the context of disaster: a social
vulnerability perspective. Child Dev 2010;81(4):1260–70.
[26] Mann M, McMillan JE, Silver EJ, Stein REK. Children and adolescents with disabil-
ities and exposure to disasters, terrorism, and the COVID-19 pandemic: a scoping
review. Curr Psych Rep 2021;23(12). doi: 10.1007/s11920-021-01295-z.
[27] Pan A. Study on mobility-disadvantage group’ risk perception and coping behav-
iors of abrupt geological hazards in coastal rural area of China. Environ Res
2016;148:574–81. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2016.04.016.
[28] Alexander M, Alexander J, Arora M, Slocum C, Middleton J. A bellweather for cli-
mate change and disability: educational needs of rehabilitation professionals
regarding disaster management and spinal cord injuries. Spinal Cord Ser Cases
2019;5(1). doi: 10.1038/s41394-019-0239-z.
[29] Stough LM. World report on disability, intellectual disabilities, and disaster pre-
paredness: costa rica as a case example. J Policy Pract Intellect Disabil 2015;12
(2):138–46.
[30] Ahmed S, Hasan MZ, Pongsiri MJ, Ahmed MW, Szabo S. Effect of extreme weather
events on injury, disability, and death in Bangladesh. Clim Dev 2020;13(4):306–
17.
[31] Khine MM, Langkulsen U. The implications of climate change on health among
vulnerable populations in South Africa: a systematic review. Int J Environ Res
Public Health 2023;20(4).
[32] Combaz É Disaster resilience. Topic Guide. University of Birmingham; 2014.
GSDRC. Available from https://research.manchester.ac.uk/en/publications/disas-
ter-resilience-topic-guide. Accessed December 10, 2023.
[33] Huq ME, Sarker MN, Prasad R, Kormoker T, Hossain MA, Rahman MM, et al. Resil-
ience for disaster management: opportunities and challenges editors. In:
Alam GMM, Erdiaw-Kwasie MO, Gustavo J, Nagy GJ, Walter Leal Filho WL, editors.
Climate vulnerability and resilience in the global south: human adaptations for
sustainable futures. Switzerland AG: Springer Nature; 2021. p. 425–42.
[34] Lindsay S, Hsu S, Ragunathan S, Lindsay J. The impact of climate change related
extreme weather events on people with pre-existing disabilities and chronic con-
ditions: a scoping review. Disabil Rehabil 2022:1–21.
[35] Landry MD, Sheppard PS, Leung K, Retis C, Salvador EC, Raman SR. The 2015 Nepal
earthquake (s): lessons learned from the disability and rehabilitation sector’s
preparation for, and response to, natural disasters. Phys Ther 2016 Nov 1;96
(11):1714–23.
[36] Benigno M.R., Kleinitz P., Calina L., Alcido M.R., Gohy B., Hall J.L. Responding to the
health and rehabilitation needs of people with disabilities post-Haiyan. Western
Pac Surveill Resp J 2015;6(June):53−9.
[37] Hiranandani V. Where is disability in disaster management in India? Strateg
disaster risk manag Asia 2015;39−48.
[38] Jodoin S, Buettgen A, Groce N, Gurung P, Kaiser C, Kett M, et al. Nothing about us
without us: the urgent need for disability-inclusive climate research. PLOS Cli-
mate 2023 Mar 6;2(3):e0000153.
[39] Levy BS, Patz JA. Climate change, human rights, and social justice. Ann Glob Heal
2015;81(3):310–22. doi: 10.1016/j.aogh.2015.08.008.
[40] UN-DESA. Disability and development report: realizing the sustainable develop-
ment goals by, for and with persons with disabilities. United Nations Publications;
T. Uddin, A. Tasnim, M.R. Islam et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 19 (2024) 100332
8
2019. Available from: https://www.un.org/en/desa/un-disability-and-develop-
ment-report-%E2%80%93-realizing-sdgs-and-persons-disabilities
[41] Bell JE, Brown CL, Conlon K, Herring S, Kunkel KE, Lawrimore J, et al. Changes in
extreme events and the potential impacts on human health. J Air Waste Manag
Assoc 2018 Apr 3;68(4):265–87.
[42] United Nations. The 17 Goals 2024 https://sdgs.un.org/goals [Accessed April 18,
2024].
[43] United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Leave no one behind, https://
unsdg.un.org/2030-agenda/universal-values/leave-no-one-behind;
2024
[Accessed April 18, 2024].
[44] Hayes K, Poland B. Addressing mental health in a changing climate: incorpo-
rating mental health indicators into climate change and health vulnerability
and adaptation assessments. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2018 Sep;15(9)
1806.
T. Uddin, A. Tasnim, M.R. Islam et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 19 (2024) 100332
9
